AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Chapter 100
GENERAL PROVISIONS
AO:1

ARTICLE I
Generally
Section 100.010. Ordinances — Interpretation, Construction. [R.O.
2008 §100.010; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 7830 §1,
3-14-2016]
All ordinances of the City of Maryville, Missouri, shall be interpreted and
construed in accordance with the following provisions, unless such
interpretation and construction would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the City Council. No provision of this Code shall apply to any
circumstance in which such application shall be unlawful under superseding
Federal or State law, and, furthermore, if any section, subsection, sentence,
clause, phrase, or portion of this Code is now or in the future superseded
or preempted by State or Federal law or found by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unauthorized, such provision shall be automatically
interpreted and applied as required by law.
Section 100.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §100.020; Ord. No. 4882
§1, 5-14-1990]
The following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
AND/OR — Whenever the words "and/or" are used, "and" shall apply where
possible; otherwise, "or" shall apply.
CERTIFIED MAIL — Includes certified mail carried by the United States
Postal Service or any parcel or letter carried by an overnight, express or
ground delivery service that allows a sender or recipient to electronically
track its location and provides record of the signature of the recipient.[Ord.
No. 7211 §1, 5-10-2010]
CITY, MUNICIPALITY — The word "City" or "Municipality" means the City
of Maryville, Missouri.
CONJUNCTIVE, DISJUNCTIVE WORDS — Conjunctive and disjunctive
words may be interchangeable to effect the purpose of any provisions.
COUNCIL, CITY COUNCIL — The word "Council" or the words "City
Council" mean the legislative body of the City of Maryville, Missouri.
COUNTY — The word "County" means the County of Nodaway, Missouri.
GENDER — Words importing masculine gender shall apply to females and
to firms, associations, partnerships and corporations.
JOINT AUTHORITY — All words purporting to give joint authority to three
(3) or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving
such authority to a majority of officers or other persons, unless it is
otherwise expressly declared in the ordinance granting the authority.
MONTH — The word "month" shall be construed to mean a calendar month.
Section
100.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.020
AO:3
NUMBER — Words in either the singular or plural numbers shall include
either or both numbers and may apply in any instance to a particular person
or persons.
OATH, AFFIRMATION, SWORN, AFFIRMED — The word "oath" shall be
construed to include the word "affirmation" in all cases where by law an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath and in like cases the word
"sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed".
OFFICERS — The several officers' titles mean such Officers of the City.
OWNER — The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include
any part-owner, land contract vendee, joint-owner, tenant-in-common,
tenant-in-partnership, joint-tenant, or tenant-by-the-entirety, of the whole or
of a part of such building or land.
PERSON — The word "person" includes firms, joint adventures,
partnerships, corporations, clubs, and all associations or organizations of
natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, howsoever
operating or named, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant,
agent or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors
and assigns thereof.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — The words "preceding" and "following", when
used by way of reference to any Title, Chapter or Section of any ordinance
of the City, shall be construed to mean the Title, Chapter or Section next
preceding or next following that in which such reference is made unless
when some other Title, Chapter or Section is expressly designated in such
reference.
PROPERTY — The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
PUBLIC PLACE — The words "public place" mean any street, alley, park,
cemetery, public building, or any place of business or assembly or parking
lot, or any other premises open to the public or frequented by the public.
PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICER — A person serving a public agency, with or
without compensation, as a Law Enforcement Officer or emergency
personnel and having power of arrest.
SEAL — In all cases in which the seal of any court or public office shall be
required to be affixed to any paper issuing from such court or office, the
word "Seal" shall be construed to mean the impression of such seal on such
paper alone, as well as the impression of such seal affixed thereto by means
of a wafer or wax.
SHALL, MAY — The word "shall" means imperative or mandatory; the word
"may" means permissive.
SIGNATURE, SUBSCRIPTION — The words "signature" and "subscription"
include a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE — The word "State" means the State of Missouri.
TENSE — Words used in the present or past tense shall be construed as
including the future as well as the present or past.
Section
100.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
100.020
AO:4
TITLES, HEADINGS AND CATCHLINES — The key words used as headings,
titles or catchlines for Chapter, Sections and Subsections are inserted for
convenience and to facilitate search, and such words shall not be construed
to limit or affect the meaning of any of the provisions hereof.
WEEK — The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING — The words "written" or "in writing" may include
any form of reproduction or expression of language.
YEAR — The word "year" shall be construed to mean a calendar year; and
the word "year" alone, shall be equivalent to the words "year of our Lord".
Section 100.030. Officers — Acts Required — Performance —
Authority. [R.O. 2008 §100.030; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Whenever in accordance with the provisions of this Code or any ordinance
of the City, any specific act is required to be done by any designated Officer
or Official of the City, such act may be performed by any City employee duly
authorized to perform that act by such officer or official.
Section 100.040. Computation of Time. [R.O. 2008 §100.040; Ord.
No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in
any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be
computed as prescribed by State Statute.
Section 100.050. Official City Time. [R.O. 2008 §100.050; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Standard time, Central division, shall be the official time of the City except
during such period of time as may be designated Daylight Savings Time by
State or Federal law.
Section 100.060. Repealing Ordinance Repealed — Former
Ordinance Not Revived — When.
When an ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision is
itself repealed, it does not revive the former ordinance, clause or provision,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided; nor shall any ordinance repealing
any former ordinance, clause or provision abate, annul or in anywise affect
any proceedings had or commenced under or by virtue of the ordinance so
repealed, but the same is as effectual and shall be proceeded on to final
judgment and termination as if the repealing ordinance had not passed,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
Section 100.070. Repeal of Inconsistent Ordinances. [R.O. 2008
§100.070; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Whenever an ordinance is adopted, all ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict therewith shall, to the extent of such conflict, be repealed.
Section
100.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.080
AO:5
Section 100.080. Effect of Repeal of Ordinance.
No offense committed and no fine, penalty or forfeiture incurred, or
prosecution commenced or pending previous to or at the time when any
ordinance provision is repealed or amended, shall be affected by the repeal
or amendment, but the trial and punishment of all such offenses and the
recovery of the fines, penalties or forfeitures shall be had, in all respects,
as if the provision had not been repealed or amended, except that all such
proceedings shall be conducted according to existing procedural laws.
Section 100.090. Citing Code. [R.O. 2008 §100.090; Ord. No. 4882
§1, 5-14-1990]
This Code shall be cited as The Municipal Code of the City of Maryville,
Missouri.
Section 100.100. Severability. [R.O. 2008 §100.100; Ord. No. 4882
§1, 5-14-1990]
If any part of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance shall be found to be invalid by any court, such invalidity shall
not affect the remaining parts or applications of the ordinance which can be
given effect without the invalid part or application, provided such remaining
parts are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end
ordinances are declared to be severable.
Section 100.110. Accessories. [R.O. 2008 §100.110; Ord. No. 4882
§1, 5-14-1990]
Every person who shall aid, abet, encourage or entice another to violate any
of the provisions contained in this Code, or any ordinance of the City shall
be deemed an accessory to the commission of such offense, and shall be
deemed guilty of an ordinance violation.
Section
100.080
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
100.110
AO:6
ARTICLE II
Penalty Provisions
Section 100.120. General Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §100.130; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Whenever in this Code or any ordinance of the City any act is prohibited
or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this
Code or such ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to
do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such provision
by any person is hereby declared to be an ordinance violation; and, upon
conviction, unless some other penalty is prescribed in this Code or such
ordinance, such person may be punished by a fine not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
(3) months, or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the
court having jurisdiction. In any case wherein the penalty for an offense is
fixed by any Statute, the Council shall affix the same penalty by ordinance
for the punishment of such offense.
Section 100.130. Continuing Violations. [R.O. 2008 §100.140; Ord.
No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
In addition to the penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or
permitted to continue to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
Code or any ordinance of the City shall be deemed a new and separate
offense for each day that such condition continues to exist, and each such
offense may be separately punished as hereinbefore provided.
Section 100.133. Enforcement; Attorneys' Fees. [Ord. No. 7830 §2,
3-14-2016]
The City shall be entitled to enforce any provision of this Code through all
remedies lawfully available, and any person determined judicially to have
violated the terms of this Code shall further be liable to pay the City's costs
and attorneys' fees in enforcing such Code provisions. Additionally, any user
of City services, rights-of-way or other City facilities or property shall, as a
condition of such use or continued use, to the full extent permissible by law,
be liable to pay the City's costs and attorneys' fees incurred in enforcing
any lawful requirement applicable to such use, whether arising in contract,
statute, ordinance, or other enforceable duty as to such use.
Section 100.135. Violation; Remedies, Unauthorized Holdover.
[Ord. No. 7830 §2, 3-14-2016]
A. Any person who fails to hold and maintain a current and valid
agreement with the City to use the City's land or facilities has no right
to holdover and shall be subject to the provisions and City remedies of
this Subsection in addition to all other remedies and penalties as may
otherwise exist in applicable law. Any claimed holdover right shall be
deemed void and terminated upon expiration of a valid use agreement
Section
100.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.135
AO:7
unless the City has affirmatively in writing authorized the holdover,
or as otherwise may be required by law. Where an agreement, lease,
or other agreement for use of public land or facilities expires, and in
addition to any penalties or other requirements therein, the licensee
during any period without a valid agreement shall, during any period of
unauthorized use:
1. Indemnify the City from any liability arising from the use;
2. Pay any damages and costs of the City from such use, including
attorney fees incurred in enforcing this Section; and
3. Make payment of compensation in the amount of two times the
monthly rent of the last expired agreement, if a holdover, and two
times the market rental value reasonably determined by the City, if
no prior agreement, until a valid agreement is executed with the
City or the attachments and/or use is fully removed, the property
restored and all obligations to the City satisfied.
B. Unless otherwise provided in an unexpired agreement, the licensee
shall also be responsible for interest on all amounts owed and at a rate
of one and one-half percent (1 1/2%) per month. Nothing in these
provisions, remedies or compensation requirements, or acceptance or
enforcement thereof by the City, shall be deemed to accept or authorize
any use of public property without a required agreement, or after the
expiration of such agreement, or otherwise in violation of applicable
requirements.
Section
100.135
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
100.135
AO:8
ARTICLE III
Provisions, Procedures and Policies
Section 100.140. Grievance Procedure for Complaints of
Discrimination Under the Americans With Disabilities Act. [R.O.
2008 §100.150; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 7074 §§1 — 2,
12-22-2008]
A. The City of Maryville, Missouri, strives to ensure that all programs it
undertakes are established in a manner by which all residents of the
City have an equal opportunity to participate in such programs,
regardless of the such residents disability, as defined within the
Americans with Disabilities Act (hereinafter, "ADA").
B. Any Maryville resident who believes that they have been discriminated
against because of handicapped status under the ADA (hereinafter,
"Claimant") shall have a right to file a written grievance.
C. The Grievance Procedure of the City of Maryville, Missouri, shall be as
follows:
1. If any claimant feels he or she has been discriminated against by
the City of Maryville under the ADA (hereinafter, the
"Discriminatory Act"), the claimant shall immediately deliver to the
City Manager's office claimant's written discrimination grievance
stating the following:
a. Claimant's full name, address and telephone number.
b. The department name and the location in which it is alleged
that the Discriminatory Act occurred.
c. A description of the Discriminatory Act, the date or dates of the
Discriminatory Act(s), and the name or names of the City
employees who claimant believes acted in a discriminatory
manner.
d. The nature of the claimant's handicap and how such handicap
affects claimant.
e. Other information that claimant believes necessary to support
their grievance.
Section
100.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.140
AO:9
Grievances made which do not include the necessary
information shall be returned to the claimant for
further information. No action shall occur until a fullycompleted
grievance has been received.
Within twenty (20) working days following the receipt
of the written grievance described above, the City
Manager shall investigate the factual basis, if any, for
the grievance and shall hold a meeting with the
claimant. Within ten (10) working days after such
meeting, the City Manager shall notify claimant of the
decision as to whether such grievance is valid and, if
so, what corrective action will be done by the City. If
the City Manager does not believe the grievance has
merit, the claimant shall be so advised and, if so, will
be advised why such a decision was made.
2. If satisfaction is not achieved by the above procedure or
notification is not mailed within ten (10) working days from the
date of the meeting with the City Manager, the claimant may then
present the grievance to the City Council. A written appeal must be
made to the City Council within forty-five (45) calendar days from
the date of the meeting, whether a notification is received from the
City Manager or not. The hearing will be conducted in an informal
manner and the City Council shall make every effort to avoid the
appearance of conducting a trial in a court of law. The written
grievance appeal shall state the following:
a. The name, address and phone number of the claimant;
b. Why the claimant believes that the decision of the City
Manager in denying the grievance, or why the corrective
action to be taken, is incorrect.
3. No later than ten (10) working days after receipt of the written
appeal, the City Council shall fix a time and place for convening a
hearing. Within forty-eight (48) hours after the hearing, findings
and recommendations will be submitted in writing to the claimant.
4. Claimant's failure to attend or notify the City Council of his/her
inability to attend will constitute just cause for dismissal of the
grievance. In order to be effective, the inability to attend the
hearing must be communicated by the claimant to the City Clerk
and must be no later than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the
hearing.
5. No portion of this grievance procedure is intended to award
compensation to any claimant for any alleged Discriminatory Act,
but rather is solely intended to allow a means of curing by
corrective action a situation that is occurring within a City
department.
Section
100.140
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
100.140
AO:10
Section 100.150. Reasonable Service Charge for Insufficient Funds,
No Account or Stop Payment Checks. [R.O. 2008 §100.160; Ord. No.
5283 §1, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 6415 §1, 10-22-2001]
Pursuant to Section 570.120.6., RSMo., the City of Maryville, Missouri, is
hereby authorized and directed to collect a reasonable service charge in the
amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per check from the party issuing any
insufficient funds, closed account, stop payment or other bad check. Upon
receipt, said funds shall be deposited in the fund for which collected.
Section 100.160. Loss Prevention and Safety Policy. [R.O. 2008
§100.170; Ord. No. 5173 §1, 11-8-1993; Ord. No. 6874 §§1 — 2,
10-23-2006]
The Council of the City of Maryville, Missouri, hereby adopts the Loss
Prevention and Safety Policy Statement. A copy of said Loss Prevention and
Safety Policy Statement shall be and is hereby incorporated by reference as
though fully set out herein and is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
Section 100.170. Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy. [R.O. 2008
§100.180; Ord. No. 5370 §§1 — 19, 1-8-1996]
The Council of the City of Maryville, Missouri, hereby adopts the Drug
and Alcohol Testing Policy for Municipal Employees. A copy of said Drug
and Alcohol Testing Policy for Municipal Employees shall be and is hereby
incorporated by reference as though fully set out herein and is on file in the
office of the City Clerk.
Section 100.180. Civil Emergency — Powers of Mayor to Issue
Proclamation of Emergency. [R.O. 2008 §210.150; Ord. No. 4944 §1,
12-10-1990]
D. Issues Regarding Employees. The City of Maryville will not discriminate
in the hiring, promotion, disciplining or removal of any City employee
on the basis of handicapped status. The City of Maryville has adopted
an Employee Handbook, Grievance Procedure, Ordinance No. 7058,
which is on file in the City Clerk's office and made a part hereof and is
hereby adopted as the official grievance procedure for employees of the
City of Maryville, Missouri.
A. Whenever in the judgment of the Mayor, a state of civil emergency
exists as a result of mob action, riots, general civil disobedience or
disorder, or the threat of any of the same shall exist, the Mayor shall, in
addition to all other powers granted him/her by the laws of this State
and the ordinances of the City, be empowered in order to suppress such
actions and preserve the peace and order of the City and to protect its
citizens and their property, to issue a proclamation declaring a state of
civil emergency to exist, and may thereby exercise the powers granted
in the following Subsections:
Section
100.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.180
AO:11
1. To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the City as designated
therein as he/she may deem advisable during such hours of the day
or night as he/she determines necessary in the interest of the
public safety and welfare, and during which all persons shall
remove themselves to their place of residence and remain off and
away from the public streets, sidewalks, parkways, parks, and all
other public or open places, and no persons shall assemble, gather,
loiter or otherwise congregate in any manner in groups, assemblies
or meetings in any place for any purpose whatsoever; provided
however, that persons performing medical services, essential
public utility services, public officials, Public Safety Officers and all
other persons exclusively enumerated in such proclamation may be
exempted from curfew;
2. To order the closing of any and all business establishments
throughout the City or any portion thereof for which the state of
emergency exists or during the curfew hours;
3. To order discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing, or
giving away of any firearms or other weapons of any character,
whatsoever;
4. To order the closing of any or all establishments or portions
thereof, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution,
dispensing or giving away [of] firearms or ammunition or other
weapons of any character whatsoever;
5. To order the closing of all retail and wholesale liquor stores,
taverns and other places dispensing, serving or permitting the
consumption of intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer;
6. To order the discontinuance of the sale, distribution or giving away
of intoxicating or non-intoxicating liquors;
7. To order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof wherein
the consumption of intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer is
permitted;
8. To order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any
container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor
vehicle;
9. To order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments,
the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products;
10. To designate any public place, public street, thoroughfare,
boulevard, parking area and any other place closed to motor
vehicles, persons and pedestrian traffic;
Section
100.180
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
100.180
AO:12
Section 100.185. State and National Criminal Background Checks.
[Ord. No. 7216 §1, 6-14-2010]
11. To order all regular, special and auxiliary Public Safety Officers and
other designated conservators of the peace to report for duty
assignment, such reporting to be in accordance with prearranged
plan or under the direction of lawful authority.
B. Any such proclamation of a state of emergency shall become
immediately effective upon its execution and the issuance by the Mayor,
and the original thereof shall be filed and remain in the office of the City
Clerk.
C. The proclamation issued in accordance with the provisions of this
Section shall remain in effect continuously from the date and time of the
issuance thereof, for such a period of time as specifically prescribed
therein or upon the issuance of a proclamation determining a civil
emergency no longer exists, whichever occurs first.
D. It shall be an ordinance violation for any person to fail, neglect or refuse
to comply with the orders made or prohibitions instituted by a
proclamation issued under the provisions of this Section, or for any
person who otherwise violates or in any manner aids, assists,
encourages or accountenances the commission or perpetration of a
violation of said proclamation. For the purpose of the prosecution of any
person for the violation of this Section, a copy of the proclamation of the
Mayor certified by the City Clerk to be a true and correct copy thereof
shall be deemed to constitute a prima facie evidence that such
proclamation was duly issued by the Mayor on the date and at the time
set forth therein pursuant to the authority contained in this Section.
A. Pursuant to Chapter 43, Section 43.535, RSMo., to regulate State and
national background checks.
1. An applicant seeking to engage in obtaining a new liquor license,
solicitors and canvassers, peddlers, and itinerant merchants'
permits, new taxicab and other vehicles for hire permits, shall
submit, if required, two sets of his or her fingerprints, taken by a
local law enforcement agency, to the Missouri State Highway
Patrol, Criminal Records and Identification Division, along with the
appropriate fees.
2. Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, the City
of Maryville, Public Safety Department, will transmit both sets of
fingerprints and the appropriate fees to the Missouri State
Highway Patrol, Criminal Records and Identification Division. The
Missouri State Highway Patrol, Criminal Records and Identification
Division, will compare the subject's fingerprints against its criminal
files and, if no disqualifying conduct is found therein or, if
necessary, submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation for a comparison with nationwide records. The results
Section
100.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.185
AO:13
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation check will be returned to the
Missouri State Highway Patrol, Criminal Records and Identification
Division, which will disseminate the State and national results to
the Public Safety Department.
3. Fees charged by the State and national agencies shall be
determined by the agency performing the criminal background
checks.
4. Upon receipt of the result, the Director of Public Safety shall
render a fitness determination based upon the results of the
criminal background check and communicate its recommendation
for a fitness determination.
5. In rendering fitness determination, the Director of Public Safety
will decide whether the record subject has been convicted of or is
pending indictment for a crime which bears upon his/her ability or
fitness to serve in that capacity or if any felony or misdemeanor
which involved force or threat of force, controlled substances, or
was a sex-related offense; or enumerated disqualifies. Upon an
applicant being denied approval, the City Clerk shall report to the
City Manager the findings.
6. Upon a formal request made by completion of the City's record
request form, the record subject may request and receive a copy of
his/her criminal history record information from the Department of
Public Safety. Should the record subject seek to amend or correct
his/her record, he/she must contact the Missouri State Highway
Patrol, Criminal Records and Identification Division, for a Missouri
State record or the Federal Bureau of Investigation for records
from other jurisdictions maintained in its file.
Section
100.185
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
100.185
AO:14
ARTICLE IV
Identity Theft Prevention Policy1
Section 100.190. Introduction. [Ord. No. 7108 §1, 4-27-2009]
Pursuant to Federal law the Federal Trade Commission adopted Identity
Theft Rules requiring the creation of certain policies relating to the use
of consumer reports, address discrepancy and the detection, prevention
and mitigation of identity theft. The Federal Trade Commission regulations
adopted as 16 CFR §681.2 require creditors, as defined by 15 U.S.C.
§681(a)(5) to adopt red flag policies to prevent and mitigate identity theft
with respect to covered accounts. 15 U.S.C. §1681a(r)(5) cites 15 U.S.C.
§1691a, which defines a creditor as a person that extends, renews or
continues credit, and defines "credit" in part as the right to purchase
property or services and defer payment therefore. The Federal Trade
Commission regulations include utility companies in the definition of
creditor. The City of Maryville is a creditor with respect to 16 CFR §681.2
by virtue of providing water and sewer utility services or by otherwise
accepting payment for municipal services in arrears. This program was
developed with oversight and approval of the City Council. After
consideration of the size and complexity of the City's water and sewer utility
(the utility) operations and account systems, and the nature and scope of
the utility's activities, the City Council determined that this program was
appropriate for the utility, and therefore approved this program on April 27,
2009.
Section 100.200. Program Purpose and Definitions. [Ord. No. 7108
§1, 4-27-2009]
A. Fulfilling Requirements Of The Red Flags Rule. Under the Red Flag
Rule, every financial institution and creditor is required to establish an
"Identity Theft Prevention Program" tailored to its size, complexity and
the nature of its operation. Each program must contain reasonable
policies and procedures to:
1. Identify relevant red flags for new and existing covered accounts
and incorporate those red flags into the program;
2. Detect red flags that have been incorporated in the program;
3. Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent
and mitigate identity theft; and
4. Ensure the program is updated periodically, to reflect changes in
risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the creditor
from identity theft.
B. Red Flags Rule Definitions Used In The Program.
1. Editor's Note — The report of suspected identity theft, list of acceptable documents and
red flag event log are on file in the office of the city clerk.
Section
100.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.200
AO:15
Section 100.210. Identification of Red Flags. [Ord. No. 7108 §1,
4-27-2009]
1. The red flags rule defines "identity theft" as fraud committed using
the identifying information of another person and a "red flag" as a
pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible
existence of identity theft.
2. According to the rule, a municipal utility is a creditor subject to the
rule requirements. The rule defines "creditors" to include finance
companies, automobile dealers, mortgage brokers, utility
companies, and telecommunications companies. Where non-profit
and government entities defer payment for goods or services, they,
too, are to be considered creditors.
3. All the utility's accounts that are individual utility service accounts
held by customers of the utility whether residential or commercial
are covered by the rule. Under the Rule, a "covered account" is:
a. Any account the utility offers or maintains primarily for
personal, family or household purposes that involves multiple
payments or transactions; and
b. Any other account the utility offers or maintains for which
there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the
safety and soundness of the utility from identity theft.
"Identifying information" is defined under the rule as any
name or number that may be used, alone or in conjunction
with any other information, to identify a specific person,
including: name, address, telephone number, Social
Security number, date of birth, government issued driver's
license or identification number, alien registration number,
government passport number, employer or taxpayer
identification number, unique electronic identification
number, computer's Internet protocol address, or routing
code.
A. In order to identify relevant red flags, the utility considers the types of
accounts that it offers and maintains, the methods it provides to open
its accounts, the methods it provides to access its accounts, and its
previous experiences with identity theft. The utility identifies the
following red flags, in each of the listed categories:
1. Notifications and warnings from credit reporting agencies (if a
consumer credit report is used; currently the utility does not use
credit reports). Examples of alerts include but are not limited to:
a. A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer
report;
Section
100.200
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
100.210
AO:16
b. A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a
consumer report;
c. A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer
reporting agency;
d. Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is
inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an
applicant or customer.
2. Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include:
a. Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered
or forged;
b. Identification on which the photograph or physical description
is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or
customer;
c. Identification on which the information is inconsistent with
existing customer information (such as if a person's signature
on a check appears forged);
3. Suspicious personal identifying information. Examples of
suspicious identifying information include:
a. Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with
external information sources used by the utility. For example:
(1) The address does not match any address in the consumer
report (if used by the utility); or
(2) The Social Security number (SSN) has not been issued, or
is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death
Master File (if used by the utility);
b. Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address,
mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers,
pager numbers or answering services, is associated with
fraudulent activity;
c. The Social Security number provided is the same as submitted
by another customer;
d. The applicant fails to provide all required personal identifying
information on an application or in response to notification that
the application is incomplete;
e. Personal identifying information is not consistent with
information that is on file;
f. Personal identifying information provided by the customer is
not consistent with other personal identifying information
provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation
Section
100.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.210
AO:17
Section 100.220. Detecting Red Flags. [Ord. No. 7108 §1,
4-27-2009]
between the Social Security number range and the date of
birth;
g. Personal identifying information or a phone number or
address, is associated with known fraudulent application or
activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used
by the utility.
4. Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account. Examples of
suspicious activity include:
a. Change of address for an account followed by a request to
change the account holder's name;
b. Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up-to-date
account;
c. An account being used in a way that is not consistent with prior
use (such as very high activity);
d. Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as
undeliverable;
e. Notice to the utility that a customer is not receiving mail sent
by the utility;
f. Breach in the utility's computer system security; and
g. Unauthorized access to or use of customer account
information.
5. Alerts from others. Notice to the utility from a customer, identify
theft victim, law enforcement or other person that it has opened or
is maintaining a fraudulent account for a person engaged in
identity theft.
A. In order to detect any of the red flags identified above in the opening of
a new account, utility personnel will take the following steps to obtain
and verify the identify of the person opening the account:
1. Require certain identifying information such as name, residential
or business address, principal place of business for an entity,
driver's license or other identification;
2. Verify the customer's identity (such as by reviewing a driver's
license or other identification card); and
3. Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity.
Section
100.210
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
100.220
AO:18
Section 100.230. Preventing and Mitigating Identity Theft. [Ord.
No. 7108 §1, 4-27-2009]
B. In order to detect any of the red flags identified above for an existing
account, utility personnel will take the following steps to monitor
transactions with an account:
1. Verify the identification of customers if they request information (in
person, via telephone, via facsimile, via e-mail);
2. Verify changes in banking information given for billing and
payment purposes.
A. In the event utility personnel detect any identified red flags, such
personnel shall take one (1) or more of the following steps, depending
on the degree of risk posed by the red flag:
1. Continue to monitor an account for evidence of identity theft;
2. Contact the customer;
3. Not open a new account;
4. Close an existing account;
5. Reopen an account with a new number;
6. Notify the program Administrator for determination of the
appropriate step(s) to take;
7. Notify law enforcement; or
8. Determine that no response is warranted under the particular
circumstances.
B. In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft occurring
with respect to utility accounts, the utility will take the following steps
with respect to its internal operating procedures to protect customer
identifying information:
1. Ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents and
computer files containing customer information;
2. Ensure that office computers are password protected and that
computer screens lock after a set period of time;
3. Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information;
4. Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are
necessary for utility purposes;
5. Require customers to authenticate addresses and personal
information, rather than utility personnel asking if the information
is correct.
Section
100.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.240
AO:19
Section 100.240. Program Updates. [Ord. No. 7108 §1, 4-27-2009]
The Program Administrator will periodically review and update this
program to reflect changes in risks to customers and the soundness of
the utility from identity theft. In doing so, the Program Administrator will
consider the utility's experiences with identity theft situations, changes in
identity theft methods, changes in identity theft detection and prevention
methods, and changes in the utility's business arrangements with other
entities. After considering these factors, the Program Administrator will
determine whether changes to the program, including the listing of red
flags, are warranted. If warranted, the Program Administrator will update
the program or present the City Council with his or her recommended
changes and the City Council will make a determination of whether to
accept, modify or reject those changes to the program.
Section 100.250. Program Administration. [Ord. No. 7108 §1,
4-27-2009]
A. Oversight. Responsibility for developing, implementing and updating
this program lies with an Identity Theft Committee to be comprised of
the Program Administrator (the City Manager) and the Finance
Director. The Program Administrator will be responsible for the
program administration, for ensuring appropriate training of utility
staff on the program, for reviewing any staff reports regarding the
detection of red flags and the steps for preventing and mitigating
identity theft, determining which steps of prevention and mitigation
should be taken in particular circumstances and considering periodic
changes to the program.
B. Staff Training And Reports. Utility staff responsible for implementing
the program shall be trained either by, or under, the direction of the
Program Administrator in the detection of red flags, and the responsive
steps to be taken when a red flag is detected.
C. Service Provider Arrangements. In the event the utility engages a
service provider to perform an activity in connection with one (1) or
more accounts, the utility will take the following steps to ensure the
service provider performs its activity in accordance with reasonable
policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the
risk of identity theft.
1. Require, by contract, that service providers have such policies and
procedures in place; and
2. Require, by contract, that service providers review the utility's
program and report any red flags to the Program Administrator.
Section
100.240
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
100.250
AO:20
Chapter 105
ADMINISTRATION
Section
100.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.250
AO:21

ARTICLE I
Organization
Section 105.010. Form of Government.2 [R.O. 2008 §105.010; Ord.
No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Section 105.020. Fiscal Year.3 [R.O. 2008 §105.020; Ord. No. 4882
§1, 5-14-1990]
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on October first (1st), and end on
September thirtieth (30th).
Section 105.030. Election Authority. [R.O. 2008 §105.030; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Section 105.035. City Elections. [R.O. 2008 §105.035; Ord. No. 5468
§1, 10-14-1996]
A. The City of Maryville, Missouri, was incorporated as a Third Class City
at special election held on September 7, 1954.
B. At special election held on April 21, 1953, the City adopted the Council
Manager form of Government.
C. Such governmental form shall be on a non-partisan basis.
A. The County Clerk of the County of Nodaway, Missouri, shall serve as the
election authority for the City of Maryville, Missouri.
B. The City shall be divided into five (5) wards; there shall be one (1)
precinct for each ward.
A. Date Of General Election. A general election for the expiring vacancies
of elective officers of this City shall be held on the first (1st) Tuesday
after the first (1st) Monday in April of each year.
B. Filing Of Candidates. Any person desiring to seek election for any
elective City office at any general City election may do so by filing their
name and the office for which they seek election with the City Clerk
during the filing period. The filing period shall be sixteen (16) Tuesdays
before the election date to eleven (11) Tuesdays before the election
date. The Clerk shall keep a permanent record of the names of the
candidates, the offices for which they seek election and the date of their
filing. Their names shall appear on the ballot in that order.
C. Qualifications Of Candidates. Any person who is not qualified for office
as provided by State law or Section 105.040 of the City Code shall not
be entitled to have their name printed on the ballot. The qualifications
2. Note — Such election was called under Ord. No. 2477 and confirmed under Ord. No. 2482.
State Law Reference — The city is now governed under §§78.430 to 78.640, both inclusive,
RSMo.
3. Note — Such election was called under Ord. No. 2477 and confirmed under Ord. No. 2482.
Section
105.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.035
AO:23
Section 105.036. Initiative and Referendum. [Ord. No. 7176,
12-28-2009]
of the candidate for office shall be determined by the City Council upon
hearing given, upon its own motion, or upon written affidavit by some
person that a named candidate is not qualified as such for the office
sought.
D. Conformance Of City Elections With State Law. All City elections shall
be conducted and held in conformance with the provisions of the State
election laws.
E. Conduct Of Election By County Clerk. The Nodaway County Clerk, as
the designated election authority, shall conduct City elections.
F. Notice Of City Election. The City Clerk shall notify the Nodaway County
Clerk prior to 5:00 P.M. on the tenth (10th) Tuesday prior to any City
election of the forthcoming City election. The notice shall be in writing
and shall specify that the City is calling the election, the purpose of the
election, the date of the election, and it shall include a certified copy of
the legal notice to be published and the sample ballot.
G. Voters' Qualifications. All residents of the City who are qualified and
properly registered voters in accordance with State law shall be
entitled to vote at City elections. In order to vote at any City election, a
person must be registered no later than 5:00 P.M. on the fourth (4th)
Wednesday prior to the election.
H. Designation Of Polling Places And Judges — Election Costs. The
election authority shall designate the polling places in all City elections.
The election authority shall appoint all election judges. The City shall
pay the election costs required by the election authority conducting its
election.
I. Special Election Dates. Authorized dates for special City elections are
the first (1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday in February or March,
August and November of each year, and other dates as may be
designated by the City Council in conformity with State law.
J. Certification Of Election Results. As soon as practicable after each City
election, the election authority shall convene a Verification Board to
verify the count and certify the results of the election. Not later than the
second (2nd) Tuesday after the election, the Verification Board shall
issue a statement announcing the results of each election and shall
certify the returns to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall issue to each
person elected a certificate of election.
K. Election Ordinance. Prior to each City election, the City Council shall
timely pass an election ordinance authorizing, establishing and
providing the election procedure to be followed in the conduct of the
City election.
Section
105.035
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
105.036
AO:24
A. Any proposal to adopt an ordinance except an ordinance appropriating
money, emergency ordinances and ordinances for the levying of taxes
may be submitted to the Council by a petition signed by at least twentyfive
percent (25%) of the registered voters of the City. The signatures,
verification, authentication, inspection, certification, amendment and
submission of the petition shall be completed as described in
Subsection (3) hereof.
1. Requisites and form of petition. Petitions shall first state the
ordinance to be adopted or protested. The petition shall only be
signed by registered voters who reside in the City of Maryville. In
addition to the signature of the voter, there shall also appear on the
same line or on the immediately following line, the legible printed
name and the street and house number at which the voter resides.
Upon the bottom of each page of such petition, a petitioner shall
make oath before a notary public that he or she personally obtained
the signatures of the registered voters on such page of the petition,
that he or she believes that each signature to the page is the
genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be and
that the statements therein are true as he or she believes. Upon the
bottom of the last page of such petition, a petitioner shall make
oath before a notary public that he or she believes that each
signature contained in the petition is the genuine signature of the
person whose name it purports to be and that the statements
therein are true as he or she believes.
The City shall not afford the opportunity to sign the petition in City
Hall or any City-owned property.
2. Clerk to ascertain sufficiency of petition. Within ten (10) days from
the date of filing such petition, the City Clerk shall examine and
from the voters register ascertain whether or not said petition is
signed by the requisite number of registered voters and, if
necessary, the Council shall allow him extra help for this purpose
and he shall attach to said petition his certificate showing the
results of said examination. If by the Clerk's certificate the petition
is insufficient, it may be amended within ten (10) days from the
date of said certificate. The Clerk shall, within ten (10) days after
such amendment, make like examination of the amended petition,
and if his certificate shall show the same to be insufficient, it shall
be returned to the person filing same, without prejudice, however,
to the filing of a new petition to the same effect.
Upon filing with the City Clerk, a copy of the petition shall be made
available for review by individuals upon request.
3. Council action on petition for ordinance. When a petition to adopt
an ordinance is signed by at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the
registered voters as certified by the City Clerk, the Council shall
pass the ordinance without alteration, within twenty (20) days of
the Clerk's certification of the petition, or submit it for a vote at the
Section
105.036
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.036
AO:25
next municipal or State primary or general election. If a majority of
the voters voting on the proposed ordinance vote in favor thereof,
it shall thereupon become a valid and binding ordinance of the City.
4. Council action on petition protesting ordinance, Clerk duties. If a
petition protesting an ordinance, signed by at least twenty-five
percent (25%) of the registered voters of the City is presented to
the Council, the Council shall reconsider such ordinance and, if it is
not entirely repealed, submit the ordinance to the voters as
provided by Subsection (4) of this Section. Such ordinance shall not
remain in effect after the election unless a majority of the voters
voting on the same shall vote in favor thereof. The petition
protesting an ordinance shall be submitted, verified and certified in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection (2) hereof.
5. Ballot. The question shall be submitted in substantially the
following form:
Shall the following ordinance be (adopted) (repealed)? (Set out
ordinance).
6. Ordinance adopted by people not to be repealed or amended for
two years, exception. Any ordinance proposed by petition, or which
is adopted by a vote of the people, cannot be repealed or amended
by the Council for a period of two (2) years after the adoption of the
ordinance except by a unanimous vote of all members of the
Council. Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at
the same election. The Council may submit a proposition for the
repeal of any such ordinance or for amendments thereto, to be
voted upon at any municipal election. Should the proposition
receive a majority of the votes cast thereon, it shall be repealed or
amended accordingly.
Section
105.036
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
105.036
AO:26
ARTICLE II
City Officers
Section 105.040. City Council.4 [R.O. 2008 §105.040; Ord. No. 4882
§1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 6780 §§1 — 2, 9-26-2005; Ord. No. 6964 §1,
11-13-2007]
Section 105.050. Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem.5 [R.O. 2008 §105.060; Ord.
No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
A. The City Council shall be composed of five (5) members, elected from
the City at large. All elections shall be for three (3) year terms.
B. The elected Council member(s) shall take office on the first (1st)
Monday following their election. In all respects the procedures for the
nomination of candidates and holding of municipal elections shall be
governed by the provisions of State law, including Sections 78.470
through 78.520, RSMo.
C. Each candidate to be a member of the Council shall be at least twentyone
(21) years of age, a citizen of the United States and a resident of
this City for at least one (1) year before the date of the filing for such
office.
D. The City Council shall possess such powers as are enumerated in
Section 78.570, RSMo.
E. Regular meetings of the Council shall be held monthly at a time and
place to be determined by Council resolution. Special meetings may be
called by the Mayor or any two (2) Council members upon proper
notice.
F. Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of at
least three (3) members shall be required to pass any ordinance or
resolution.
G. All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures of
the Missouri Open Meetings Law, Chapter 610, RSMo.
H. A journal or minutes of all open and closed meetings shall be taken and
retained in accordance with the law. Any electronic recording of an
open meeting shall be retained for a period of not less than thirty-six
(36) months.
I. City Council members shall be compensated for their work in City
Government with a yearly gratuity of one thousand two hundred dollars
($1,200.00) per member to be paid quarterly and after election
beginning after ordinance adoption.
4. State Law Reference — For organization procedures of the Council, §78.560, RSMo.
5. Cross Reference — As to powers of mayor to issue proclamation of emergency, §100.180.
Section
105.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.050
AO:27
Section 105.060. City Manager.6 [R.O. 2008 §105.070; Ord. No. 4882
§1, 5-14-1990]
A. Following the election of Council member(s) in April, the Council shall
select one (1) of its members as Mayor and another as Mayor Pro Tem,
each to serve for a one (1) year term.
B. The Mayor shall preside at all Council meetings with full participation
but without power of veto. In his/her absence, or inability to serve, the
functions of his/her office shall be filled by the Mayor Pro Tem.
C. The Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the City by the
courts for the purpose of serving civil process, by the Governor of the
State for the purpose of military law, and for all ceremonial purposes.
He/she shall sign all ordinances and resolutions.
A. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council for an
indefinite term, serving at the pleasure of the Council. He/she shall be
the Chief Administrative Officer of the City. He/she shall attend all
meetings of the Council, participating, but without power of vote. His/
her entire time shall be devoted to the duties of such office. He/she shall
appoint such officers and employees of the City as are authorized under
this Code and by the Council. He/she shall be the Chief Enforcement
Officer of the City and shall enforce all City laws and ordinances. He/
she shall recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he/
she deems necessary or expedient. He/she shall prepare and submit the
annual budget for Council consideration, review and adoption. He/she
shall keep the Council fully advised as to the financial conditions and
needs of the City. He/she shall perform such other duties and possess
such other powers as are prescribed by ordinance, resolution, Council
directive or State Statute.
B. It shall be his or her duty to:
1. Make all personnel appointments and discharges of officers and
employees as provided for in Section 78.600, RSMo.
2. See that the laws and ordinances are enforced.
3. Exercise control of all departments and divisions that may
hereafter be created by the Council.
4. See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its
inhabitants in any public utility franchises are faithfully kept and
performed, and upon information of any violation thereof, to take
such steps as will be necessary to stop or prevent the further
violation of the same.
6. State Law Reference — For similar state statute prescribing the duties of the city
manager, §78.610, RSMo.
Section
105.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
105.060
AO:28
Section 105.070. City Departments. [R.O. 2008 §105.080; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 5186 §1, 2-14-1994]
Section 105.080. City Clerk. [R.O. 2008 §105.090; Ord. No. 4882 §1,
5-14-1990]
The City Clerk shall be appointed by the City Council and serve at the
pleasure of the Council. The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Council
and maintain, in the English language, a journal of the proceedings thereof.
The Clerk shall be custodian of the official City Seal and affix the same to
official City documents. The Clerk shall subscribe his/her signature to all
ordinances and resolutions duly adopted by the Council, and shall perform
such duties as may be prescribed by the Council, the City Manager, City
ordinances and State Statutes.
Section 105.090. City Treasurer. [R.O. 2008 §105.095; Ord. No.
5185 §1, 2-14-1994]
The City Treasurer shall be appointed by the City Council and serve at the
pleasure of the Council. The Treasurer shall hold the administrative position
of Finance Director and the terms Treasurer and Finance Director shall be
interchangeable in this Code of the City. He/she shall perform such duties
5. Attend all meetings of the Council with the privilege of taking part
in the discussions but having no vote.
6. Recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he or she
may deem necessary or expedient.
7. Prepare and submit the annual budget and to keep the City Council
fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the City and
to perform such other duties as may be prescribed by these
Sections or be required of him or her by any ordinance or
resolution of the Council.
A. The following departments are hereby established:
1. Department of Administration. This Department shall be composed
of the City Treasurer, the City Clerk and those persons dealing with
the general finance and administration of the City.
2. Department of Public Safety. This Department shall be composed of
the Police and Fire Departments and Emergency Operations.
3. Department of Public Works. This Department shall be composed of
the Street Department, Sewer Department, Water Department,
Code Enforcement Department and the Cemetery, Airport, and
Sanitary Landfill Operations.
4. Any other functions may be assigned to the appropriate
department upon direction of the City Manager.
Section
105.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.090
AO:29
as may be prescribed by the Council, the City Manager, City ordinances and
State Statutes.
Section 105.095. Investment Policy. [R.O. 2008 §105.096; Ord. No.
5203 §1, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 6673 §1, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 7576 §1,
11-18-2013; Ord. No. 7895, 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 8133, 10-8-2018]
A. The City of Maryville, Missouri, shall invest public funds in accordance
with the investment policy of the City of Maryville, Missouri, which
shall read as follows:
1. Policy. It is the policy of the City of Maryville, Missouri, to invest
public funds in a manner which will provide a reasonable
investment return with the maximum security while meeting the
daily cash flow demands of the City and conforming to all State and
local statutes governing the investment of public funds.
2. Scope. This investment policy applies to all financial assets of the
City of Maryville, Missouri. These funds are accounted for in the
City's Comprehensive Annual Financial Report and include:
a. General fund.
b. Parks and recreation.
c. Transient guest tax.
d. CIP fund.
e. Debt retirement.
f. Solid waste.
g. TIF fund.
h. Water/wastewater.
i. Mozingo recreation.
j. Conference center debt retirement.
k. Central garage.
l. Group insurance.
m. Cemetery perpetual.
n. Payroll.
o. Any new fund created by the City Council unless specifically
exempt.
3. Prudence.
Section
105.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
105.095
AO:30
a. Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing which persons of prudence,
discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their
own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment,
considering the safety of this capital as well as the probable
income to be derived.
b. The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials
shall be the prudent person standard and shall be applied in
the context of managing an overall portfolio.
c. The City Treasurer, acting in accordance with written
procedures and the investment policy and exercising due
diligence, shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an
individual security's credit risk or market price changes,
provided deviations from expectations are reported in a timely
fashion and appropriate action is taken to control adverse
developments.
4. The primary objectives, in priority order, of the City of Maryville's
investment activities shall be:
a. Safety. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the
investment program. Investments of the City of Maryville,
Missouri, shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to ensure
the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. To attain this
objective, diversification is a consideration in order that
potential losses of individual securities do not exceed the
income generated from the remainder of the portfolio.
b. Liquidity. The City of Maryville's investment portfolio will
remain sufficiently liquid to enable the City of Maryville,
Missouri, to meet all operating requirements which might be
reasonably anticipated.
c. Return On Investment. The City of Maryville's investment
portfolio shall be designed with the objective of attaining a
market rate of return throughout budgetary and economic
cycles, taking into account the City of Maryville's investment
risk constraints and the cash flow characteristics of the
portfolio.
5. Delegation Of Authority.
a. Management responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the City Treasurer. No person may engage
in an investment transaction except as provided under the
terms of this policy. The City Treasurer shall be responsible for
all transactions undertaken and shall establish a system of
controls to regulate the activities of subordinate officials.
Section
105.095
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.095
AO:31
b. The City Treasurer shall submit a monthly investment report to
the City Manager for review and to the City Council for
approval. The form of the report shall be as set out in Exhibit
A6 as attached and made a part of this policy.7
6. Ethics And Conflict Of Interest.
a. Officers and employees involved in the investment process
shall refrain from personal business activity that could conflict
with proper execution of the investment program, or which
could impair their ability to make impartial investment
decisions.
b. Employees and investment officials shall disclose to the City
Council any material financial interest in financial institutions
that conduct business within this jurisdiction, and they shall
further disclose any large personal financial/investment
positions that could be related to the performance of the City of
Maryville's portfolio. Employees and officers shall subordinate
their personal investment transactions to those of the City of
Maryville, Missouri, particularly with regard to the time of
purchases and sales.
7. Authorized Financial Dealers And Institutions.
a. In order for a financial institution to qualify as a depository for
operating funds or for investments of the City of Maryville,
Missouri, it must be an FDIC-insured organization with offices
in the City of Maryville, Missouri. For proceeds from the
issuance of tax increment financing bonds, general obligation
bonds, revenue bonds, and certificates of participation, the
paying agent financial institution will qualify as a depository
for those funds and investments. Financial institutions that
purchase the aforementioned bonds or obligations may be
considered as a depository for the investment of any required
reserves funds.
b. Brokerage firms must be SIPC-insured and a member of NYSE
with full service offices in the State of Missouri.
c. All financial institutions handling City operations or investment
funds shall supply a current audited financial statement on an
annual basis.
8. Authorized And Suitable Investments. The City of Maryville,
Missouri, is authorized by this policy to invest in the following:
a. Investment Type.
7. Exhibit A6 is on file in the City offices.
Section
105.095
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
105.095
AO:32
(1) Collateralized certificates of deposit savings accounts,
money market accounts.
(2) Direct obligations of the United States government
(Treasury bills, notes, bonds) with maturities of two (2)
years or less.
b. Investment Maturities. The maturity distribution of the
investment portion of the City of Maryville, Missouri, assets is
limited to the following maximum percentages in each
designated maturity category:
Maturity Distribution
Maturity Category
(in months) Maximum Percent
0 to 6 100%
7 to 12 75%
13 to 15 50%
16 to 18 40%
19 to 21 30%
22 to 24 20%
Over 24 0%
9. Collateralization.
a. All investments and deposits which exceed the financial
institution's insurance limits shall be secured by eligible
collateral. The market value of the collateral must be equal to
or greater than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the value of
the total deposits less the amount of insurance coverage.
Eligible collateral shall mean all securities which are on the
State of Missouri Office of the State Treasurer's list of
Securities Acceptable as Collateral to Secure State Deposits.
(See attached Exhibit B.8)
b. All investments purchased under this policy are to be issued in
negotiable, bearer form to the City of Maryville, Missouri, or in
the form of a safekeeping receipt.
c. Collateral will always be held by an independent third party. A
clearly marked evidence of ownership (safekeeping receipt)
must be supplied to the City of Maryville, Missouri, and
retained.
d. The right of collateral substitution is granted.
8. Exhibit B is on file in the City offices.
Section
105.095
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.095
AO:33
Section 105.100. Director of Public Safety. [R.O. 2008 §105.100;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Section 105.110. City Attorney. [R.O. 2008 §105.110; Ord. No. 4882
§1, 5-14-1990]
10. Safekeeping And Custody. All security transactions entered into by
the City of Maryville, Missouri, shall be conducted on a deliveryversus-
payment (DVP) basis. Securities will be held by a third-party
custodian designated by the City Treasurer and evidenced by
safekeeping receipts.
11. Internal Control.
a. The City Treasurer shall establish an annual process of
independent review by an external auditor.
b. Internal control shall be obtained through the monthly reports
that are set forth as part of this policy. These documents will be
reviewed by the City Manager and approved by the City
Council. The review will provide internal control by assuring
compliance with policies and procedures.
12. Investment Policy Adoption.
a. This investment policy shall be adopted by ordinance of the
City Council.
b. The policy shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the City
Manager and the City Treasurer.
c. Any modifications or changes suggested by this review will not
be effective until approved and adopted in ordinance form by
the City Council.
A. The Director of Public Safety, who may be otherwise referred to in this
Code as "Chief of Police" or "Fire Chief", shall be appointed by the City
Manager for an indefinite term. He/she shall be head of the Department
of Public Safety and perform such functions and duties as may be
prescribed by the Council, the City Manager, City ordinances and State
Statutes.
B. The Director of Public Safety shall recommend to the City Manager the
employment of persons to fill positions within his/her Department that
have been authorized by the Council.
C. The Director of Public Safety and each Public Safety Officer of his/her
Department shall be a conservator of the Police; it shall be his/her and
their duty to enforce all ordinance violations of this Code and felony
provisions of State law.
A. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the City Manager for an
indefinite term, subject to confirmation by the Council.
Section
105.095
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
105.110
AO:34
Section 105.120. Bonds Required. [R.O. 2008 §105.120; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
B. Duties. The duties of the City Attorney shall be as follows:
1. Attendance at all regular meetings of the Council and at adjourned
and special meetings upon request of the City Manager and/or
Council;
2. Attendance at such study sessions of the City Council or meetings
of City Boards and committees when requested to do so for the
purpose of representing the interests of the City or give legal
advice;
3. Draft all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other legal forms
and documents required in the ordinary course of the City
business;
4. Availability to represent the City in any suit or action at law or in
equity brought by or against the City, except prosecutions begun
before the Municipal Judge or appeals taken from the Municipal
Judge, and except where it is determined by the City Attorney that
participation would not be ethical by reason of a conflict of interest;
5. Give legal advice to the Mayor, Councilmen, City Manager and City
Clerk. All other officers and departments under the control of the
City Manager and City Boards and Committees shall obtain legal
advice from the City Attorney through the City Manager;
6. Perform such other ministerial duties as shall be prescribed by
ordinance or shall be ordered by the City Council or City Manager.
C. Compensation. The compensation of the City Attorney shall be
established at an hourly rate for all legal services as set out by the City
Manager.
A. Bonds shall be given the City for the faithful performance of duties and
the correct accounting for and delivery to the City of all monies or other
property in his/her custody and belonging to or under control of the
City, by each and every Officer or employee indicated in the following
list and enumeration and for the amount set opposite his/her proper
designation:
1. City Manager: One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
2. Finance Officer: One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
3. City Clerk: Twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00).
4. Director of Public Safety: Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
5. Municipal Court Clerk: Twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00).
Section
105.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.120
AO:35
Section 105.130. Oath Required. [R.O. 2008 §105.130; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Each officer and employee of the City shall subscribe to the oath required
of municipal officers and employees by State law.
Section 105.140. Compensation — Expense. [R.O. 2008 §105.140;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
6. Each other Officer or employee whose duties include the receiving,
custody or disbursement of money or other property, in such sums
or of such values as the City Manager may require.
B. All bonds shall be given upon the security of a reliable surety company
duly authorized to do business in the State and empowered by law to
sign as surety to give bonds for the faithful discharge of duty by public
officers and others. The bond, on sufficiency of surety thereon, offered
by all officers and employees, shall be approved by the City Attorney
and kept at the City Hall.
C. The premiums on all such official bonds shall be paid by the City out of
the appropriate funds.
D. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as preventing the City
Manager from procuring department, position or blanket bonds
covering a single department or all departments of the City so as to
thereby eliminate the necessities and extra cost of separate bonds
issued to cover individual officers and employees.
A. Each Officer and employee of the City shall be paid such compensation
as shall be prescribed by ordinance, contract or agreement. Such
compensation shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions and other
compensation receivable by such officers or employees for such
services from a third (3rd) party. Fees, commissions and other
compensation shall belong to the City and shall be collected and
accounted for by officer or employee and be paid into the appropriate
City Fund.
The salaries of all City employees shall be paid bi-weekly. The City
Manager may designate that the compensation of certain contractual
and/or professional services may be paid monthly or as designated by
contract.
B. Nothing contained in this Section shall prohibit the payment of
necessary bona fide expenses actually incurred or for any services on
behalf of the City as may be authorized by the Council or City Manager.
C. The City Manager shall designate the officers and employees of the City,
who are to be compensated for the use of their private vehicle in the
business of the City. He/she shall determine a reasonable rate at which
such employees shall be compensated and shall authorize the
compensation on this basis.
Section
105.120
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
105.150
AO:36
Section 105.150. Workers' Compensation Act — Adoption. [R.O.
2008 §105.150; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The City hereby elects to come under and be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 287, RSMo., being Sections 287.010 to 287.811, inclusive together
with the laws of Missouri amending, modifying or making additions to such
Acts, being the Workers' Compensation Law of the State of Missouri.
Section 105.160. Social Security Provisions — Adoption. [R.O. 2008
§105.160; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the City to extend to
all eligible employees and Officials of the City, who are not excluded by law,
or the benefits of the system of Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance as
authorized by the Social Security Act Amendments of 1950.
Section 105.170. Standard Work Week. [R.O. 2008 §105.170; Ord.
No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The standard work week for employees shall be interpreted to mean one
which regularly averages forty (40) hours during any twenty-eight (28) day
period.
Section 105.180. Services of a Special Nature. [R.O. 2008 §105.180;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Where it is, in the judgement of the City Manager, to the advantage of the
City to obtain professional or technical services or other personal services
of a special nature on some basis other than for a set number of hours per
week and under circumstances not provided for, such employees shall be
considered as classified employees of the City, but shall not be assigned to
a standard salary grade and shall not be required to work an established
number of hours per week, but shall spend such time in the performance of
their duties as the nature of the work or the agreement under which they
are employed requires. The City Manager is hereby authorized to enter into
any necessary arrangements covering the described employment.
Section 105.190. Depositories, City Funds. [R.O. 2008 §105.190;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Section 105.200. Sale of Abandoned and Unclaimed Property. [R.O.
2008 §105.200; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
A. The City Council, at its regular meeting in July of each year, may receive
sealed proposals for the deposit of the City funds from banking
institutions doing business within the City.
B. The City Council shall select as the depository of the funds of the City,
the banking institution offering to pay to the City, the largest amount for
the privilege; as set out in the statutory provisions of Sections 95.280 to
95.350, RSMo.
Section
105.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.200
AO:37
Section 105.210. City Residence Requirements. [R.O. 2008
§105.210; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 7059 §§1 — 2,
10-27-2008]
Section 105.220. Pecuniary Interest — Prohibition.9 [R.O. 2008
§105.220; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 5334 §1,
8-14-1995]
A. Any personal property in the custody of the City which is unclaimed by
the owner within ninety (90) days after the custody, if obtained by the
City shall be and hereby is declared to be abandoned by the owner of
the property, and shall be sold for the payment of the storage charge.
B. Disposition of abandoned or unclaimed property will be conducted as
set out in the Purchasing Manual of the City.
C. All expenses of the sale shall be paid from the General Fund or
appropriate Enterprise Fund and all proceeds derived from the sale of
the articles shall be paid into the General Fund or appropriate
Enterprise Fund.
A. Except as may be required by this Section, there shall be no absolute
residence requirement for City employment or to reside within a
reasonable response time of an employee's place of work.
B. It shall be a condition of employment that the City Manager must reside
within the corporate limits of the City.
C. It shall be a condition of employment that the City Clerk, Finance
Officer, Director of Public Safety, Director of Public Works and other key
personnel must reside within Polk Township.
D. It shall be a condition of employment that those persons identified as a
Public Safety Officer may reside outside the corporate limits of the City,
but must reside within a ten (10) mile distance to the Department of
Public Safety.
A. No elected or appointed official or employee of the City shall:
1. Perform any service for the City for receipt or payment of any
compensation, other than of the compensation provided for the
performance of his or her official duties, in excess of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per transaction or five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) per annum, except on transactions made pursuant to
an award on a contract let or sale made after public notice and
competitive bidding, provided that the bid or offer is the lowest
received;
9. State Law Reference — For similar restriction of financial interest by officers and
employees, §§105.450 to 105.482, RSMo.
Section
105.200
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
105.220
AO:38
2. Sell, rent or lease any property to the City for consideration in
excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per annum unless the
transaction is made pursuant to an award on a contract let or a sale
made after public notice and in the case of property other than real
property, competitive bidding, provided that the bid or offer
accepted is the lowest received; or
3. Attempt, for any compensation other than the compensation
provided for the performance of their duties, to influence the
decision of any agency of the City on any manner, except that, this
provision shall not be construed to prohibit such person from
participating for compensation in any adversary proceeding or in
the preparation or filing of any public document or conference
thereon.
B. No sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, or corporation in
which any elected or appointed official or employee of the City is the
sole proprietor, a partner having more than a ten percent (10%)
partnership interest, or a co-participant or owner of in excess of ten
percent (10%) of the outstanding shares of any class of stock, shall:
1. Perform any service for the City or any agency of the City for any
consideration in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
transaction or one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per
annum unless the transaction is made pursuant to an award on a
contract let or sale made after public notice and competitive
bidding, provided that the bid or offer accepted is the lowest
received; or
2. Sell, rent or lease any property to the City or any agency of the City
thereof for consideration in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00) per transaction or one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) per annum unless the transaction is made pursuant to
an award on a contract let or a sale made after public notice and in
the case of property other than real property, competitive bidding,
provided that the bid or offer accepted is the lowest and best
received.
Section
105.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.220
AO:39
Chapter 110
ADMINISTRATIVE BOARDS
Cross Reference — As to city tree board, §120.030.
Section
105.220
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
105.220
AO:40
ARTICLE I
Airport Board10
Section 110.010. Creation, Composition, Qualifications. [R.O. 2008
§110.010; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 7106 §1, 4-13-2009;
Ord. No. 7206 §1, 4-26-2010]
Section 110.020. Appointments, Term, Officers. [R.O. 2008
§110.020; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Section 110.030. Powers and Duties — By-Laws. [R.O. 2008
§110.030; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The Board will serve in an advisory capacity to the City Council and shall
have such power to adopt such rules of procedure and by-laws, subject
to the City Council approval, as it shall deem necessary to administer
to the operation and maintenance of the Maryville Municipal Airport, not
inconsistent with the laws of the State or Ordinances of the City.
Section 110.040. City Officers, Jurisdiction. [R.O. 2008 §110.040;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The provisions of the ordinances of the City pertaining to the public health,
safety and welfare, and in any manner pertaining to the general peace and
quiet of the public, shall be effective within the limits of the Municipal
Airport as though the Airport were included within the limits of the City,
and to this end the Department of Public Safety of the City and all other
A. There is hereby created and established an Airport Board, to consist of
seven (7) persons, electors of the City, who shall have the following
qualifications:
1. Board members shall be at least eighteen (18) years old.
2. The Board shall consist of no less than the four (4) of the seven (7)
members living/residing, with their primary residency located,
inside the City limits of Maryville for no less than one (1) year. No
more than three (3) Board members shall reside outside the City
limits, but shall reside within Nodaway County, as their primary
residence for no less than one (1) year.
A. The members of such Airport Board shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to confirmation by the City Council, to serve a three (3) year
term. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed.
B. Such Board shall elect officers annually, at a date to be fixed by the
Board, and shall elect one (1) of its members as President, Vice
President, Secretary and such other officers of the Board as it may
deem necessary.
10.Cross Reference — For specific code provisions relative to the municipal airport, ch. 125 of
this code.
Section
110.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.040
AO:41
departments of similar character shall be and are hereby directed and
empowered to exercise full and complete jurisdiction over the Municipal
Airport area as they are empowered to exercise within the City Limits.
Section
110.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
110.040
AO:42
ARTICLE II
Park and Recreation Board
Section 110.050. Creation. [R.O. 2008 §110.050; Ord. No. 4882 §1,
5-14-1990]
Under authority of Sections 90.500 to and including 90.570, RSMo., there
is hereby created a Park and Recreation Board for the City.
Section 110.060. Appointment, Number and Qualification of
Directors. [R.O. 2008 §110.060; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord.
No. 7206 §1, 4-26-2010]
The Park and Recreation Board of the City shall be composed of nine (9)
members, hereinafter referred to as "Directors," who shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council. The Directors shall
be chosen from the citizens at large, shall have been a resident of the City
for no less than one (1) year immediately prior to taking office as a Director,
and shall not be a member or employee of the Municipal Government.
Section 110.070. Directors, Term of Office. [R.O. 2008 §110.070;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The Directors shall hold office, one-third (?) for one (1) year, one-third (?)
for two (2) years, and one-third (?) for three (3) years, from the first (1st)
of June following their appointment, and at the first (1st) regular meeting of
Directors shall cast lots for their respective terms; and annually thereafter
the Mayor shall, before the first (1st) of June of each year, appoint as before
three (3) Directors, who shall hold office for three (3) years or until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
Section 110.080. Removal of Directors — Filling Vacancy. [R.O.
2008 §110.080; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The Mayor may, by and with the consent of the City Council, remove any
Director for misconduct or neglect of duty. The unexpired term for any
Director who shall be removed, resign or for any other reason cease to be a
member of the Park and Recreation Board shall be filled by appointment by
the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.
Section 110.090. Compensation of Directors. [R.O. 2008 §110.090;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
No Director shall receive compensation for his/her services as a Director on
the Park and Recreation Board.
Section 110.100. Officers. [R.O. 2008 §110.100; Ord. No. 4882 §1,
5-14-1990]
A. The Park and Recreation Board shall, immediately after the
appointment of Directors, except the appointment of a Director to fill
Section
110.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.100
AO:43
Section 110.110. Powers and Duties. [R.O. 2008 §110.110; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The Park and Recreation Board shall have exclusive control of the
expenditure of all money collected to the credit of the Park Fund and of
the supervision, improvement, care and custody of the Parks and Recreation
facilities of the City. All monies received shall be deposited to the credit of
the Park Fund and shall be kept separate and apart from the other monies
of the City and drawn upon by the properly authenticated vouchers of the
Park and Recreation Board. The Board shall have the power to purchase or
otherwise secure grounds to be used for such parks and shall have power
to appoint a suitable person, to be known as the Director of Parks and
Recreation, to take care of said parks and necessary assistants for said
person and fix their compensation and shall have the power to remove such
appointees. The Park and Recreation Board shall have all powers necessary
to carry out the spirit and intent of Sections 90.500 to and including 90.570,
RSMo.
Section 110.120. Annual Report. [R.O. 2008 §110.120; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The Park and Recreation Board shall make, on or before the second (2nd)
Monday in June, an annual report to the City Council stating the condition
of their trusts on the first (1st) day of May preceding, the various sums of
money received by the Park Fund and other sources, and how much monies
have been expended and for what purposes, and with such other statistics,
information and suggestions as they may deem of general interest. All such
portions of such report as relate to the receipt and expenditure of money
shall be verified by affidavit.
Section 110.130. Gifts and Bequests. [R.O. 2008 §110.130; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The Park and Recreation Board shall be held and considered to be special
trustees of any gift to the City of Maryville of money, personal property or
real property for the benefit of parks and/or recreational facilities of the
City, and shall hold and control such property according to the terms of the
deed, gift, devise or bequest of such property.
the unexpired term of a prior Director, meet and organize by the
election, from membership of the Park and Recreation Board, of the
following officers: President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer.
B. The Board shall make and adopt such by-laws, rules and regulations for
its own guidance and procedures as may be expedient, not inconsistent
with this Article and with Sections 90.500 to and including 90.570,
RSMo.
Section
110.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
110.140
AO:44
Section 110.140. Rules and Regulations, Etc. — Board — Powers.
[R.O. 2008 §110.140; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
In addition to the powers and duties herein granted, the Park and
Recreation Board shall be designated and have authority to carry out the
provisions of Sections 67.750 to and including 67.780, RSMo., pertaining to
recreational systems of political subdivisions and, subject to the approval
of the City Council, shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for
the conduct, administration and management of the public recreational
program of the City.
Section
110.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.140
AO:45

ARTICLE III
Board of Code Appeals
Section 110.150. Creation, Composition, Qualifications. [R.O. 2008
§110.150; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
There is hereby created and established a Board of Code Appeals which
shall consist of five (5) members and two (2) alternate members who shall
be electors of the City and who shall have the same qualifications for office
as are required of members of the Council.
Section 110.160. Appointment, Term of Office. [R.O. 2008 §110.160;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The members of such Board of Code Appeals shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation of the City Council. One (1) member shall be
appointed to serve a one (1) year term; two (2) members shall be appointed
to serve a two (2) year term; and two (2) members shall be appointed to
serve a three (3) year term. Each of the two (2) alternate members shall be
initially appointed to a one (1) year term and shall be designated as "first
alternate" or "second alternate". All appointments shall be made effective
from the same date and annually, thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint as
before, or reappoint members whose terms have expired, to three (3)
year terms of office, including the alternate members. Appointments to fill
unexpired terms of members or alternates shall be for the remainder of
the term. Members and alternates shall serve until their successors are
appointed, confirmed and qualified.
Section 110.170. Election of Officers. [R.O. 2008 §110.170; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
At the first (1st) regular meeting of the Board and annually thereafter, the
Board shall elect one (1) of its members as President and another as Vice
President.
Section 110.180. Rules, By-Laws, Meetings, Quorum. [R.O. 2008
§110.180; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 5337 §1,
8-14-1995]
A. The Board shall have the power to adopt such rules of procedure and
by-laws, subject to City Council approval, as it shall deem proper and
necessary to carry out the provisions of this Article, which are not
inconsistent with the laws of the State or ordinances of the City.
B. The rules shall fix the time and place for regular meetings of the Board;
however, the President of the Board may call special meetings by
providing notice to each member at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to
such meeting. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and
conducted in compliance with Chapter 610, RSMo.
Section
110.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.180
AO:47
Section 110.190. Removal of Members — Filling Vacancy —
Compensation of Members. [R.O. 2008 §110.190; Ord. No. 4882 §1,
5-14-1990]
The Mayor may, by and with the consent of the City Council, remove
any member or alternate member for misconduct or neglect of duty. The
unexpired term of any member or alternate member who shall be so
removed, or who shall resign or for any other reason cease to be a member
of the Board, shall be filled by appointment in the same manner as
described in this Article. No member or alternate member shall receive
compensation for his/her services on the Board of Code Appeals.
Section 110.200. Powers and Duties. [R.O. 2008 §110.200; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 5337 §1, 8-14-1995; Ord. No. 5353 §1,
10-16-1995]
C. The Board shall appoint a Secretary, who shall keep the minutes of all
proceedings of the Board which shall show the vote of each member
upon each question. The Secretary shall keep records of all official
actions of the Board and all minutes and records shall be kept and filed
in the office of the City Clerk and shall be open to the public.
D. Three (3) members or alternate members shall constitute a quorum of
the Board. If one (1) member is absent, the first alternate shall be
designated as a voting member; if the first alternate is also absent, the
second alternate shall be designated as a voting member. If two (2)
members are absent, both the first and second alternates shall be
designated voting members. Every determination by the Board, in order
to carry, must be decided by a quorum of the Board and must receive
the affirmative vote of not less than three (3) members of the Board.
E. No member or alternate member of the Board shall take part in any
hearing or determination in which they have a personal or financial
interest.
A. The Board of Code Appeals shall have power and authority to make
rulings, findings and determination in the following situations:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination by an
employee of the City in the application or enforcement of any
provision of the Maryville Building Code, Maryville Construction
Code, Maryville Electrical Code, Maryville Heating Code, Maryville
Housing Code, Maryville Plumbing Code, Maryville Fire Prevention
Code, Maryville Dangerous Building Code, or any other ordinance
related to the provision of the foregoing City Codes.
2. To authorize upon appeal in special cases, variances from the
terms, conditions or obligations imposed by the Codes and
ordinances described in Subsection (1), above, as will not be
contrary to the public interest, health, safety or general welfare,
Section
110.180
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
110.200
AO:48
Section 110.210. Form and Procedure for Hearing of Appeals. [R.O.
2008 §110.210; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 5337 §1,
8-14-1995; Ord. No. 6575 §§1 — 2, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 6586 §§1 —
2, 9-15-2003]
where owing to special conditions, literal enforcement and strict
application of the provisions of said codes and ordinances would
result in unreasonable or unnecessary hardship.
3. To issue opinions and/or advise the City Council on such matters as
pertain to the application and enforcement of provisions of the
codes and ordinances referred to in Subsection (1), above,
including recommendations as to amendments or revisions of such
codes and ordinances.
4. To make rulings and determinations for the advice of the Code
Enforcement Officer or other employee on any matters which are
not specifically mentioned in the codes or ordinances referred to in
Subsection (1), above, or which are mentioned only in non-specific
terms in such codes or ordinances and which are relevant to the
application or enforcement of such codes and ordinances.
5. To hear and decide all matters referred to or upon which it is
required to pass under such codes and ordinances referred to in
Subsection (1), above.
6. To inspect or cause to be inspected any building, land or premises
involved in any case properly before it, provided however, that
notice of such inspection by the Board shall be given to the parties
involved prior to the inspection, that the parties are given an
opportunity to be present during the inspection; and that the Board
shall state for the record upon completion of the inspection, the
material facts and conditions observed and the conclusions drawn
therefrom. The parties shall be granted the right to rebut or explain
the matters reported on by the Board.
A. Jurisdiction. Any person aggrieved, or any City Official, Department,
Board or agency affected by any ruling, decision or inspection of the
Code Enforcement Officer or other representative of the City in
connection with any matter relative to the application, interpretation or
enforcement of any of the provisions of the codes and ordinances
referred to in this Article, may appeal such ruling, decision or
interpretation to the Board of Code Appeals. The Board shall also hear
matters on which jurisdiction is granted it, pursuant to Chapters 505
and 530 of the Municipal Code of the City of Maryville.
B. Filing. Such appeal shall be filed at the office of the Department of
Public Works within thirty (30) days from the date of service of such
ruling, decision or interpretation. Failure of any person to make a
timely appeal in accordance with the provisions of this Section shall
constitute a waiver of their right to an administrative hearing and
Section
110.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.210
AO:49
adjudication of the subject ruling, decision or interpretation by the
Code Enforcement Office or other representative of the City.
C. Fees. The filing fee for such appeal shall be one hundred twenty-five
dollars ($125.00) plus the cost of mailings. The filing fee shall
accompany the appeal and shall not be refundable.
D. Form Of Appeal. The appeal shall be in written form and shall state each
of the following:
1. A heading in the words: "Before the Board of Code Appeals of the
City of Maryville, Missouri."
2. A caption reading: "Appeals of." or other appropriate caption,
giving the names of all appellants participating in the action.
3. A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the
appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and
order.
4. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of that specific
order or action protested or variance sought, together with any
material fact claimed to support the contentions of the appellant.
Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant
shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
5. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or
action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside, or why
the variance should be granted.
6. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official
mailing addresses.
7. The verification by declaration under penalty of perjury of at least
one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
E. Processing Of Appeal.
1. Upon notification of the filing of any appeal or the filing of any
petition pursuant to this Section, the Code Enforcement Officer or
other representative of the City shall forward to the Board
members in a timely manner the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken, together with the written appeal form.
Said record shall be provided prior to the date of any hearing
scheduled in accordance with this Section.
2. Subject to specific legislation to the contrary, including Sections
505.060(D) and 530.070(D) of the Municipal Code of the City of
Maryville, which shall prevail over the language of this particular
Subsection, an appeal under this Section shall stay all proceedings
and further action from which the appeal is taken unless the City
Manager or his/her authorized representative certifies facts to the
Section
110.210
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
110.210
AO:50
Board that a stay is likely to cause immediate danger to life or
property. In such case, the proceedings and furtherance of the
action from which the appeal is taken shall not be stayed except
by a restraining order granted by the Board or a restraining order
granted by a court of competent jurisdiction.
F. Schedule And Notice. [Ord. No. 7211 §1, 5-10-2010]
1. As soon as practicable after receipt of the appeal from the Code
Enforcement Officer or his/her authorized representative, the
Board shall fix a date and place for the hearing of the appeal by the
Board. Such date shall be not less than ten (10) days nor more than
sixty (60) days from the date of filing of the appeal with the
Department of Public Works. Written notice of the time and location
of the hearing shall be served upon each appellant and/or the
record owner of the property involved in the hearing. Additionally,
one (1) copy shall be served on each of the following if known to the
Board of Code Appeals or disclosed from the land records of the
Recorder of Deeds of Nodaway County, Missouri:
a. The holder of any mortgage, deed of trust or other lien or
encumbrance of record;
b. The owner or holder of any lease or record;
c. The holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or
to the building or the land on which it is located; and
d. Any tenant in possession of the premises.
2. Said notice shall be given by the Secretary of the Board by either
causing a copy of the said notice to be delivered personally or by
mailing a copy of such notice by certified mail, postage prepaid, to
each such person at his/her address as it appears on the last
equalized assessment roll of Nodaway County or as known to the
Board of Code Appeals. Such notice shall be served or received at
least fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing date. If no such
address of such person so appears or is known to the Board of Code
Appeals, then notice may be given by publication in a newspaper
qualified to publish legal notices at least fourteen (14) days prior to
the hearing date, specifically addressed to the person for whom no
address is known and to all other persons having an interest in the
structure or real estate, to appear before the Board of Code
Appeals at the date and time specified. Except for hearings under
Chapter 505 or Chapter 530, notice shall additionally be given to
the owners of record of any property adjoining the property which
is the subject of the hearing.
G. Conduct Of Hearing. The Board shall consider all information,
documents and testimony presented at the public hearing and then
render a decision based thereon which may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
Section
110.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.210
AO:51
Section 110.220. Appeal From Decision of Board. [R.O. 2008
§110.220; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
An appeal from any action, decision, interpretation, ruling, judgment or
order of the Board may be taken by any person or persons jointly or
severally, or by any taxpayer, or any Officer, department, board or official of
the City to a court of competent jurisdiction.
appeals from, and may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination as is deemed proper or grant the relief sought. The
hearing need not be conducted according to the applicable rules of
evidence as applied by judicial bodies in the State of Missouri; provided
however, that a fair and impartial forum is provided at which each party
shall have the right to:
1. Call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of
the hearing;
2. Introduce documentary and physical evidence;
3. Cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing;
4. Impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him\her
to testify;
5. Rebut the evidence against him\her; and
6. Represent himself\herself or be represented by anyone of his\her
choice who is lawfully permitted to do so.
H. Decision Of Board. Except for hearings under Chapter 505 or Chapter
530, in which case the requirements of their particular Chapters shall
apply as to decisions by the Board, the Board shall render a decision
within thirty (30) days from the date on which the appeal was filed, and
such decision shall be made by resolution which shall incorporate
findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, the reasons for
the decision, the requirements to be complied with, and the vote of each
member participating in the decision. A copy of the resolution shall be
delivered to the appellant personally or sent to him/her by certified
mail, postage prepaid,. The effective date of the decision shall be as
stated in the resolution. All decisions of the Board shall require the
affirmative vote of not less than three (3) members of the Board. Where
a contested case is heard before the Board, no member thereof who did
not hear the evidence shall vote or take part in the decision. [Ord. No.
7211 §1, 5-10-2010]
Section
110.210
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
110.220
AO:52
ARTICLE IV
Housing Advisory Board
Section 110.230. Creation, Composition, Qualifications. [R.O. 2008
§110.230; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
There is hereby created and established a Housing Advisory Board which
shall consist of five (5) members and two (2) alternate members who shall
be electors of the City and who shall have the same qualifications for office
as are required of members of the Council.
Section 110.240. Appointment, Term of Office. [R.O. 2008 §110.240;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The members of such Advisory Board shall be appointed by the Mayor
subject to confirmation of the City Council. One (1) member shall be
appointed to serve one (1) year term; two (2) members shall be appointed to
serve two (2) year terms; and two (2) members shall be appointed to serve
three (3) year terms. Each of the two (2) alternate members shall be initially
appointed to a one (1) year term and shall be designated as "first alternate"
or "second alternate". All appointments shall be made effective from the
same date and annually, thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint as before, or
reappoint, members whose terms have expired to three (3) year terms of
office, including alternate members. Appointments to fill unexpired terms of
members or alternates shall be for the remainder of the term. Members and
alternates shall serve until their successors are appointed, confirmed and
qualified.
Section 110.250. Election of Officers. [R.O. 2008 §110.250; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
At the first (1st) regular meeting of the Board, and annually thereafter, the
Board shall elect one (1) of its members as President and another as Vice
President.
Section 110.260. Rules, By-Laws, Meetings and Quorum. [R.O. 2008
§110.260; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
A. The Board shall have the power to adopt such rules of procedure and
by-laws, subject to City Council approval, as it shall deem proper and
necessary to carry out the provisions of this Article, which are not
inconsistent with the laws of the State or ordinances of the City.
B. The rules shall fix the time and place for regular meetings of the Board;
however, the President of the Board may call special meetings by giving
adequate notice to each member at least three (3) days prior to such
meeting. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public in
compliance with the Missouri Open Meetings, Open Record Law.
C. The Board shall elect one (1) of its members as Secretary to the Board
and this person shall keep the minutes of all proceedings of the Board
Section
110.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.260
AO:53
Section 110.270. Powers and Duties. [R.O. 2008 §110.270; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
which shall show the vote of each member upon each question. The
Secretary shall keep records of all official actions of the Board and all
minutes and records shall be kept and filed in the office of the City
Clerk and shall be open to the public.
D. Four (4) members or alternate members shall constitute a quorum of
the Board. If one (1) member is absent, the first alternate shall be
designated as a voting member; if the first alternate is also absent, the
second alternate shall be designated as a voting member. If two (2)
members are absent, both the first and second alternates shall be
designated voting members. Every determination by the Board, in any
matter pending before it, must be decided by a quorum of the Board
and must receive the vote of at least three (3) voting members, voting in
the affirmative, in order to carry.
E. No member or alternate member of the Board shall take part in any
hearing or determination in which he/she has a personal or financial
interest.
A. The Housing Advisory Board shall have the following powers and
duties:
1. To administer, manage and exercise control over housing
rehabilitation grant and/or loan programs, including, but not
limited to, the formulation and adoption, subject to City Council
approval, of rules, regulations, requirements and standards
relating to the establishment of grant or loan recipient eligibility
requirements, grant or loan eligible items, grant or loan amount
limits, grant or loan terms, and conditions, and other grant or loan
program policies, procedures, specifications, forms, records and
accounts.
2. To manage and exercise control over the administration and
enforcement of the Fair Housing Ordinance of the City.
3. To issue opinions and recommendations and advise the City Council
on such matters as pertain to the administration and enforcement
of City codes, ordinances, programs and policies relating to
housing in the City, but excluding those powers expressly granted
to the Board of Code Appeals.
4. To make rulings and determinations for the advice of the Code
Enforcement Officer or his/her authorized representative on any
matters relative to City codes, ordinances, programs and policies
relating to the housing in the City, but excluding those powers
expressly granted to the Board of Code Appeals.
5. To inspect any building, land or premises that may be necessary for
the proper exercise of the above-mentioned powers.
Section
110.260
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
110.270
AO:54
6. To receive and investigate complaints, initiate surveys, assemble
data, confer with individuals and groups, hold hearings, and
conduct investigations relative to the need for production,
maintenance and rehabilitation of housing in the City.
7. To adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of business.
8. To make an annual report of its activities, together with significant
findings and recommendations, to the Mayor and City Council.
Section
110.270
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.270
AO:55

ARTICLE V
Mozingo Lake Recreation Park Advisory Board
Section 110.280. Creation, Composition, Qualifications. [Ord. No.
7226 §§1 — 2, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 7250 §1, 9-27-2010; Ord. No.
8007, 9-25-201711; Ord. No. 8056, 2-26-2018]
Section 110.290. Appointments, Term, Officers. [Ord. No. 7226 §§1
— 2, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 8007, 9-25-2017; Ord. No. 8056,
2-26-2018]
Section 110.300. Powers and Duties — Bylaws. [Ord. No. 7226 §§1 —
2, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 8007, 9-25-2017; Ord. No. 8056, 2-26-2018]
A. There is hereby created and established a Mozingo Lake Recreation
Park Advisory Board, to consist of nine (9) persons; two (2) members
shall be appointed by school districts included within any area funded
by a sales tax, five (5) members shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of the majority of the City Council, and two (2) shall be
appointed by Nodaway County. Members shall have the following
qualifications:
1. Board members shall be at least eighteen (18) years old.
2. The Board shall consist of no less than five (5) of the nine (9)
members living/residing with their primary residency located
inside the City limits of Maryville. No more than four (4) Board
members shall reside outside the City limits, but shall reside within
Nodaway County as their primary residence.
3. A member of the City Council shall serve as a liaison of the Council,
without the power to vote as a member of the Board.
A. The members of such Mozingo Lake Recreation Park Advisory Board
shall be appointed or confirmed by the City Council. Initially, three (3)
members shall be appointed to serve a one-year term; three (3)
members shall be appointed to serve a two-year term; and three (3)
members shall be appointed to serve a three-year term, with a threeyear
term for all members proceeding the initial terms. Members' terms
shall expire October 1 of each year. Members shall serve until their
successors are appointed.
B. Such board shall elect officers annually, at a date to be fixed by the
Board, and shall elect one (1) of its members as President, Vice
President, Secretary, and such other officers of the Board as it may
deem necessary.
A. The Board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City Council and
will have such power to adopt rules of procedure and bylaws, subject to
11.Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 8007 also changed the title of this Article from “Mozingo Park
Recreational Advisory Board” to “Mozingo Lake Recreation Park Advisory Board.”
Section
110.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.300
AO:57
Section 110.310. Compensation of Members. [Ord. No. 7226 §§1 —
2, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 8007, 9-25-2017; Ord. No. 8056, 2-26-2018]
No member shall receive compensation for his/her services as a member on
the Mozingo Lake Recreation Park Advisory Board.
Section 110.320. Meetings. [Ord. No. 7226 §§1 — 2, 7-12-2010; Ord.
No. 8007, 9-25-2017; Ord. No. 8056, 2-26-2018]
The Board shall meet regularly to strategize, formulate, and implement
marketing plans, promotions, and provide oversight of all short- and longterm
plans to effectively and efficiently use Mozingo Lake Recreation Park
as a full functioning family recreation location.
Section 110.330. Recordkeeping, Reports. [Ord. No. 7226 §§1 — 2,
7-12-2010; Ord. No. 8007, 9-25-2017; Ord. No. 8056, 2-26-2018]
Council approval, as it shall deem necessary to administer to the
marketing and promotion of Mozingo Lake Recreation Park.
B. The Board, subject to approval of the City Council, shall consider
implementation of short- and long-term strategic plans and economic
development plans consistent with Section 67.1305, RSMo.
C. The Board shall not have any authority to contractually bind the City of
Maryville, Missouri.
A. The elected Secretary of this Board shall keep records and minutes of
its meetings which shall be presented to the City Clerk, who will
forward them to the Council.
B. The Board shall report at least annually to the City Council on the use of
the funds provided under Section 67.1305, RSMo., and on the progress
of any plan, project, or designation adopted under this Section and shall
make such report available to the public.
C. Not later than the first day of March each year the Board shall submit to
the Joint Committee on Economic Development a report, as prescribed
by Section 67.1305, RSMo.
D. The Board shall be responsible for developing a ten-year planning
proposal every ten (10) years, or a longer-term Park Master Plan,
outlining marketing and promotion strategies, development, operation
and maintenance associated with Mozingo Lake Recreation Park.
Additional plans may be made as necessary for the purpose of this
Board.
Section
110.300
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
110.330
AO:58
ARTICLE VI
Tax Increment Financing Commission
Section 110.340. Establishment. [R.O. 2008 §110.340; Ord. No.
6557 §1, 6-23-2003]
There is created pursuant to Section 99.820.2 of the Act a commission to be
known as the "Tax Increment Financing Commission of Maryville, Missouri"
(the "TIF Commission"). The TIF Commission shall have continuous
existence unless and until terminated by the adoption of an ordinance of the
City Council (the "Council") terminating it.
Section 110.350. Composition. [R.O. 2008 §110.350; Ord. No. 6557
§2, 6-23-2003]
Section 110.360. Term. [R.O. 2008 §110.360; Ord. No. 6557 §3,
6-23-2003]
A. The TIF Commission shall be composed of eleven (11) members to be
initially appointed as follows:
1. Six (6) members shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City with
the consent of the Council.
2. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the mailed notice required
by Section 99.830 of the Act, notice of a proposed redevelopment
area, redevelopment plan or redevelopment project, two (2)
members shall be appointed by Presiding Commissioner of
Nodaway County (the "County") with the consent of the majority of
the County Commission.
3. Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of notice of a proposed
redevelopment area, redevelopment plan or redevelopment project
required by Section 99.830 of the Act, two (2) members shall be
appointed by the Board of Education of the Maryville R-II School
District (the "school district").
4. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the mailed notice required
by Section 99.830 of the Act, notice of a proposed redevelopment
area, redevelopment plan or redevelopment project, one (1)
member shall be appointed, in any manner agreed upon by the
affected taxing districts, to represent all taxing districts, other than
the City, the County and the school district, levying ad valorem
taxes within the area selected for a redevelopment plan.
A. The terms of the members shall be as follows:
1. With regard to the term of the first (1st) six (6) members appointed
by the Mayor with the consent of the Council:
a. Two (2) shall be designated to serve for terms of two (2) years;
Section
110.340
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.360
AO:59
Section 110.370. Voting. [R.O. 2008 §110.370; Ord. No. 6557 §4,
6-23-2003]
Those TIF Commission members who are appointed by the school district,
the County and other taxing districts shall only be authorized to vote
on matters specifically and directly relating to the redevelopment plan,
redevelopment project or redevelopment area upon which their affected
taxing districts levy ad valorem taxes.
Section 110.380. Officers. [R.O. 2008 §110.380; Ord. No. 6557 §5,
6-23-2003]
The TIF Commission, upon the effective date of this Article, shall organize
itself and elect from its six (6) members appointed by the Mayor, a
Chairman, Vice Chairman, Treasurer and Secretary, each to serve for one
(1) year terms or until their successors are elected.
Section 110.390. Meetings. [R.O. 2008 §110.390; Ord. No. 6557 §6,
6-23-2003]
The TIF Commission shall meet regularly and shall adopt such rules and
regulations for operation as shall enable it to maintain an orderly procedure
for its business and to effectively and efficiently exercise the pointers
authorized by the Statute and delegated to it by the Council.
Section 110.400. Recordkeeping. [R.O. 2008 §110.400; Ord. No.
6557 §7, 6-23-2003]
The TIF Commission shall keep records and minutes of its meetings and
shall report annually to the Council with regard to its activities.
b. Two (2) shall be designated to serve for terms of three (3)
years; and
c. Two (2) shall be designated to serve for terms of four (4) years.
Thereafter, members appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the Council shall serve for a term of four
(4) years. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
terms in the same manner as were the original
appointments.
2. The members who are appointed by the County, the school district
and other taxing districts shall serve on the TIF Commission for a
term which coincides with the length of time such redevelopment
project, redevelopment plan or the designation of the area for
which they were appointed is being considered for approval by the
TIF Commission. Such term will terminate upon final approval of
such redevelopment project, redevelopment plan or designation of
the area by the Council.
Section
110.360
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
110.400
AO:60
ARTICLE VII
Public Art Advisory Committee
Section 110.410. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. 7594 §1, 1-27-2014]
It is the purpose and intent of the City to promote and expand the
opportunities for its citizens to experience public art and other projects
resulting from the creative expression of visual arts in public places within
the City. A policy is hereby established to direct the inclusion of works of art
in public spaces within the City of Maryville, Missouri.
Section 110.420. Definitions. [Ord. No. 7594 §1, 1-27-2014]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
CITY — The City of Maryville, Missouri.
PUBLIC ART — Means a work of art that is visible or accessible to the
general public. Public art is generally large-scale and may include
sculpture, painting, installations, photography, video, works of light or
sound, or any other work or project determined by the Public Art Advisory
Committee to satisfy the intent of this Chapter.
PUBLIC ART ADVISORY COMMITTEE — A group of qualified citizens,
appointed by the City Council, to oversee, in conjunction with City staff, the
selection of public art, its placement and location, and to recommend to the
City Council the placement of specific pieces, while staying within budgeted
amounts.
PUBLIC ART PROJECTS PLAN — A prioritized list of public art projects to
be undertaken in any given year with budgets and recommended site and
design approach, developed by the provider of art pieces and the Public Art
Advisory Committee of the City of Maryville.
Section 110.430. Creation, Establishment and Qualifications of
Office. [Ord. No. 7594 §1, 1-27-2014]
A. There is hereby created and established a Public Arts Advisory
Committee for the City of Maryville, Missouri, which shall consist of
seven (7) members, citizens and residents of Maryville, Missouri, who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.
Members shall have the same qualifications for office as the City
Council.
1. Appointment — term of office. The members of such Public Art
Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to
confirmation of the City Council. Initially one (1) member shall be
appointed to serve a one-year term; three (3) members shall be
appointed to serve two-year terms; and three (3) members shall be
appointed to serve three-year terms. All appointments shall be
made effective from the same date, and, annually thereafter, the
Mayor shall appoint as before, or reappoint, members whose terms
Section
110.410
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.430
AO:61
Section 110.440. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 7594 §1, 1-27-2014]
have expired to three-year terms of office. Appointments to fill
unexpired terms of members or alternates shall be for the
remainder of the term. Members shall serve until their successors
are appointed, confirmed and qualified. The members of the Public
Art Advisory Committee shall serve without compensation.
2. Election of officers. The Committee shall elect one (1) of its
members as President and another as Vice President at the first
regular meeting of the Committee. The Committee shall elect one
(1) of its members as Secretary to the Committee, and this person
shall keep the minutes of all proceedings of the Committee which
shall show the vote of each member upon each question. The
Secretary shall keep records of all official actions of the Committee,
and all minutes and records shall be kept and filed in the office of
the City Clerk and shall be open to the public. An agenda shall be
posted at City Hall no less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the
time of a committee meeting.
3. Rules, bylaws, meeting a quorum.
a. The Committee shall have the power to adopt such rules of
procedure and bylaws, subject to City Council approval, as it
shall deem proper and necessary to carry out the provisions of
this Chapter.
b. The rules shall fix the time and place for regular meetings of
the Committee. All meetings of the Committee shall be held in
compliance with the Missouri Open Meetings, Open Records
law.12
c. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum of the Committee.
Every determination by the Committee, in any matter pending
before it, must be decided by a quorum of the Committee and
must receive the vote of at least four (4) voting members,
voting in the affirmative, in order to carry.
A. The duties of the Public Art Advisory Committee shall be as follows:
1. To act in an advisory capacity to the City Council and City Manager
in all matters concerning public art.
2. To facilitate communication and cooperation between public art
and adjacent property owners.
3. To take action or provide recommendations to the City Council
regarding the public display and installation of art in accordance
with City Council-adopted policies or resolutions.
12.Editor's Note: See §610.010 et seq., RSMo.
Section
110.430
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
110.440
AO:62
Section 110.450. Standards of Review. [Ord. No. 7594 §1,
1-27-2014]
Section 110.460. Ownership. [Ord. No. 7594 §1, 1-27-2014]
All art objects acquired pursuant to this Article shall be acquired in the
name of the City of Maryville, Missouri.
Section 110.470. through Section 110.490. (Reserved)
4. To develop, maintain, and update a public art projects plan
periodically for presentation to and approval by the City Council.
5. To explore and suggest outside funding sources for public art.
6. To expand and enhance public art education in the community.
7. To promote and stimulate public interest in art.
8. To perform such additional functions relating to public art as may
be delegated to the Commission pursuant to a project, policy, or
resolution by the City Council.
A. In performing its duties with respect to the public arts program, the
Public Arts Advisory Committee shall give special attention to the
following matters:
1. Conceptual compatibility of the design with the immediate
environment of the site;
2. Appropriateness of the design to the function of the site;
3. Compatibility of the design and location within a unified design
character or historical character of the site;
4. Appropriateness of the materials, textures, colors, and design to
the expression of the design concept;
5. Representation of a broad variety of tastes within the community
and the provision of a balanced inventory of art in public places to
insure a variety of style, design, and media throughout the
community that will be representative of the eclectic tastes of the
community;
Section
110.440
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.470
AO:63

ARTICLE VIII
Tourism Committee
Section 110.500. Purpose And Intent. [Ord. No. 7931, 1-23-2017]
It is the purpose and intent of the Tourism Committee to help facilitate
efforts towards enhancing the vitality and broadening the economic base of
Maryville through the development and promotion of tourism.
Section 110.510. Composition. [Ord. No. 7931, 1-23-2017]
Section 110.520. Compensation And Qualifications. [Ord. No. 7931,
1-23-2017]
All members of the Tourism Committee shall serve without compensation
and shall have the same qualifications for office as are required of members
of the City Council.
Section 110.530. Terms — Filling Vacancies. [Ord. No. 7931,
1-23-2017]
Members of the Tourism Committee will be appointed for a term of three
(3) years; but, of the members first appointed, three (3) shall be appointed
for a term of one (1) year, three (3) shall be appointed for a term of two (2)
years, and three (3) shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years.
Section 110.540. Election Of Officers. [Ord. No. 7931, 1-23-2017]
The Committee shall elect one (1) of its members as President and another
as Vice President at the first regular meeting of the Committee. The
Committee shall elect one (1) of its members as Secretary to the Committee
and this person shall keep the minutes of all proceedings of the Committee
which shall show the vote of each member upon each question. The
Secretary shall keep records of all official actions of the Committee and all
minutes and records shall be kept and filed in the office of the City Clerk
and shall be open to the public.
A. The Tourism Committee shall consist of nine (9) members appointed by
the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.
1. One (1) representative shall be appointed from each of the
following organizations who have a vested interest in the tourism
industry: Greater Maryville Chamber of Commerce, Nodaway
County Economic Development, Maryville Downtown Improvement
Organization, Northwest Missouri State University, City of
Maryville and Maryville Parks and Recreation.
2. Three (3) members representing the general interests of the
community.
B. One (1) member of the City Council shall serve as liaison in a non-voting
capacity. All members shall be residents of the City.
Section
110.500
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.550
AO:65
Section 110.550. Rules, Bylaws, Quorum. [Ord. No. 7931,
1-23-2017]
Section 110.560. Powers And Duties. [Ord. No. 7931, 1-23-2017]
A. The Committee shall have the power to adopt such rules of procedure
and bylaws, subject to City Council approval, as it shall deem proper
and necessary to carry out the provisions of this Chapter.
B. The rules shall fix the time and place for regular meetings of the
Committee. All meetings of the Committee shall be held in compliance
with the Missouri Open Meetings, Open Record law. An agenda shall be
posted at City Hall no less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time
of a committee meeting.
C. Five (5) members shall constitute a quorum of the Committee. Every
determination by the Committee, in any matter pending before it, must
be decided by a quorum of the Committee and must receive the vote of
at least five (5) voting members, voting in the affirmative, in order to
carry.
A. The duties of the Tourism Committee shall be as follows:
1. To act in an advisory capacity to the City Council and City Manager
in all matters concerning tourism. Duties may include preparation
and data review, analysis, and review of other pertinent
information to recommend strategies for action to improve tourism
within the City.
2. To facilitate communication, cooperation, and scheduling efforts
between the City of Maryville and Northwest Missouri State
University with regards to events and planned activities at the
Northwest Multipurpose Complex.
3. To provide recommendations to the City Council regarding
transient guest tax revenues to promote and develop tourism in the
City.
4. To explore and suggest comprehensive marketing projects,
including advertising media buys, creation and distribution of
printed or electronic promotional tourism material, or coordination
of efforts to recruit conventions, sporting and other events to the
community.
5. To perform such additional functions relating to tourism as may be
delegated to the Committee pursuant to a project, policy, or
resolution by the City Council.
Section
110.550
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
110.560
AO:66
Chapter 112
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Section 112.010. Declaration of Policy. [R.O. 2008 §112.010; Ord.
No. 6770 §1, 8-8-2005; Ord. No. 6815 §1, 3-13-2006; Ord. No. 6924
§1, 8-13-2007; Ord. No. 7139 §1, 8-10-2009; Ord. No. 7338 §1,
6-27-2011; Ord. No. 7536 §1, 6-24-2013; Ord. No. 7758 §1,
6-22-2015]
The operation of government requires that public officials and employees
be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government
decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental
structure; that public office not be used for personal gain, and the public
have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these
goals, there is hereby established a procedure for disclosure by certain
officials and employees of private financial and/or other interest in matters
affecting the City.
Section 112.020. Conflicts of Interest. [R.O. 2008 §112.020; Ord.
No. 6770 §2, 8-8-2005; Ord. No. 6815 §2, 3-13-2006; Ord. No. 6924
§2, 8-13-2007; Ord. No. 7139 §2, 8-10-2009; Ord. No. 7338 §2,
6-27-2011; Ord. No. 7536 §2, 6-24-2013; Ord. No. 7758 §2,
6-22-2015]
Section 112.030. Disclosure Reports. [R.O. 2008 §112.030; Ord. No.
6770 §3, 8-8-2005; Ord. No. 6815 §3, 3-13-2006; Ord. No. 6924 §3,
8-13-2007; Ord. No. 7139 §3, 8-10-2009; Ord. No. 7338 §3,
A. All elected and appointed officials, as well as employees of a political
subdivision, must comply with Section 105.454, RSMo., on conflicts of
interest and other State laws governing official conduct.
B. Any member of the Governing Body of a political subdivision who has a
substantial or private interest in any measure, bill, order or ordinance
proposed or pending before such governing body must disclose that
interest to the City Clerk, and such disclosure shall be recorded in the
appropriate journal of the Governing Body. "Substantial or private
interest" is defined as ownership by the individual, his spouse or his
dependent children, whether singularly or collectively, directly or
indirectly of:
1. Ten percent (10%) or more of any business entity; or
2. An interest having a value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); or
3. The receipt of a salary, gratuity or other compensation or
enumeration of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more per year
from any individual, partnership, organization or association within
any calendar year.
Section
110.560
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
112.030
AO:67
6-27-2011; Ord. No. 7536 §3, 6-24-2013; Ord. No. 7758 §3,
6-22-2015]
A. Each elected official and the City Manager shall disclose the following
information by May 1 if any such transactions were engaged in during
the previous calendar year:
1. For each person, and all persons within the first degree of
consanguinity or affinity of such person, the date and identification
of the parties of each transaction with a total value in excess of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) if any, that such person had with the
political subdivision, other than compensation received as an
employee or payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political
subdivision and other than transfer for no consideration to the
political subdivision; and
2. The data and the identities of the parties to each transaction known
to the person with a total value in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00), if any, that any business entity in which such person had
a substantial interest had with the political subdivision, other than
payment of any tax, fee or penalty fee to the political subdivision or
transactions involving payment for providing utility service to the
political subdivision and other than transfer for no consideration to
the political subdivision.
3. The City Manager shall disclose on May 1, for the previous
calendar year the following information:
a. The name and address of each of the employers of such person
from whom income of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
more was received during the year covered by the statement;
b. The name and address of each sole proprietorship that he
owned; the name and address and the general nature of the
business conducted of each general partnership and joint
venture in which he was a partner or participant; the name and
address of each partner or coparticipant for each partnership
or joint venture unless such names and addresses are filled by
the partnership or joint venture with the Secretary of State;
the name, address and general nature of the business
conducted of any closely held corporation or limited
partnership in which the person owned ten percent (10%) or
more of any class of the outstanding stock or limited
partnership units; and the name of any publicly traded
corporation or limited partnership that is listed on a regulated
stock exchange or automated quotation system in which the
person owned two percent (2%) or more of any class of
outstanding stock, limited partnership units or other equity
interests;
c. The name and address of such corporation for which such
person served in the capacity of a director, officer or receiver.
Section
112.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
112.040
AO:68
Section 112.040. Filing of Report. [R.O. 2008 §112.040; Ord. No.
6770 §4, 8-8-2005; Ord. No. 6815 §4, 3-13-2006; Ord. No. 6924 §4,
8-13-2007; Ord. No. 7139 §4, 8-10-2009; Ord. No. 7338 §4,
6-27-2011; Ord. No. 7536 §4, 6-24-2013; Ord. No. 7758 §4,
6-22-2015]
Chapter 115
MUNICIPAL COURT
Section 115.010. Court Established. [R.O. 2008 §115.010; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
There is hereby established in this City a Municipal Court, to be known
as the "Maryville Municipal Court, a Division of the Fourth Judicial Circuit
Court of the State of Missouri". This Court is a continuation of the Municipal
Court of the City as previously established, and is termed herein "Municipal
Court".
Section 115.020. Jurisdiction.
Violations of municipal ordinances shall be heard and determined only
before divisions of the Circuit Court. "Heard and determined", for purposes
of this Chapter, shall mean any process under which the court in question
retains the final authority to make factual determinations pertaining to
allegations of a municipal ordinance violation.
Section 115.030. Missouri Uniform Traffic Ticket — Adoption. [R.O.
2008 §115.030; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The Missouri Uniform Traffic Ticket, as adopted by the Supreme Court of
Missouri for Municipal and Traffic Courts, is hereby adopted for use in the
Municipal Court of the City.
A. The report shall be filed with the City Clerk and with the Secretary of
State prior to January 1 and thereafter with the Ethics Commission. The
reports shall be available for public inspection and copying during
normal business hours. The financial interests shall be filed at the
following times, but no person is required to file more than one (1)
financial interest statement in any calendar year:
1. Each person appointed to office shall file the statement within
thirty (30) days of such appointment or employment; and
2. Every other person required to file a financial interest statement
shall file the statement annually no later than May 1, and the
statement shall cover the calendar year ending and immediately
preceding December 31; provided that any member of the City
Council may supplement the financial interest statement to report
additional interest acquired after December 31 of the covered year
until the date of filing of the financial interest statement.
Section
112.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.040
AO:69
Section 115.040. Selection of Judge. [R.O. 2008 §115.040; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The Judge of the City's Municipal Court shall be known as a Municipal Judge
of the 4th Judicial Circuit and shall be appointed to his/her position by the
City Council, for a term as specified herein.
Section 115.050. Term of Office. [R.O. 2008 §115.050; Ord. No. 4882
§1, 5-14-1990]
The Municipal Judge shall hold his/her office for a period of not less than
two (2) years and shall take office biannually. If for any reason a Municipal
Judge vacates his/her office, his/her successor shall complete the term of
office, even if the same be for less than two (2) years.
Section 115.060. Vacation of Office. [R.O. 2008 §115.060; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Section 115.070. Qualifications for Office. [R.O. 2008 §115.070;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
A. The Municipal Judge shall vacate his/her office under the following
circumstances:
1. Upon removal from office by the State Commission on the
Retirement, Removal and Discipline of Judges, as provided in
Missouri Supreme Court Rule 12; or
2. Upon attaining his/her seventy-fifth (75th) birthday; or
3. If he/she is not licensed to practice law in the State of Missouri, and
if he/she has served as Municipal Judge of the City for at least three
(3) years prior to January 2, 1979, then if he/she should fail, within
six (6) months of his/her selection, to satisfactorily complete a
course of instruction for Municipal Judge as prescribed by the State
Supreme Court; or
4. If he/she is licensed to practice law in the State of Missouri, then if
he/she should lose his/her license to practice law within the State of
Missouri.
5. The Municipal Judge may be removed from office upon appropriate
action of the City Council, for causes related to conviction of a
felony or maleficence.
A. The Municipal Judge shall possess the following qualifications before
he/she shall take office:
1. He/she must be a resident of the State of Missouri.
2. He/she must be between the ages of twenty-one (21) and seventyfive
(75) years.
Section
115.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
115.070
AO:70
Section 115.080. Superintending Authority. [R.O. 2008 §115.080;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The Municipal Court of the City shall be subject to the rules of the Circuit
Court of which it is a part, and to the rules of the State Supreme Court. The
Municipal Court shall be subject to the general administrative authority of
the Presiding Judge of the Circuit Court, and the Judge and Court personnel
of said Court shall obey his/her directives.
Section 115.090. Report to City Council. [R.O. 2008 §115.090; Ord.
No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 5186 §1, 2-14-1994]
The Municipal Judge shall cause the Municipal Court Clerk to prepare
within the first ten (10) days of every month a list of all cases heard and
tried before the Court during the preceding month, giving in each case the
name of the defendant, the fine imposed, if any, the amount of cost, the
names of the defendants committed and in the cases where there was an
application for trial de novo, respectively. The same shall be prepared under
oath by the Municipal Court Clerk or the Municipal Judge. This report will
be filed with the City Clerk, who shall thereafter forward the same to the
City Council for examination at its first (1st) day of the month, pay to the
City Treasurer the full amount of all fines collected during the preceding
month, if they have not previously been paid.
Section 115.100. Duties and Powers of the Municipal Judge. [R.O.
2008 §115.100; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
3. He/she may serve as Municipal Judge for any other municipality.
4. He/she must not hold any other office within the City Government.
5. He/she must either:
a. Be licensed to practice law within the State of Missouri, or
b. Have been Municipal Judge of this City for at least three (3)
years immediately prior to January 2, 1979, and he/she must,
within six (6) months after his/her selection to the position,
satisfactorily complete a course of instruction for Municipal
Judges as prescribed by the State Supreme Court.
6. The Municipal Judge shall be considered holding a part-time
position, and as such may accept (within the requirements of the
Code of Judicial Conduct, Missouri Supreme Court Rule 2) other
employment.
A. The Municipal Judge shall be a conservator of the peace. He/she shall
keep a docket in which he/she shall enter every case commenced before
him/her and the proceedings therein, and he/she shall keep such other
records as may be required. Such docket and records shall be records
of the Circuit Court of Nodaway County. The Municipal Judge shall
deliver the docket and the records of the Municipal Court, and all books
Section
115.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.100
AO:71
Section 115.105. Substitute Municipal Judge and Term of Office.
[Ord. No. 7399 §1, 2-27-2012]
Section 115.110. Missouri Rules of Civil Procedure and Practice —
Adoption. [R.O. 2008 §115.110; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The Missouri Rules of Civil Procedure and Practice promulgated by the
State Supreme Court for Municipal and Traffic Courts are hereby adopted
for the use of the Municipal Court.
Section 115.120. Violations Bureau. [R.O. 2008 §115.120; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Should the Municipal Judge determine that there shall be a Violations
Bureau, the City shall provide all expenses incident to the operation of the
same. The City Manager shall designate a Traffic Violations Clerk for said
Bureau if established.
and papers pertaining to his/her office, to his/her successor in office or
to the Presiding Judge of the Circuit Court. In addition, the Municipal
Judge shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To establish a Violations Bureau as provided for in the Missouri
Rules of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic Courts
and Section 479.050, RSMo.
2. To administer oaths and enforce due obedience to all orders, rules
and judgments made by him, and may fine and imprison for
contempt committed before him/her while holding Court, in the
same manner and to the same extent as a Circuit Judge.
3. To commute the term of any sentence, stay execution of any fine or
sentence, suspend any fine or sentence, and make such other
orders as the Municipal Judge deems necessary relative to any
matter that may be pending in the Municipal Court.
A. A substitute Municipal Judge for the City's Municipal Court shall be
appointed by the City Council for a term as specified herein.
B. The term of office, reasons to vacate the office, and qualifications of
office shall be the same as those of the Municipal Judge.
C. The substitute Municipal Judge shall have all the duties and powers of
the Municipal Judge as described in Section 115.100 of the Municipal
Court.
D. The substitute Municipal Judge shall be paid on an hourly basis at the
same rate as the Municipal Judge.
Section
115.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
115.130
AO:72
Section 115.130. Issuance and Execution of Warrants. [R.O. 2008
§115.130; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
All warrants issued by a Municipal Judge shall be directed to a member of
the Department of Public Safety, or to the Sheriff of the County. The warrant
shall be executed by the member of the Department of Public Safety or
Sheriff at any place within the limits of the County and not elsewhere unless
the warrants are endorsed in the manner provided for warrants in criminal
cases and, when so endorsed, shall be served in other counties, as provided
for warrants in criminal cases.
Section 115.140. Arrests Without Warrants. [R.O. 2008 §115.140;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
A member of the Department of Public Safety shall, without a warrant, make
arrest of any person who commits an offense in his/her presence, but such
Officer shall, before the trial, file a written complaint with the Judge hearing
violations of municipal ordinances.
Section 115.150. Jury Trials. [R.O. 2008 §115.150; Ord. No. 4882 §1,
5-14-1990]
Any person charged with a violation of a municipal ordinance of this City
shall be entitled to a trial by jury, as in prosecutions for misdemeanors
before an Associate Circuit Judge. Whenever a defendant accused of a
violation of a municipal ordinance demands trial by jury, the Municipal
Court shall certify the case to the Presiding Judge of the Circuit Court for
reassignment, as provided in Section 546.095, RSMo.
Section 115.155. Failure to Appear. [R.O. 2008 §115.155; Ord. No.
5564 §1, 7-28-1997]
Section 115.160. Duties of the City's Prosecuting Attorney. [R.O.
2008 §115.160; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 6603 §§1 — 2,
11-24-2003]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who has been released upon
recognizance or bond to willfully fail to appear before any Court or any
Judicial Officer as required.
B. The punishment for violation of this Section shall be in addition to the
forfeiture of any security which was given or pledged for the person's
release.
C. Nothing in this Section shall prevent or limit any Court's exercise of its
power to punish for contempt.
A. Appointment. The City's Prosecuting Attorney shall be appointed by the
City Manager for an indefinite term, subject to confirmation of the City
Council.
B. Duties. The duties of the City's Prosecuting Attorney shall be as follows:
Section
115.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.160
AO:73
Section 115.170. Summoning of Witnesses. [R.O. 2008 §115.170;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Judge to summon all persons whose
testimony may be deemed essential as witnesses at the trial, and to enforce
their attendance by attachment, if necessary. The fees of witnesses shall
be the same as those fixed for witnesses in trials before Associate Circuit
Judges and shall be taxed as other costs in the case. When a trial shall be
continued by a Municipal Judge it shall not be necessary to summon any
witnesses who may be present at the continuance, but the Municipal Judge
shall orally notify such witnesses as either party may require to attend
before him/her on the day set for trial to testify in the case, and enter the
names of such witnesses on his/her docket, which oral notice shall be valid
as a summons.
Section 115.180. Transfer of Complaint to Associate Circuit Judge.
[R.O. 2008 §115.180; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
If, in the progress of any trial before a Municipal Judge, it shall appear to the
Judge that the accused ought to be put upon trial for an offense against the
criminal laws of the State and not cognizable before him/her as Municipal
Judge, he/she shall immediately stop all further proceedings before him/
her as Municipal Judge and cause the complaint to be made before some
Associate Circuit Judge within the County.
Section 115.190. Parole and Probation. [R.O. 2008 §115.190; Ord.
No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Any Judge hearing violations of municipal ordinances may, when in his/her
judgment it may seem advisable, grant a parole or probation to any person
who shall plead guilty or who shall be convicted after a trial before said
Judge.
1. Represent and defend the City on all actions in Municipal Court.
2. Prosecute all cases on behalf of the City when Municipal Court
cases are transferred from Municipal Court because of jury trial
demand, change of Judge or other procedure.
3. Represent the City on all appeals taken from an action commenced
in Municipal Court.
4. Give legal advice to Law Enforcement Officers, Mayor, members of
the City Council, City Manager and City Clerk in connection with
prosecutions or potential prosecutions for violations of City Code.
5. Perform all such other ministerial duties as may be prescribed by
ordinance or ordered by the City Council or City Manager.
C. Compensation. Compensation of the Prosecuting Attorney for all legal
services shall be established at an hourly rate by the City Manager.
Section
115.160
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
115.200
AO:74
Section 115.200. Right of Appeal. [R.O. 2008 §115.200; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Section 115.210. Appeal From Jury Verdicts. [R.O. 2008 §115.210;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
In all cases in which a jury trial has been demanded, a record of the
proceedings shall be made, and appeals may be had upon that record to the
appropriate Appellate Court.
Section 115.220. Breach of Recognizance. [R.O. 2008 §115.220;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 5186 §1, 2-14-1994]
In the case of a breach of any recognizance entered into before a Municipal
Judge or an Associate Circuit Judge hearing a municipal ordinance violation
case, the same shall be deemed forfeited and the Judge shall call the same
to be prosecuted against the principal and surety, or either of them, in the
name of the municipality as plaintiff. Such action shall be prosecuted before
a Circuit Judge or Associate Circuit Judge and in the event of cases caused
to be prosecuted by a Municipal Judge, such shall be on the transcript of
the proceedings before the Municipal Judge. All monies recovered in such
action shall be paid over to the City Treasurer to the General Revenue Fund
of the City.
Section 115.230. Duties of Director of Public Safety Upon
Commitment of Prisoners. [R.O. 2008 §115.230; Ord. No. 4882 §1,
5-14-1990]
Whenever the Director of Public Safety shall commit any person to the
County Jail, or other authorized place of confinement, under the authority
of any execution or warrant of commitment under which such commitment
is made, and he/she shall endorse thereon the amount of money or other
property in his/her possession belonging to the prisoner, and turn the said
property over to the Sheriff (or other chief officer exercising jurisdiction)
A. When the Municipal Judge is one who is not licensed to practice law
within the State of Missouri, the defendant shall have a right to a trial
de novo, even from a plea of guilty, before a Circuit Judge or on
assignment before an Associate Circuit Judge. An application for a trial
de novo shall be filed within ten (10) days after judgment and shall be
filed in such form and perfected in such manner as provided by
Supreme Court Rules.
B. When the Municipal Judge is one who is licensed to practice law within
the State of Missouri, then in all cases tried before the Municipal Court,
except where there has been a plea of guilty or where the case has been
tried with a jury, the defendant shall have a right of trial de novo, before
a Circuit Judge or on assignment before an Associate Circuit Judge. An
application for a trial de novo shall be filed within ten (10) days after
judgment and shall be filed in such form and perfected in such manner
as provided by Supreme Court Rules.
Section
115.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.230
AO:75
upon such official's receipting for the same upon the back of the
commitment on behalf of the prisoner; and no such prisoner shall be
released from the jail except upon certificate of the Director of Public Safety
or by order of the Mayor as hereinafter provided, and in no case, unless
the fine and costs assessed against the prisoner are paid or the same have
been remitted by the common Council in open session, which facts must
be stated in the certificate of the Director of Public Safety, or order of the
Mayor releasing the prisoner.
Section 115.240. Records Required. [R.O. 2008 §115.240; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The Director of Public Safety shall, upon committing any person to the jail
or other authorized place of confinement as aforesaid, in a book to be kept
for that purpose, register the name, age, height, sex, color and nativity of
such person, with the date of such committal and the amount of the fine and
costs for which such person was committed, and upon the payment to the
Director of Public Safety of the amount due on any such execution, or when
such prisoner shall be otherwise legally entitled to a discharge, the Director
of Public Safety shall certify that fact to the Sheriff of the County or other
official charged with custody who shall thereupon discharge the prisoner
named therein.
Section 115.250. Officers, Attendance as Witnesses. [R.O. 2008
§115.250; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Whenever a Public Safety Officer of the City appears as a witness in Court
during his/her off-duty hours, said Officer shall appear in uniform. Officers
shall attend without being summoned, nor shall any subpoena be issued for
their appearance, but failure to appear at the time for trial may be punished
for contempt.
Section 115.260. Limitation on City's Cause of Action. [R.O. 2008
§115.260; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
No prosecution for violation of any City ordinance shall be commenced after
the lapse of twelve (12) months after the date of such violation; provided,
that if any person charged with such violation shall conceal or absent
himself so that a process cannot be served upon him/her or shall absent
himself from the City for the purpose of avoiding such prosecution, the time
of such absence or concealment shall not be computed.
Section 115.270. Disqualification of Municipal Judge From Hearing
Particular Case. [R.O. 2008 §115.270; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
A Municipal Judge shall be disqualified to hear any case in which he/she is
in anywise interested, or, if before the trial is commenced, the defendant or
the prosecutor files an affidavit that the defendant or municipality, as the
case may be, cannot have a fair and impartial trial by reason of the interest
or prejudice of the Judge. Neither the defendant nor the municipality shall
Section
115.230
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
115.270
AO:76
be entitled to file more than one (1) affidavit or disqualification in the same
case.
Section 115.280. Clerk of Municipal Court. [R.O. 2008 §115.280;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Section 115.290. General Court Costs. [R.O. 2008 §115.290; Ord.
No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 5189 §1, 2-14-1994; Ord. No. 5565
§1, 7-28-1997]
There shall be assessed as general Court costs, the sum of twelve dollars
($12.00) per case for each municipal ordinance case initially filed before
the Municipal Judge. Said costs shall be in addition to service costs, witness
fees, training costs, Crime Victims' Compensation Fund judgment, jail costs
or any other costs or assessments which may be otherwise authorized
by municipal ordinance or State law. These general Court costs shall be
collected by the Court in the same manner as other costs and fees, and
remitted to the City Treasurer for dispersal in accordance with City
ordinance and State law.
A. The City Manager shall designate an employee of the City as Clerk of
the Municipal Court. The duties of said Clerk shall be as follows:
1. To take oaths and affirmations;
2. To accept signed complaints, and allow the same to be signed and
sworn to or affirmed before him;
3. To sign and issue subpoenas duces tecum;
4. To accept the appearance, waiver of trial and plea of guilty and the
payment of fine and costs in Violations Bureau cases or as directed
by the Municipal Judge; generally to act as Violation Clerk of the
Violations Bureau;
5. To perform all other duties as provided for by said ordinance, by the
Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic
Courts and by Statute;
6. To maintain, properly certified by the City Clerk, a complete copy of
the ordinances of the City, which shall constitute prima facie
evidence of such ordinance before the Court. Further, to maintain a
similar certified copy on file with the Clerk serving the Circuit
Court of this County.
7. To perform any and all duties assigned by the Municipal Judge; and
8. The Court Clerk is a City employee and is subject to personnel rules
and regulations of the City.
Section
115.270
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.291
AO:77
Section 115.291. Court Costs — Training. [R.O. 2008 §115.291; Ord.
No. 5184 §1, 2-14-1994; Ord. No. 5487 §1, 12-16-1996]
In addition to any fine or other costs, there shall be assessed as Court costs
the sum of three dollars ($3.00) per case, for each municipal ordinance
case filed before the Municipal Judge of the City of Maryville, Missouri, said
amount to be collected pursuant to Section 488.5336, RSMo., related to
training. It is, provided however, that no such fee shall be collected for nonmoving
traffic violations, nor shall the same be collected in any case when
the proceedings or defendant has been dismissed by the Court. These costs
shall be calculated as additional costs by the Municipal Court and shall
be collected by the Court in the same manner as other costs and fees are
collected. Two dollars ($2.00) of said sum shall be transmitted monthly to
the City Treasurer to be used for the training of Peace Officers. One dollar
($1.00) of said sum shall be deposited with the Treasurer of the State of
Missouri in the Peace Officer Standards and Training Commission Fund, to
be used Statewide for the training of Peace Officers.
Section 115.292. Crime Victims' Compensation Fund Judgment.
[R.O. 2008 §115.292; Ord. No. 5184 §1, 2-14-1994; Ord. No. 6416 §1,
10-22-2001]
There shall be assessed as Court costs the sum of seven dollars fifty cents
($7.50) per case for each municipal ordinance case filed before the
Municipal Judge, said amount to be collected pursuant to Section 488.5339,
RSMo., related to the Crime Victims' Compensation Fund judgment. These
costs shall be calculated as additional costs by the Municipal Court and
shall be collected by the Court in the same manner as other costs and fees
are collected and remitted to the City Treasurer for disbursal in accordance
with City ordinance and State law.
Section 115.293. Reimbursement for Costs of Alcohol and Drug
Related Offenses. [R.O. 2008 §115.293; Ord. No. 5184 §1,
2-14-1994]
Upon a plea of guilty, finding of guilt or conviction for violation of any
provisions of the Municipal Code of the City of Maryville, Missouri, for any
alcohol or drug related offenses, including violation of Chapter 342 of the
Municipal Code, the Court may, in addition to imposition of any penalties
provided by law, order the defendant to reimburse Law Enforcement
Authorities for costs associated with such arrest. Such costs shall include
the reasonable costs of making the arrest, including the costs of any
chemical test to determine the alcohol or drug content of the persons
blood, the cost of processing, charging, booking and holding such person
in custody. Law Enforcement Officials may establish a schedule of such
costs for submission to the Court. However, the Court may order the costs
reduced if it determines that the schedule of costs is excessive, given the
circumstances of the case or for good cause shown. These fees shall be
calculated as additional costs by the Municipal Court, and shall be collected
by the Court in the same manner as other costs and fees are collected,
Section
115.291
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
115.293
AO:78
and remitted to the City Treasurer for disbursal in accordance with City
ordinance and State law.
Section 115.294. Judicial Education Fund. [R.O. 2008 §115.294;
Ord. No. 5595 §1, 10-27-1997]
Section 115.295. Incarceration Costs. [R.O. 2008 §115.295; Ord.
No. 5181 §1, 1-10-1994; Ord. No. 6772 §§1 — 2, 8-8-2005]
In addition to any fine or other court costs that may be imposed, there
shall be assessed as costs against any defendant, an amount equal to the
expenses associated with incarceration served by the defendant by order
of the Municipal Judge or Circuit Judge on any case involving violation of
ordinances of the City of Maryville. The assessed costs of incarceration shall
include the amount charged to the City of Maryville by the incarceration
entity for the term of incarceration of said defendant, as well as all other
costs associated therewith including any costs of transportation and costs
associated with obtaining the defendant's appearance before the Court and/
or returning defendant to the incarceration facility.
Section 115.296. Children and Family Center of Northwest Missouri
Surcharge. [Ord. No. 7707 §1, 1-12-2015]
In addition to any fine or other costs, there shall be assessed as Court
costs the sum of two dollars ($2.00) per case, for each municipal ordinance
case filed before the Municipal Judge of the City of Maryville, Missouri,
said amount to be collected pursuant to Section 488.607, RSMo., related
to the operations of the Children and Family Center of Northwest Missouri,
located in Maryville, Nodaway County, Missouri. It is provided, however,
that no surcharge shall be collected when the proceeding or defendant has
been dismissed by the Court, when costs are waived, or when costs are
A. There is hereby established a Judicial Education Fund to be maintained
in an account under the control of the Municipal Court. Municipal Court
is authorized to retain one dollar ($1.00) from the fees collected,
pursuant to Section 115.290.
B. Sums retained in the Judicial Education Fund may be used to pay for
either of the following:
1. The continuing education and certification required of the
Municipal Judge by the law or Supreme Court rule.
2. Judicial education for the Court Administrator and Clerks of the
Municipal Court.
C. The Municipal Court may not retain more than one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in the fund for each Judge, Administrator
or Clerk of the Municipal Court. All sums in excess of that amount shall
be transmitted quarterly to the General Revenue Fund of the City of
Maryville, Missouri.
Section
115.293
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.296
AO:79
paid by the City. These costs shall be calculated as additional costs by the
Municipal Court and shall be collected by the Court in the same manner
as other costs and fees are collected. The surcharge shall be transmitted
monthly to the Children and Family Center of Northwest Missouri,
Maryville, Nodaway County.
Section 115.297. Surcharge for Inmate Security Fund. [Ord. No.
7117 §1, 5-11-2009]
Section 115.298. Justice Information System Implementation
Automation Fee. [Ord. No. 7345 §1, 7-25-2011]
In addition to any fine or other costs, there shall be assessed as Court costs
the sum of seven dollars ($7.00) per case, for each municipal ordinance
case filed before the Municipal Judge of the City of Maryville, Missouri,
said amount to be collected for services relating to the Justice Information
System implementation process. No surcharge shall be collected when the
proceeding or defendant has been dismissed by the Court, when costs
are waived, or when costs are paid by the City. Such surcharge shall be
collected by the Municipal Court and transmitted monthly to the Missouri
Director of Revenue to the credit of the Missouri Statewide Court
Automation Fund, as provided in Sections 488.012.3(5) and 488.027.2,
RSMo.
Section 115.299. Court Costs — Sheriff's Retirement Fund. [Ord.
No. 7890, 9-14-2016]
A fee of three dollars ($3.00) shall be assessed for the Sheriff's Retirement
Fund established by the State, except any proceeding when the proceeding
of a Defendant has been dismissed by Court.
Section 115.300. Costs, Assessment Against Prosecuting Witness.
[R.O. 2008 §115.300; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The costs of any action may be assessed against the prosecuting witness
and judgment be rendered against him/her that he/she pay the same and
A. A two dollar ($2.00) surcharge per case for such municipal ordinance
violations for the purpose of providing operating expenses for an
Inmate Security Fund is established pursuant to Section 488.5026,
RSMo.
1. The judge in such cases may waive the assessment of this
surcharge in those cases where the defendant is found by the judge
to be indigent and unable to pay the cost.
2. Such surcharge shall be collected by the Clerk of the Municipal
Court and dispersed to the City at least monthly.
3. Such surcharge shall not be assessed against the defendant when
any proceeding or defendant has been dismissed.
Section
115.296
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
115.300
AO:80
stand committed until paid in any case where it appears to the satisfaction
of the Municipal Judge that the prosecution was commenced without
probable cause and from malicious motives.
Section 115.310. Installment Payment of Fine. [R.O. 2008 §115.310;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
When a fine is assessed for violating an ordinance, it shall be within the
discretion of the Judge assessing the fine to provide for the payment of the
fine on an installment basis under such terms and conditions as he/she may
deem appropriate.
Section 115.315. Community Service. [Ord. No. 7896, 9-28-2016]
A. The Municipal Judge for the City of Maryville or the person performing
the duties of the Municipal Judge may order any person who has been
convicted, or has received a suspended imposition of sentence for
violating an ordinance of the City of Maryville, whether the original
punishment be by fine or imprisonment, or both, to perform alternative
community service, as defined in this Section, as a condition of
probation or in lieu of a fine or imprisonment, or both.
B. Alternative community service may consist of:
1. Service on the public streets, highways and alleys or other public
works or buildings or public grounds of the City of Maryville, and/
or
2. Such other service for a charitable, religious or educational
organization or entity as may be approved and authorized by the
Municipal Judge for the City of Maryville or authorized by
resolution of the City Council.
3. The service performed pursuant to Subsection (A) and/or (B) herein
above shall be performed without compensation to the defendant
for such service.
C. If the alternative community service determined by the Municipal Judge
for the City of Maryville is pursuant to Subsection (A), herein above, the
Chief of Police or other officer of the City of Maryville, as may be
authorized by resolution of the City Council, is hereby authorized,
empowered and directed to assign work to and supervise all persons
ordered to perform alternative community service by the Municipal
Judge.
D. The Municipal Judge may determine the number of hours of alternative
community service that a person shall perform under this Section.
E. If alternative community service is ordered by the Municipal Judge for
the City of Maryville, the defendant shall not be required to pay
additional fees or costs for participation in the alternative community
service.
Section
115.300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.315
AO:81
Section 115.320. Misdemeanor Defined. [R.O. 2008 §115.320; Ord.
No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Section 115.330. Administrative Search Warrants. [R.O. 2008
§115.330; Ord. No. 6380 §1, 6-13-2001; Ord. No. 6417 §1,
10-22-2001]
F. The authority granted in this Section shall be subject to the provisions
of Section 559.021 of the Revised Statutes of the State of Missouri.
A. Whenever the term "misdemeanor" is used in any ordinance of the City,
it shall be construed to mean and stand in lieu of "a violation of an
ordinance".
B. Any person who shall be convicted of a misdemeanor under the
provisions of any ordinance of the City in cases where no penalty is
otherwise provided or prescribed, may be fined or imprisoned, or both,
in the discretion of the Court before whom conviction may be had, but
no fine or penalty shall exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment to exceed three (3) months.
C. In any ordinance the doing of an act or omission to do any act or duty is
declared to be a breach thereof and there shall be no fine or penalty
defined or declared for such breach, any person who shall be convicted
of any such breach may be fined or imprisoned, or both, in the
discretion of the Court before whom conviction may be had, but no fine
or penalty shall exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor
imprisonment to exceed three (3) months.
A. Administrative Search Warrants.
1. An administrative search warrant is a written order of the
Municipal Court Judge commanding the search or inspection of any
property, place or thing and the seizure, photographing, copying or
recording of property or physical conditions found thereon or
therein to determine or prove the existence of any ordinance or
code violation of the City of Maryville relating to the use, condition
or occupancy of property or structures located within the City of
Maryville or to enforce the provisions of any such ordinance or
code Section.
2. The Municipal Judge having original and exclusive jurisdiction to
determine violations against the ordinance of the municipality may
issue an administrative search warrant when the property or place
to be searched or inspection of the thing to be seized is located
within the City limits of the City of Maryville at the time of the
making of the application and the owner or occupant of the
property or place to be searched or inspection of the thing to be
seized has refused to allow same after an official request.
Section
115.315
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
115.330
AO:82
3. Any such warrant shall be directed to the Director of Maryville
Public Safety or any other Law Enforcement Officer of the City of
Maryville and shall be executed within the City limits of the City of
Maryville.
B. Application Procedures.
1. The City Attorney of the City of Maryville, the City Prosecuting
Attorney for the City of Maryville or any law enforcement office of
the City of Maryville may make application to the Municipal Court
Judge for the issuance of an administrative search warrant.
2. The application shall:
a. Be in writing;
b. State the time and date of the making of the application;
c. Identify the property or places to be entered, searched,
inspected or seized in sufficient detail and particularly that the
officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it;
d. State that the owner or occupant of the property or places to
be entered, searched, inspected or seized has been requested
by the City of Maryville to allow such action and has refused to
allow such action;
e. State facts sufficient to show probable cause for the issuance
of a search warrant as provided herein to search or inspect for
violations of an ordinance or code Section specified in the
application or show that entry or seizure is authorized and
necessary to enforce an ordinance or code Section specified in
the application and that any required due process has been
afforded prior to the entry or seizure;
f. Be verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant; and
g. Be signed by the applicant and filed with the Maryville
Municipal Division of the Circuit Court of Nodaway County,
Missouri.
C. Search Warrant Hearing Procedure.
1. The Municipal Judge shall hold a non-adversary hearing to
determine whether probable cause exists to inspect or search for
violations of any City of Maryville ordinance or code Section or to
enforce any such ordinance or code Section.
2. In doing so, the Municipal Judge shall determine whether the
action to be taken by the City of Maryville is reasonable in light of
the facts stated. The Municipal Judge shall consider the goals of the
ordinance or code Section sought to be enforced and such other
factors as may be appropriate including, but not limited to, the
Section
115.330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.330
AO:83
physical condition of the specified property, the age and nature of
the property, the condition of the area in which the property is
located, the known violation of any relevant Maryville ordinance
or code Section and the passage of time since the property's last
inspection. The standard for issuing a warrant need not be limited
to actual knowledge of an existing violation of a Maryville
ordinance or code Section.
3. If it appears from the application and any supporting affidavit that
there is probably cause to inspect or search for violations of any
City of Maryville ordinance or code Section or to enforce any such
ordinance or code Section, a search warrant shall immediately be
issued.
4. The application, any supporting affidavit and one (1) copy of the
warrant as issued shall be retained in the records of the Municipal
Court.
D. Contents Of Search Warrant. The search warrant shall:
1. Be in writing and in the name of the City of Maryville;
2. Be directed to any Law Enforcement Officer of the City of
Maryville;
3. State the time and date the warrant was issued;
4. Identify the property or places to be searched, inspected or entered
upon in sufficient detail and particularity that the Law Enforcement
Officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it;
5. Command that the described property or places be searched or
entered upon and that any evidence of any Maryville ordinance
violations found therein or thereon, or any property seized
pursuant thereto, or a description of such property seized be
returned within ten (10) days after filing of the application to the
Municipal Judge who issued the warrant, to be dealt with according
to law;
6. Be signed by the Judge with his/her title of office indicated.
E. Search Warrant Execution And Return.
1. A search warrant issued under this Section shall be executed only
by a Maryville Law Enforcement Officer. It is provided, however,
that one (1) or more designated officials including Code
Enforcement Officers, employees of the Maryville Department of
Public Works or other appropriate individuals may accompany the
Law Enforcement Officer, and the warrant shall be executed in the
following manner:
Section
115.330
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
115.330
AO:84
a. The warrant shall be executed by conducting the search,
inspection, entry or seizure as commanded and shall be
executed as soon as practicable and in a reasonable manner.
b. The officer shall give the owner or occupant of the property
searched, inspected or entered upon a copy of the warrant.
c. If any property is seized incident to the search, the officer shall
give the person from whose possession it was taken, if the
person is present, an itemized receipt for the property taken. If
no such person is present, the officer shall leave the receipt at
the site of the search in a conspicuous place.
d. A copy of the itemized receipt of any property taken shall be
delivered to the City Attorney or City Prosecuting Attorney
within two (2) working days of the search.
e. The disposition of property seized pursuant to a search
warrant under this Section shall be in accordance with an
applicable Maryville ordinance or code Section, but in the
absence of same, then with Section 542.301, RSMo.
2. The officer may summon as many persons as he/she deems
necessary to assist him/her in executing the warrant, and such
persons shall not be held liable as a result of any illegality of the
search and seizure.
3. An officer making a search pursuant to an invalid warrant, the
invalidity of which is not apparent on its face, may use such force as
he/she would be justified in using if the warrant were valid.
4. A search warrant shall expire if it is not executed and the required
return made within ten (10) days after the date of the making of the
application.
5. After execution of the search warrant, the warrant, with a return
thereon signed by the officer making the search, shall be delivered
to the Municipal Court. The return shall show the date and manner
of execution and, if known, the name of the possessor and of the
owner, when not the same person of the property or places
searched or seized.
6. Upon request, the Court Clerk, shall deliver a copy of the return, to
the possessor and the owner, when not the same person of the
property searched or seized.
F. Invalidity Of Search Warrant. A search warrant executed under this
Section shall be held to be invalid in the following circumstances:
1. If it was not issued by the Municipal Judge;
2. If it was issued without a written application having been filed and
verified;
Section
115.330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.330
AO:85
Chapter 117
OPEN MEETINGS AND RECORDS POLICY
3. If it was issued without sufficient probable cause in light of the
goals of the ordinance to be enforced and such other factors as
provided herein;
4. If it was not issued with respect to property or places in the City of
Maryville.
Section
115.330
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
115.330
AO:86
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 117.010. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the
following terms mean:
CLOSED MEETING, CLOSED RECORD or CLOSED VOTE — Any meeting,
record or vote closed to the public.
COPYING — If requested by a member of the public, copies provided as
detailed in Section 117.100 of this Chapter, if duplication equipment is
available.
PUBLIC BUSINESS — All matters which relate in any way to performance
of the City's functions or the conduct of its business.
PUBLIC GOVERNMENTAL BODY — Any legislative, administrative or
governmental entity created by the Constitution or Statutes of this State,
orders or ordinances of the City, judicial entities when operating in an
administrative capacity or by executive order, including:
Any advisory committee or commission appointed by the Mayor or City
Council.
1.
2. Any department or division of the City.
Any other legislative or administrative governmental deliberative body
under the direction of three (3) or more elected or appointed members
having rulemaking or quasi-judicial power.
3.
Any committee appointed by or at the direction of any of the entities
and which is authorized to report to any of the above-named entities,
any advisory committee appointed by or at the direction of any of
the named entities for the specific purpose of recommending, directly
to the public governmental body's governing body or its Chief
Administrative Officer, policy or policy revisions or expenditures of
public funds.
4.
Any quasi-public governmental body. The term "quasi-public
governmental body" means any person, corporation or partnership
organized or authorized to do business in this State pursuant to the
provisions of Chapters 352, 353 or 355, RSMo., or unincorporated
association which either:
Has as its primary purpose to enter into contracts with public
governmental bodies or to engage primarily in activities carried out
pursuant to an agreement or agreements with public governmental
bodies; or
a.
Performs a public function, as evidenced by a statutorily or
ordinance-based capacity, to confer or otherwise advance, through
approval, recommendation or other means, the allocation or
b.
5.
Section
117.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
117.010
AO:87
PUBLIC MEETING — Any meeting of a public governmental body subject
to this Chapter at which any public business is discussed, decided or
public policy formulated, whether such meeting is conducted in person
or by means of communication equipment including, but not limited to,
conference call, video conference, Internet chat or Internet message board.
The term "public meeting" shall not include an informal gathering of
members of a public governmental body for ministerial or social purposes
when there is no intent to avoid the purposes of this Chapter, but the
term shall include a vote of all or a majority of the members of a public
governmental body, by electronic communication or any other means,
conducted in lieu of holding a public meeting with the members of the
public governmental body gathered at one (1) location in order to conduct
public business.
PUBLIC RECORD — Any record, whether written or electronically stored,
retained by or of any public governmental body including any report, survey,
memorandum, or other document or study prepared for the public
governmental body by a consultant or other professional service paid for in
whole or in part by public funds, including records created or maintained by
private contractors under an agreement with a public governmental body
or on behalf of a public governmental body. The term "public record" shall
not include any internal memorandum or letter received or prepared by or
on behalf of a member of a public governmental body consisting of advice,
opinions and recommendations in connection with the deliberative decisionmaking
process of said body, unless such records are retained by the public
governmental body or presented at a public meeting. Any documents or
study prepared for a public governmental body by a consultant or other
professional service as described in this subdivision shall be retained by the
public governmental body in the same manner as any other public record.
PUBLIC VOTE — Any vote, whether conducted in person, by telephone, or
by any other electronic means, cast at any public meeting of any public
governmental body.
Section 117.020. Meetings, Records and Votes to Be Public —
Exceptions.
issuance of tax credits, tax abatement, public debt, tax exempt
debt, rights of eminent domain, or the contracting of lease-back
agreements on structures whose annualized payments commit
public tax revenues; or any association that directly accepts the
appropriation of money from the City, but only to the extent that a
meeting, record or vote relates to such appropriation.
A. All meetings, records and votes are open to the public, except that any
meeting, record or vote relating to one (1) or more of the following
matters, as well as other materials designated elsewhere in this
Chapter, shall be closed unless the public governmental body votes to
make them public:
1. Legal actions, causes of action or litigation involving a public
governmental body and any confidential or privileged
Section
117.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
117.020
AO:88
communications between a public governmental body or its
representatives and its attorneys. However, any minutes, vote or
settlement agreement relating to legal actions, causes of action
or litigation involving a public governmental body or any agent
or entity representing its interests or acting on its behalf or with
its authority, including any insurance company acting on behalf of
a public governmental body as its insured, shall be made public
upon final disposition of the matter voted upon or upon the signing
by the parties of the settlement agreement, unless, prior to final
disposition, the settlement agreement is ordered closed by a court
after a written finding that the adverse impact to a plaintiff or
plaintiffs to the action clearly outweighs the public policy
considerations of Section 610.011, RSMo., however, the amount
of any monies paid by, or on behalf of, the public governmental
body shall be disclosed; provided however, in matters involving
the exercise of the power of eminent domain, the vote shall be
announced or become public immediately following the action on
the motion to authorize institution of such a legal action. Legal
work product shall be considered a closed record.
2. Leasing, purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental
body where public knowledge of the transaction might adversely
affect the legal consideration therefor. However, any minutes or
vote or public record approving a contract relating to the leasing,
purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental body shall
be made public upon execution of the lease, purchase or sale of the
real estate.
3. Hiring, firing, disciplining or promoting of particular employees by
a public governmental body when personal information about the
employee is discussed or recorded. However, any vote on a final
decision, when taken by a public governmental body, to hire, fire,
promote or discipline an employee of a public governmental body
shall be made available with a record of how each member voted to
the public within seventy-two (72) hours of the close of the meeting
where such action occurs; provided however, that any employee so
affected shall be entitled to prompt notice of such decision during
the seventy-two (72) hour period before such decision is made
available to the public. As used in this Subsection, the term
"personal information" means information relating to the
performance or merit of individual employees.
4. Non-judicial mental or physical health proceedings involving an
identifiable person, including medical, psychiatric, psychological,
or alcoholism or drug dependency diagnosis or treatment.
5. Testing and examination materials, before the test or examination
is given or, if it is to be given again, before so given again.
6. Welfare cases of identifiable individuals.
Section
117.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
117.020
AO:89
7. Preparation, including any discussions or work product, on behalf
of a public governmental body or its representatives for
negotiations with employee groups.
8. Software codes for electronic data processing and documentation
thereof.
9. Specifications for competitive bidding, until either the
specifications are officially approved by the public governmental
body or the specifications are published for bid.
10. Sealed bids and related documents, until the bids are opened; and
sealed proposals and related documents or any documents related
to a negotiated contract until a contract is executed, or all
proposals are rejected.
11. Individually identifiable personnel records, performance ratings or
records pertaining to employees or applicants for employment,
except that this exemption shall not apply to the names, positions,
salaries and lengths of service of officers and employees of public
agencies once they are employed as such.
12. Records which are protected from disclosure by law.
13. Meetings and public records relating to scientific and technological
innovations in which the owner has a proprietary interest.
14. Records relating to municipal hotlines established for the reporting
of abuse and wrongdoing.
15. Confidential or privileged communications between a public
governmental body and its auditor, including all auditor work
product; however, all final audit reports issued by the auditor are to
be considered open records pursuant to this Chapter.
16. Operational guidelines and policies developed, adopted, or
maintained by any public agency responsible for law enforcement,
public safety, first response, or public health for use in responding
to or preventing any critical incident which is or appears to be
terrorist in nature and which has the potential to endanger
individual or public safety or health. Nothing in this exception shall
be deemed to close information regarding expenditures, purchases,
or contracts made by an agency in implementing these guidelines
or policies. When seeking to close information pursuant to this
exception, the agency shall affirmatively state in writing that
disclosure would impair its ability to protect the safety or health of
persons, and shall in the same writing state that the public interest
in non-disclosure outweighs the public interest in disclosure of the
records. This exception shall sunset on December 31, 2012.
17. Existing or proposed security systems and structural plans of real
property owned or leased by a public governmental body, and
Section
117.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
117.020
AO:90
information that is voluntarily submitted by a non-public entity
owning or operating an infrastructure to any public governmental
body for use by that body to devise plans for protection of that
infrastructure, the public disclosure of which would threaten public
safety.
a. Records related to the procurement of or expenditures relating
to security systems purchased with public funds shall be open.
b. When seeking to close information pursuant to this exception,
the public governmental body shall affirmatively state in
writing that disclosure would impair the public governmental
body's ability to protect the security or safety of persons or real
property and shall in the same writing state that the public
interest in non-disclosure outweighs the public interest in
disclosure of the records.
c. Records that are voluntarily submitted by a non-public entity
shall be reviewed by the receiving agency within ninety (90)
days of submission to determine if retention of the document is
necessary in furtherance of a State security interest. If
retention is not necessary, the documents shall be returned to
the non-public governmental body or destroyed.
d. This exception shall sunset on December 31, 2012.
18. Records that identify the configuration of components or the
operation of a computer, computer system, computer network or
telecommunications network and would allow unauthorized access
to or unlawful disruption of a computer, computer system,
computer network or telecommunications network of a public
governmental body. This exception shall not be used to limit or
deny access to otherwise public records in a file, document, data
file or database containing public records. Records related to the
procurement of or expenditures relating to such computer,
computer system, computer network or telecommunications
network, including the amount of monies paid by, or on behalf of, a
public governmental body for such computer, computer system,
computer network or telecommunications network, shall be open.
19. Credit card numbers, personal identification numbers, digital
certificates, physical and virtual keys, access codes or
authorization codes that are used to protect the security of
electronic transactions between a public governmental body and a
person or entity doing business with a public governmental body.
Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to close the record of a
person or entity using a credit card held in the name of a public
governmental body or any record of a transaction made by a person
using a credit card or other method of payment for which
reimbursement is made by a public governmental body.
Section
117.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
117.030
AO:91
Section 117.030. Electronic Transmissions — Public Record —
When.
Any member of a public governmental body who transmits any message
relating to public business by electronic means shall also concurrently
transmit that message to either the member's public office computer or
the custodian of records in the same format. The provisions of this Section
shall only apply to messages sent to two (2) or more members of that body
so that, when counting the sender, a majority of the body's members are
copied. Any such message received by the custodian or at the member's
office computer shall be a public record subject to the exception of Section
610.021, RSMo.
Section 117.040. Notices of Meetings.
A. All public governmental bodies shall give notice of the time, date and
place of each meeting and its tentative agenda in a manner reasonably
calculated to advise the public of the matters to be considered, and if
the meeting will be conducted by telephone or other electronic means,
the notice of the meeting shall identify the mode by which the meeting
will be conducted and the designated location where the public may
observe and attend the meeting. If a public body plans to meet by
Internet chat, Internet message board or other computer link, it shall
post a notice of the meeting on its website in addition to its principal
office and shall notify the public how to access that meeting.
Reasonable notice shall include making available copies of the notice to
any representative of the news media who requests notice of meetings
of a particular public governmental body concurrent with the notice
being made available to the members of the particular governmental
body and posting the notice on a bulletin board or other prominent
place which is easily accessible to the public and clearly designated for
that purpose at the principal office of the body holding the meeting, or if
no such office exists, at the building in which the meeting is to be held.
B. Notice conforming with all of the requirements of Subsection (A) of this
Section shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours, exclusive of
weekends and holidays when City Hall is closed, prior to the
commencement of any meeting of a governmental body unless for good
cause such notice is impossible or impractical, in which case as much
notice as is reasonably possible shall be given.
C. The City shall allow for the recording by audiotape, videotape or other
electronic means of any open meeting. The City may establish
guidelines regarding the manner in which such recording is conducted
so as to minimize disruption to the meeting. No audio recording of any
meeting, record or vote closed pursuant to the provisions of Section
117.020 shall be permitted without permission of the City; any person
who violates this provision shall be guilty of an ordinance violation.
D. Each governmental body proposing to hold a closed meeting or vote
shall give notice of the time, date and place of such closed meeting or
Section
117.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
117.040
AO:92
Section 117.050. Closed Meetings — How Held.
Section 117.060. Journals of Meetings and Records of Voting.
vote and the reason for holding it by reference to a specific exception
allowed pursuant to Section 117.020 hereof. The notice shall be the
same as described in Subsection (A) herein.
E. A formally constituted subunit of a parent governmental body may
conduct a meeting without notice during a lawful meeting of the parent
governmental body, a recess in that meeting, or immediately following
that meeting if the meeting of the subunit is publicly announced at the
parent meeting and the subject of the meeting reasonably coincides
with the subjects discussed or acted upon by the parent governmental
body.
A. Except as set forth in Subsection (D) of Section 117.040, no meeting or
vote may be closed without an affirmative public vote of the majority of
a quorum of the public governmental body. The vote of each member of
the governmental body on the question of closing a public meeting or
vote and the specific reason for closing that public meeting or vote by
reference to a specific Section of this Chapter shall be announced
publicly at an open meeting of the governmental body and entered into
the minutes.
B. Any meeting or vote closed pursuant to Section 117.020 shall be closed
only to the extent necessary for the specific reason announced to justify
the closed meeting or vote. Public governmental bodies shall not
discuss any business in a closed meeting, record or vote which does not
directly relate to the specific reason announced to justify the closed
meeting or vote. Public governmental bodies holding a closed meeting
shall close only an existing portion of the meeting facility necessary to
house the members of the public governmental body in the closed
session, allowing members of the public to remain to attend any
subsequent open session held by the public governmental body
following the closed session.
A. Except as provided in Section 117.020, rules authorized pursuant to
Article III of the Missouri Constitution and as otherwise provided by
law, all votes shall be recorded, and if a roll call is taken, as to attribute
each "yea" and "nay" vote, or abstinence if not voting, to the name of
the individual member of the public governmental body. Any votes
taken during a closed meeting shall be taken by roll call. All public
meetings shall be open to the public and public votes and public records
shall be open to the public for inspection and duplication. All votes
taken by roll call in meetings of a public governmental body consisting
of members who are all elected, shall be cast by members of the public
governmental body who are physically present and in attendance at the
meeting. When it is necessary to take votes by roll call in a meeting of
the public governmental body, due to an emergency of the public body,
Section
117.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
117.060
AO:93
Section 117.070. Accessibility of Meetings.
Section 117.080. Segregation of Exempt Material.
If a public record contains material which is not exempt from disclosure,
as well as material which is exempt from disclosure, the custodian shall
separate the exempt and non-exempt material and make the non-exempt
material available for examination and copying in accord with the policies
provided herein. When designing a public record the custodian shall, to
the extent practicable, facilitate a separation of exempt from non-exempt
information. If the separation is readily apparent to a person requesting to
inspect or receive copies of the form, the custodian shall generally describe
the material exempted unless that description would reveal the contents of
the exempt information and thus defeat the purpose of the exemption.
Section 117.090. Custodian Designated — Response to Request for
Access to Records.
with a quorum of the members of the public body physically present
and in attendance and less than a quorum of the members of the public
governmental body participating via telephone, facsimile, Internet, or
any other voice or electronic means, the nature of the emergency of
the public body justifying that departure from the normal requirements
shall be stated in the minutes. Where such emergency exists, the votes
taken shall be regarded as if all members were physically present and
in attendance at the meeting.
B. A journal or minutes of open and closed meetings shall be taken and
retained by the public governmental body including, but not limited to,
a record of any vote taken at such meeting. The minutes shall include
the date, time, place, members present, members absent, and a record
of votes taken. When a roll call vote is taken, the minutes shall attribute
each "yea" and "nay" vote, or abstinence if not voting, to the name of
the individual member of the public governmental body.
A. Each meeting shall be held at a place reasonably accessible to the
public and of sufficient size to accommodate the anticipated attendance
by members of the public and at a time reasonably convenient to the
public unless for good cause such a place or time is impossible or
impractical. Every reasonable effort shall be made to grant special
access to the meeting to handicapped or disabled individuals.
B. When it is necessary to hold a meeting on less than twenty-four (24)
hours' notice, or at a place that is not reasonably accessible to the
public, or at a time that is not reasonably convenient to the public, the
nature of the good cause justifying that departure from the normal
requirements shall be stated in the minutes.
A. The City Clerk shall be the custodian of records and will be responsible
for maintenance and control of all records. The custodian may
designate deputy custodians in operating departments of the City and
Section
117.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
117.090
AO:94
Section 117.100. Fees for Copying Public Records — Limitations.
such other departments or offices as the custodian may determine.
Deputy custodians shall conduct matters relating to public records and
meetings in accord with the policies enumerated herein.
B. Each public governmental body shall make available for inspection and
copying by the public of that body's public records. No person shall
remove original public records from the office of a public governmental
body or its custodian without written permission of the designated
custodian. No public governmental body shall, after August 28, 1998,
grant to any person or entity, whether by contract, license or otherwise,
the exclusive right to access and disseminate any public record unless
the granting of such right is necessary to facilitate coordination with, or
uniformity among, industry regulators having similar authority.
C. Each request for access to a public record shall be acted upon as soon
as possible, but in no event later than the end of the third (3rd) business
day following the date the request is received by the custodian of
records of a public governmental body. If records are requested in a
certain format, the public body shall provide the records in the
requested format, if such format is available. If access to the public
record is not granted immediately, the custodian shall give a detailed
explanation of the cause for further delay and the place and earliest
time and date that the record will be available for inspection. This
period for document production may exceed three (3) days for
reasonable cause.
D. If a request for access is denied, the custodian shall provide, upon
request, a written statement of the grounds for such denial. Such
statement shall cite the specific provision of law under which access is
denied and shall be furnished to the requester no later than the end of
the third (3rd) business day following the date that the request for the
statement is received.
A. Except as otherwise provided by law, each public governmental body
shall provide access to and, upon request, furnish copies of public
records subject to the following:
1. Fees for copying public records, except those records restricted
under Section 32.091, RSMo., shall not exceed ten cents ($.10) per
page for a paper copy not larger than nine (9) by fourteen (14)
inches, with the hourly fee for duplicating time not to exceed the
average hourly rate of pay for clerical staff of the public
governmental body. Research time required for fulfilling records
requests may be charged at the actual cost of research time. Based
on the scope of the request, the public governmental body shall
produce the copies using employees of the body that result in the
lowest amount of charges for search, research, and duplication
time. Prior to producing copies of the requested records, the
person requesting the records may request the public
Section
117.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
117.100
AO:95
governmental body to provide an estimate of the cost to the person
requesting the records. Documents may be furnished without
charge or at a reduced charge when the public governmental body
determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public
interest because it is likely to contribute significantly to public
understanding of the operations or activities of the public
governmental body and is not primarily in the commercial interest
of the requester.
2. Fees for providing access to public records maintained on
computer facilities, recording tapes or disks, videotapes or films,
pictures, maps, slides, graphics, illustrations or similar audio or
visual items or devices, and for paper copies larger than nine (9) by
fourteen (14) inches shall include only the cost of copies, staff time,
which shall not exceed the average hourly rate of pay for staff of
the public governmental body required for making copies and
programming, if necessary, and the cost of the disk, tape or other
medium used for the duplication. Fees for maps, blueprints or plats
that require special expertise to duplicate may include the actual
rate of compensation for the trained personnel required to
duplicate such maps, blueprints or plats. If programming is
required beyond the customary and usual level to comply with a
request for records or information, the fees for compliance may
include the actual cost of such programming.
B. Payment of such copying fees may be requested prior to the making of
copies.
Section
117.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
117.100
AO:96
ARTICLE II
Law Enforcement Arrest Reports and Records, Incident Reports,
Etc.
Section 117.110. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
ARREST — An actual restraint of the person of the defendant, or by his/
her submission to the custody of the officer, under authority of a warrant
or otherwise for a criminal violation which results in the issuance of a
summons or the person being booked.
ARREST REPORT — A record of a law enforcement agency of an arrest and
of any detention or confinement incident thereto together with the charge
therefor.
INACTIVE — An investigation in which no further action will be taken by a
law enforcement agency or officer for any of the following reasons:
INCIDENT REPORT — A record of a law enforcement agency consisting of
the date, time, specific location, name of the victim, and immediate facts
and circumstances surrounding the initial report of a crime or incident,
including any logs of reported crimes, accidents and complaints maintained
by that agency.
INVESTIGATIVE REPORT — A record, other than an arrest or incident
report, prepared by personnel of a law enforcement agency inquiring into
a crime or suspected crime either in response to an incident report or in
response to evidence developed by Law Enforcement Officers in the course
of their duties.
Section 117.120. Police Department Records.
1. A decision by the law enforcement agency not to pursue the case.
Expiration of the time to file criminal charges pursuant to the
applicable statute of limitations or ten (10) years after the commission
of the offense, whichever date earliest occurs.
2.
Finality of the convictions of all persons convicted on the basis of the
information contained in the investigative report, by exhaustion of or
expiration of all rights of appeal of such persons.
3.
A. The Police Department of the City shall maintain records of all incidents
reported to the Police Department and investigations and arrests made
by the Police Department. All incident reports and arrest reports shall
be open records. Notwithstanding any other provision of law other than
the provisions of Subsection (C) of this Section or Section 320.083,
RSMo., investigative reports of the Police Department are closed
records until the investigation becomes inactive. If any person is
arrested and not charged with an offense against the law within thirty
Section
117.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
117.120
AO:97
(30) days of the person's arrest, the arrest report shall thereafter be a
closed record except that the disposition portion of the record may be
accessed and except as provided in Section 117.140.
B. Except as provided in Subsections (C) and (D) of this Section, if any
portion of a record or document of a Police Department Officer or the
Police Department, other than an arrest report which would otherwise
be open, contains information that is reasonably likely to pose a clear
and present danger to the safety of any victim, witness, undercover
officer or other person; or jeopardize a criminal investigation, including
records which would disclose the identity of a source wishing to remain
confidential or a suspect not in custody; or which would disclose
techniques, procedures or guidelines for Police Department
investigations or prosecutions, that portion of the record shall be closed
and shall be redacted from any record made available pursuant to this
Chapter.
C. Any person, a family member of such person within the first degree of
consanguinity of such person if deceased or incompetent, attorney for a
person, or insurer of a person involved in any incident or whose
property is involved in an incident may obtain any records closed
pursuant to this Section or Section 117.140 for purposes of
investigation of any civil claim or defense as provided by this
Subsection. Any individual, his/her attorney or insurer involved in an
incident or whose property is involved in an incident, upon written
request, may obtain a complete unaltered and unedited incident report
concerning the incident and may obtain access to other records closed
by the Police Department pursuant to this Section. Within thirty (30)
days of such request, the Police Department shall provide the requested
material or file a motion pursuant to this Subsection with the Circuit
Court having jurisdiction over the Police Department stating that the
safety of the victim, witness or other individual cannot be reasonably
ensured, or that a criminal investigation is likely to be jeopardized.
Pursuant to Section 610.100(4), RSMo., if, based on such motion, the
court finds for the Police Department, the court shall either order the
record closed or order such portion of the record that should be closed
to be redacted from any record made available pursuant to this
Subsection.
D. Any person may apply pursuant to this Subsection to the Circuit Court
having jurisdiction for an order requiring a Law Enforcement Agency to
open incident reports and arrest reports being unlawfully closed
pursuant to the Section. If the court finds by a preponderance of the
evidence that the Law Enforcement Officer or Agency has knowingly
violated this Section, the officer or agency shall be subject to a civil
penalty in an amount up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If the
court finds that there is a knowing violation of this Section, the court
may order payment by such officer or agency of all costs and attorneys'
fees, as provided by Section 610.027, RSMo. If the court finds by a
preponderance of the evidence that the Law Enforcement Officer or
Section
117.120
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
117.120
AO:98
Section 117.130. Effect of Nolle Pros, Dismissal and Suspended
Imposition of Sentence on Records.
Section 117.140. Public Access of Closed Arrest Records.
Agency has purposely violated this Section, the officer or agency shall
be subject to a civil penalty in an amount up to five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) and the court shall order payment by such officer or agency
of all costs and attorney fees, as provided in Section 610.027, RSMo.
The court shall determine the amount of the penalty by taking into
account the size of the jurisdiction, the seriousness of the offense,
and whether the Law Enforcement Officer or Agency has violated this
Section previously.
E. The victim of an offense as provided in Chapter 566, RSMo., may
request that his/her identity be kept confidential until a charge relating
to such incident is filed.
A. If the person arrested is charged but the case is subsequently nolle
prossed, dismissed, or the accused is found not guilty, or imposition of
sentence is suspended in the court in which the action is prosecuted,
official records pertaining to the case shall thereafter be closed records
when such case is finally terminated, except as provided in Subsection
(B) of this Section and Section 117.140 and except that the court's
judgment or order or the final action taken by the prosecutor in such
matters may be accessed. If the accused is found not guilty due to
mental disease or defect pursuant to Section 552.030, RSMo., official
records pertaining to the case shall thereafter be closed records upon
such findings, except that the disposition may be accessed only by law
enforcement agencies, child care agencies, facilities as defined in
Section 198.006, RSMo., and in-home services provider agencies as
defined in Section 660.250, RSMo., in the manner established by
Section 117.140.
B. If the person arrested is charged with an offense found in Chapter 566,
RSMo., Section 568.045, 568.050, 568.060, 568.065, 568.080, 568.090
or 568.175, RSMo., and an imposition of sentence is suspended in the
court in which the action is prosecuted, the official records pertaining
to the case shall be made available to the victim for the purpose of using
the records in his/her own judicial proceeding or if the victim is a minor
to the victim's parents or guardian, upon request.
A. Records required to be closed shall not be destroyed; they shall be
inaccessible to the general public and to all persons other than the
defendant except as provided in this Section and Section 43.507, RSMo.
The closed records shall be available to: criminal justice agencies for
the administration of criminal justice pursuant to Section 43.500,
RSMo., criminal justice employment, screening persons with access to
criminal justice facilities, procedures and sensitive information; to law
enforcement agencies for issuance or renewal of a license, permit,
Section
117.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
117.140
AO:99
Section 117.150. "911" Telephone Reports.
Except as provided by this Section, any information acquired by the Police
Department by way of a complaint or report of a crime made by telephone
contact using the emergency number "911" shall be inaccessible to the
general public. However, information consisting of the date, time, specific
location, and immediate facts and circumstances surrounding the initial
report of the crime or incident shall be considered to be an incident report
and subject to Section 117.120. Any closed records pursuant to this Section
shall be available upon request by law enforcement agencies or the Division
of Workers' Compensation or pursuant to a valid court order authorizing
disclosure upon motion and good cause shown.
certification, or registration of authority from such agency including,
but not limited to, watchmen, security personnel, private investigators,
and persons seeking permits to purchase or possess a firearm; those
agencies authorized by Section 43.543, RSMo., to submit and when
submitting fingerprints to the central repository; the Sentencing
Advisory Commission created in Section 558.019, RSMo., for the
purpose of studying sentencing practices in accordance with Section
43.507, RSMo.; to qualified entities for the purpose of screening
providers defined in Section 43.540, RSMo.; the Department of
Revenue for driver license administration; the Division of Workers'
Compensation for the purposes of determining eligibility for crime
victims' compensation pursuant to Sections 595.010 to 595.075, RSMo.;
Department of Health and Senior Services for the purpose of licensing
and regulating facilities and regulating in-home services provider
agencies and Federal agencies for purposes of criminal justice
administration, criminal justice employment, child, elderly, or disabled
care, and for such investigative purposes as authorized by law or
presidential executive order.
B. These records shall be made available only for the purposes and to the
entities listed in this Section. A criminal justice agency receiving a
request for criminal history information under its control may require
positive identification, to include fingerprints of the subject of the
record search, prior to releasing closed record information.
Dissemination of closed and open records from the Missouri criminal
records repository shall be in accordance with Section 43.509, RSMo.
All records which are closed records shall be removed from the records
of the Police Department and Municipal Court which are available to
the public and shall be kept in separate records which are to be held
confidential and, where possible, pages of the public record shall be
retyped or rewritten omitting those portions of the record which deal
with the defendant's case. If retyping or rewriting is not feasible
because of the permanent nature of the record books, such record
entries shall be blacked out and recopied in a confidential book.
Section
117.140
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
117.160
AO:100
Section 117.160. Daily Log or Record Maintained by Police
Department of Crimes, Accidents or Complaints — Public Access to
Certain Information.
A. The City of Maryville Police Department, if it maintains a daily log or
record that lists suspected crimes, accidents or complaints, shall make
available the following information for inspection and copying by the
public:
1. The time, substance and location of all complaints or requests for
assistance received by the Police Department;
2. The time and nature of the Police Department's response to all
complaints or requests for assistance; and
3. If the incident involves an alleged offense or infraction:
a. The time, date and location of occurrence;
b. The name and age of any victim, unless the victim is a victim of
a crime under Chapter 566, RSMo.;
c. The factual circumstances surrounding the incident; and
d. A general description of any injuries, property or weapons
involved.
Section
117.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
117.160
AO:101
Chapter 120
TREE PLANTING POLICY
Section 120.010. Purpose and Intent. [R.O. 2008 §120.010; Ord. No.
6020 §1, 1-12-1998]
Section 120.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §120.020; Ord. No. 6020
§1, 1-12-1998]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
CITY — The City of Maryville, Missouri.
CITY-OWNED PROPERTY — Property within the City limits of Maryville,
Missouri, and owned by the City or implied or expressly dedicated to the
City for present or future use for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic,
rights-of-way, public easements or other public purposes.
PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
City public parks having individual names.
STREET TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or
ways within the City.
Section 120.030. Creation and Establishment of a City Tree Board.
[R.O. 2008 §120.030; Ord. No. 6020 §1, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 7206 §1,
4-26-2010]
A. It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to promote good forestry
practices through the City and to protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting,
maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants on City
property and municipally owned rights-of-way within the City of
Maryville, Missouri. This Chapter shall only be applicable to plantings
on City property and on municipally owned rights-of-way within the City
of Maryville.
B. It is the intent of the Council of the City of Maryville, Missouri, that the
terms of this Chapter shall be construed so as to promote:
1. The planting, maintenance, restoration and survival of desirable
trees, shrubs and other plants through the City; and
2. An increase in the total number of trees in the City and on public
property.
A. There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the City
of Maryville, Missouri, which shall consist of five (5) members and two
(2) alternates, citizens and residents for no less than one (1) year, of
Section
117.160
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
120.030
AO:102
Maryville, Missouri, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the City Council.
1. Appointment — term of office. The members of such Tree Board
shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation of the City
Council. Initially one (1) member shall be appointed to serve a oneyear
term; two (2) members shall be appointed to serve two-year
terms; and two (2) members shall be appointed to serve three-year
terms. Each of the two (2) alternate members shall be initially
appointed to a one-year term and shall be designated as "first
alternate" or "second alternate." All appointments shall be made
effective from the same date and annually thereafter, the Mayor
shall appoint as before, or reappoint, members whose terms have
expired to three-year terms of office, including alternate members.
Appointments to fill unexpired terms of members or alternates
shall be for the remainder of the term. Members and alternates
shall serve until their successors are appointed, confirmed and
qualified. The members of the City Tree Board shall serve without
compensation.
2. Election of officers. The Board shall elect one (1) of its members as
President and another as Vice President at the first regular meeting
of the Board. The Board shall elect one (1) of its members as
Secretary to the Board, and this person shall keep the minutes of
all proceedings of the Board which shall show the vote of each
member upon each question. The Secretary shall keep records of
all official actions of the Board, and all minutes and records shall be
kept and filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be open to the
public.
3. Rules, bylaws, meeting a quorum.
a. The Board shall have the power to adopt such rules of
procedure and bylaws, subject to City Council approval, as it
shall deem proper and necessary to carry out the provisions of
this Chapter.
b. The rules shall fix the time and place for regular meetings of
the Board. All meetings of the Board shall be held in
compliance with the Missouri Open Meetings, Open Record
law.
c. Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum of the Board.
Every determination by the Board, in any matter pending
before it, must be decided by a quorum of the Board and must
receive the vote of at least three (3) voting members, voting in
the affirmative, in order to carry.
4. Duties and responsibilities. The Maryville Tree Board shall have the
following powers and duties:
Section
120.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.030
AO:103
Section 120.040. Program Rules and Regulations. [R.O. 2008
§120.040; Ord. No. 6020 §1, 1-12-1998]
a. To act in an advisory capacity to the Council and staff of the
City of Maryville with regard to forestry matters.
b. To recommend to the City Council for its approval a five (5)
year urban forestry plan and update plans on an as-needed
basis for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting,
removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along
streets and in other public areas.
c. To be authorized to purchase and pay for expenditures of the
Board, and shall comply with all City rules and regulations
pertaining to purchasing, bids, grants, etc. The Tree Board will
have its own fund, through donations from individuals,
businesses, grants, to operate from which will be managed
through the Finance Department of the City.
d. To recommend to the City Council, for its approval, such
documents as are necessary to develop, maintain, publicize
and amended as necessary a list of trees and shrubs which may
be planted in or on City-owned property including parks,
streets and right-of-way. Said list shall be public record that
can be reviewed in the Department of Public Works.
A. Tree Species To Be Planted. The list of trees shall be categorized into
three (3) sizes based on mature height:
1. Small (under thirty (30) feet).
2. Medium (thirty (30) to forty-five (45) feet); and
3. Large (over forty-five (45) feet).
B. Spacing. The spacing of street trees shall be in accordance with the
three (3) species size classes. Except in special plantings approved by
the City, no trees shall be planted closer than the following:
1. Small trees, twenty (20) feet.
2. Medium trees, thirty (30) feet.
3. Large trees, forty (40) feet.
except in special plantings approved by the City.
C. Distance From Curb And Sidewalk. The distance trees may be planted
from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the
three (3) species size classes. No trees shall be planted closer to any
curb or sidewalk than the following:
1. Small trees, two (2) feet.
Section
120.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
120.040
AO:104
Chapter 125
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
Cross Reference — For code provisions relative to the airport board, ch.
110, Art. I.
Section 125.010. Airport Operation Policies. [R.O. 2008 §125.010;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 6925 §1, 8-13-2007]
2. Medium trees, three (3) feet.
3. Large trees, four (4) feet.
D. Distance From Street Corners And Fireplugs. No street tree shall be
planted within thirty-five (35) feet of any street corner, measured from
the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No street tree shall
be planted closer than ten (10) feet from any fire hydrant.
E. Utilities. No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in
this Chapter shall be planted under or within ten (10) feet of any
overhead utility wire.
F. Public Tree Care.
1. The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all City streets, City
alleys, avenues, lanes, rights-of-way, and grounds as may be
necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the
symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
2. The City Manager or his/her appointed designee may remove or
order to be removed, any tree on City property, or part thereof,
which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is
injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or
other public improvements or is affected with an injurious fungus,
insect or other pest.
G. Tree Topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person,
firm or City department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on
public property unless otherwise permitted by the City Manager or his/
her appointed designee in writing. "Topping" is defined as the severe
cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter
within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree. This restriction shall not apply to trees
severely damaged by storms or other causes, or trees under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical.
A. The Municipal Airport shall be operated in accordance with the
following designated airport operation policies.
Section
120.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.010
AO:105
1. Activities on the Municipal Airport are classified under the
following general headings:
a. Fixed base operations (all non-air carrier commercial flight
services).
(1) Sales of aircraft parts, supplies and accessories.
(2) Sales of gasoline and oil.
(3) Mechanical servicing and repair of aircraft and
accessories.
(4) Charter flights.
(5) Private flight instructions for pay.
(6) Contract and program flight instruction.
(7) Airplane rental.
(8) Pleasure and sight-seeing flights.
(9) Other.
b. Private airplane ownership and operation.
c. Operation of transient and visiting aircraft.
d. Scheduled air carrier operations.
e. Other activities, operations, enterprises, and services.
2. The Airport Board is charged by the City with the responsibility of
encouraging, developing and regulating activities on the Municipal
Airport in such a way as to best serve aviation and the interests of
the City.
3. Access to the facilities, advantages and opportunities offered by the
Municipal Airport shall be on an equal basis to all who meet the
conditions as recommended by the Airport Board and adopted by
the City Council.
4. General Airport Regulations are recommended by the Airport
Board and adopted by Resolution by the City Council.
5. Current United States Department of Commerce Civil Air
Regulations shall at all times govern activities.
6. Airport flight regulations will be established and amended by the
Airport Board, approved by the City Manager and City Council and
consistent with current Civil Air Regulations of the Department of
Commerce.
Section
125.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
125.010
AO:106
Section 125.020. Use by Military Aircraft. [R.O. 2008 §125.020; Ord.
No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The Mayor is authorized and directed to execute, upon behalf of the City, a
permit granting to the United States of America the privilege of using the
Municipal Airport for transient use by military aircraft of such airport.
Chapter 130
7. The City Council, upon the recommendation of the Airport Board,
will enter into a contract for an Airport Manager/Fixed Base
Operator; such contract defining the duties and responsibilities.
8. Airport terminal building reservation. [Ord. No. 7218 §1,
6-14-2010]
a. The terminal, including, but not limited to, the terminal
meeting room, may be reserved with a damage deposit of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and the reservation fee as follows:
(1) Half day [one (1) to four (4) hours]: fifty dollars ($50.00).
(2) Full day [four (4) to nine (9) hours]: one hundred dollars
($100.00).
b. Cancellation policy.
(1) For reservations canceled sixty (60) or more days prior to
the reservation date, the entire reservation fee and the
damage deposit shall be refunded.
(2) For reservations canceled fifty-nine (59) to fifteen (15)
days prior to the reservation date, a late cancellation fee of
twenty-five percent (25%) of the reservation fee will be
retained by the City, and the balance of the rental fee shall
be refunded. The entire damage deposit shall be refunded.
(3) For reservations canceled fourteen (14) or fewer days to
the reservation date, the entire reservation fee shall be
forfeited to the City. The entire damage deposit shall be
refunded.
c. The damage deposit shall be returned after inspection of the
facility by the City. If the facility is found to be of satisfactory
condition, the damage deposit will be returned in full. In the
event damages exist, the actual cost of repair or cleaning and
reasonable labor costs shall be applied first to the deposit and
any additional amounts shall be billed to the occupant at
replacement and/or repair costs.
d. Northwest Missouri State University and City offices are
exempt from said fees.
Section
125.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.020
AO:107
CITY CEMETERY
Section 130.010. Council Control. [R.O. 2008 §130.010; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The cemetery situated north of the City and known as Oak Hill Cemetery
shall be and remain under the control and supervision of the City Council,
as an authorized burial site.
Section 130.020. Grave Space Lots — Sale, Cost. [R.O. 2008
§130.020; Ord. No. 5048 §1, 4-13-1992]
Section 130.030. Grave Space Lots — Payment. [R.O. 2008
§130.030; Ord. No. 5048 §1, 5-24-1992]
Section 130.040. Sexton — Appointment, Duties, Grave Digs,
Charges. [R.O. 2008 §130.040; Ord. No. 5048 §1, 4-13-1992; Ord.
No. 5512 §1, 4-14-1997]
A. The City Manager and the City Clerk are hereby authorized to sell
grave spaces in Oak Hill Cemetery to be used for the burial of the
remains of bodies of human beings and for no other purpose.
B. The price to be charged for such grave spaces is two hundred dollars
($200.00) per space in Sections (A), (B), (C,) and (D) and three hundred
dollars ($300.00) per space in Section (F).
A. All sales of cemetery spaces shall be for cash, to be paid to the City
Clerk, provided, the City Manager may approve the sale of spaces on a
credit basis setting out a regular monthly payment system to provide
for full payment of sale.
B. On the payment of the full purchase price for said grave space, the
same shall be conveyed by deed, signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the City Clerk and attached thereto the Seal of the
City of Maryville specifying the owner of the space or spaces described
therein by number as laid down on a plat for the purpose of interment;
that such certificate shall vest in the purchaser, his/her heirs or assigns,
the right in fee simple to such space for the sole purpose of interment of
the remains of human bodies.
A. The City Manager shall appoint a sexton of said cemetery.
B. Such sexton shall, upon presentation to him/her of a burial permit
issued by the City Clerk, dig and prepare all graves for the interment of
the dead in said cemetery.
C. The City Manager shall be charged with the responsibility of the
operation and maintenance of Oak Hill Cemetery.
D. Grave opening fees:
Section
125.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
130.040
AO:108
Section 130.050. Grave Digs, Indigent Persons. [R.O. 2008
§130.050; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Section 130.060. Perpetual Care Cemetery Fund. [R.O. 2008
§130.060; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Section 130.070. Defacing Fixtures, Etc. [R.O. 2008 §130.070; Ord.
No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Grave dig — adult $250.00
Grave dig — child $100.00
Grave dig — cremation $150.00
Saturday grave dig $350.00
E. There will be NO burials on Sunday, and on Memorial Day,
Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays.
A. No charge shall be made for grave digs for the burial of indigent
persons in Oak Hill Cemetery.
B. For the purpose of this Section, an "indigent person" shall be defined as
a person whose estate is without funds or, in the case of persons leaving
no estate, whose survivors are without funds, to provide the normal cost
of a grave dig in Oak Hill Cemetery, and which state of indigence has
been so certified to the City Clerk.
A. There is hereby established a fund to be known as the Perpetual Care
Cemetery Fund and the income therefrom shall be expended for the
preservation, care, upkeep and adornment of Oak Hill Cemetery and for
no other purpose whatsoever. The principal of such Perpetual Care
Cemetery Fund shall not be encroached upon for any purpose
whatsoever, and no money shall be transferred out of such Perpetual
Care Cemetery Fund except for the purpose of being invested as herein
provided.
B. From the sale of each grave space, one hundred percent (100%) of this
payment shall be deposited to the Perpetual Care Cemetery Fund.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person maliciously to remove the earth from
any grave, vault or lot, or maliciously remove, injure, break, deface or
damage any monument, slab, tombstone, paling, wall or other fixture
belonging to any grave, lot or vault in the Oak Hill Cemetery.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously break, cut, damage or
remove any fence or part thereof, or any tree, shrub, flower, ornament
or decoration or any part thereof standing or growing in or around any
grave, vault or lot or on or near the walks, aisles, public grounds or at
any other place in or around said cemetery.
Section
130.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.070
AO:109
Section 130.080. Interments, Transfer of Lots, or Remuneration.
[R.O. 2008 §130.080; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
Section 130.090. Burial of Indigent Persons. [R.O. 2008 §130.090;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The southeast quarter of Oak Hill Cemetery, known as the "Potter's Field",
is hereby set apart and declared to be the place for the burial of the paupers
of the City; and for the burial of any persons in such place there shall be no
charges made by the City, either for lots or otherwise.
Chapter 135
PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS
Cross Reference — As to regulations in Mozingo Lake Park, ch. 212.
Section 135.010. Violation of Chapter Regulations Prohibited. [R.O.
2008 §135.010; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any regulation governing the
use of City Parks as provided in this Chapter.
Section 135.020. Amusement for Gain. [R.O. 2008 §135.020; Ord.
No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
No amusement for gain or for which a charge is made may be conducted
in a park or public recreational facility without consent of the Park and
Recreation Board, and such amusement must be conducted in accordance
with any rules, regulations of the Board and the ordinances of the City.
Section 135.030. Prohibited Acts.13 [R.O. 2008 §135.030; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 5416 §1, 5-13-1996]
C. The City of Maryville shall in no way be held responsible for damage
done to any tombstones, plant or other fixtures placed on or around
grave sites in Oak Hill Cemetery. [Ord. No. 7212 §1, 5-10-2010]
A. Proprietors shall not allow interments to be made in their lots for a
remuneration.
B. No purchaser of any lot or part of a lot in the City Cemetery shall set or
transfer the same or any part thereof to any private party.
C. The City may, at their option pay to every such lot owner who desires to
dispose of a purchased lot or to his/her heirs, an amount equal to the
sum originally paid therefor to the City, provided that the remains of no
person shall at the time be or remain interred in such lot and upon
presentation of a duly acknowledged deed. In such purchase, the City
Manager shall act for the City and pay for such lot out of the Cemetery
Fund. A correct abstract of all sales of lots and of all such transfers shall
be kept in the office of the City Clerk.
Section
130.070
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
135.030
AO:110
Section 135.040. Vehicles. [R.O. 2008 §135.040; Ord. No. 4882 §1,
5-14-1990; Ord. No. 5196 §1, 3-14-1994]
A. Disfiguration And Removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully mark, deface, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove any
tables, benches, fireplaces, paving signs or notices whether temporary
or permanent, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other
structures or equipment, facilities or park property whatsoever, either
real or personal.
B. Sanitation. No person in a park shall throw, discharge or otherwise
place or cause to be placed in the water of any pool, stream, river in or
adjacent to any park, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid,
which will or may result in pollution of said waters; have brought in or
shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper
boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash. No
such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters or on the grounds of
any park or left anywhere on the grounds or any buildings therein,
except in receptacles provided for such purpose.
C. Animals. Horses are not permitted on park property at any time without
expressed approval of the Park and Recreation Board.
D. Golf Balls. It shall be unlawful for any person to play or simulate the
game of golf by hitting, striking, driving a golf ball or other similar
object or practicing a golf swing using golf clubs, whether wood or
metal, on any park property whatsoever, whether real or personal. It
shall additionally be unlawful for any person to leave or abandon a golf
ball in or upon a City park. This prohibition shall not apply to activities
upon a public or private golf course.
A. No person, without the consent of the Park and Recreation Board of the
City, will drive or park any motor vehicle on any park except in
designated parking areas, roads or drives.
B. No vehicles will be parked in any area, on any road or drive where
parking is prohibited or in such manner as to obstruct the flow of traffic
along such road or drive.
C. No motor vehicle shall be operated in any City Park at a speed in excess
of ten (10) miles per hour.
D. All provisions of the Municipal Code of the City governing the operation
of motor vehicles shall apply to the operation of motor vehicles in City
Parks.
E. Vehicles shall not be left unattended overnight in the City of Maryville
parks or parking lots.
13.Cross Reference — For specific provisions of this code relative to the park and recreation
board, ch. 110, art. II.
Section
135.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.050
AO:111
Section 135.050. Hours of Operation. [R.O. 2008 §135.050; Ord. No.
4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 5196 §1, 3-14-1994]
Section 135.055. Park Closing — Hours. [R.O. 2008 §135.055; Ord.
No. 6797 §1, 11-28-2005]
Section 135.060. Fires in Park. [R.O. 2008 §135.060; Ord. No. 4882
§1, 5-14-1990]
It shall be unlawful for any person to start a fire in any area of the park
except in a suitable container adapted to the use of containing a fire for the
purpose of cooking foods thereon, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
leave the area of such fire before the same is completely extinguished.
Section 135.070. Park and Recreation Board — Powers. [R.O. 2008
§135.070; Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990]
The Park and Recreation Board shall have authority to set rentals,
admission prices, expense charges and other fees as it deems necessary for
A. Park. The park shall be open to the public. Any section or part of the
park may be declared closed or reserved to the public by the Park and
Recreation Board at any time or for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular or stated intervals.
B. Swimming Pool. The Park and Recreation Board shall determine the
length of the season during which the pool shall be open for public
swimming, the hours of operation, and the conditions under which the
swimming pool shall be closed for public swimming.
C. Camping. Overnight camping shall not be permitted in any City of
Maryville parks or parking lots.
A. It shall be unlawful for any individual to enter or remain on park
property between the hours of 12:00 Midnight and 5:00 A.M. local time.
B. The foregoing provision shall not apply to Mozingo Lake Park, any City
employee, City Official, Park and Recreation Board member, any
designee or agent of any of the foregoing or any individual participating
in an after hour event sanctioned and approved the City Council or by
the Park and Recreation Board of Directors or any Law Enforcement or
Peace Officer engaged in his/her official duties.
C. As used in this Section, the term "park" shall include any real estate
owned, leased or occupied by the City of Maryville or the Maryville Park
and Recreation Department and used for park purposes or designated
as a park.
D. The City Manager and the Park and Recreation Department Director or
their designees are hereby authorized and directed to post signage they
deem sufficient to provide notice to the public of the hours of park
closing.
Section
135.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
135.070
AO:112
any event utilizing special facilities or personnel under the jurisdiction of
the Park and Recreation Board.
Section 135.071. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §135.071; Ord. No. 6796
§1, 11-28-2005]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to have the
following meanings:
CIVIC ORGANIZATION — Any corporation, LLC, community chest,
foundation or other organization generally accepted as a civil organization
in the community, including any organization described herein which has as
its primary purpose charitable, religious, educational, scientific or literary
endeavors.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR — Shall have the meaning described in Section
600.010 of this Code.
PUBLIC PARK — Any park owned or leased by the City or the Parks
and Recreation Department of the City of Maryville, or any other area
designated as a public park within the City limits of the City of Maryville.
Section 135.072. Alcohol Prohibited in Parks — Exception. [R.O.
2008 §135.072; Ord. No. 6796 §1, 11-28-2005]
Section 135.073. Park Alcohol Use Permit. [R.O. 2008 §135.073;
Ord. No. 6796 §1, 11-28-2005]
A. It shall be unlawful to possess, consume, dispense, sell or vend
intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer in any public park unless
said act complies with the terms of this Chapter and a valid park alcohol
use permit.
B. It shall be lawful to possess, consume, dispense, sell or vend
intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer in a public park only if such
act complies with the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the
requirements of a valid park alcohol use permit.
A. A park alcohol use permit authorizes the holder to sell, dispense or vend
intoxicating liquor and non-intoxicating beer in compliance with the
terms of the permit.
B. Possession or consumption of intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating
beer by any individual in compliance with the terms of a valid park
alcohol use permit is authorized.
C. Only a civic organization may apply for a park alcohol use permit.
D. A permit fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus a damage deposit of
three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be paid at the time the
application for the permit is made, which application must be submitted
at least thirty (30) days prior to the event.
Section
135.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.073
AO:113
Section 135.074. Violation of Permit Terms. [R.O. 2008 §135.074;
Ord. No. 6796 §1, 11-28-2005]
Section 135.075. Park Alcohol Use Permit — Application. [R.O. 2008
§135.075; Ord. No. 6796 §1, 11-28-2005]
E. A park alcohol use permit, if approved, shall be issued for period
requested on the application but shall not exceed three (3) days in
duration. Multiple applications by a civic organization or by multiple
organizations shall not be approved to circumvent this duration
limitation. The City Council may authorize an exception to this duration
period limitation for special or annual events of community-wide
interest.
A. It shall be unlawful to possess, consume, dispense, sell or vend
intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer contrary to the terms or
condition of the park alcohol use permit.
B. In addition to any other authorized sanction or punishment, the
Maryville Parks and Recreation Department is authorized to
immediately revoke any park alcohol use permit where alcohol
dispensing, possession or use, or the event location, display or
operation fails to comply with any term, condition, requirement or
restriction of the permit as approved.
A. All applications for a park alcohol use permit shall be submitted on such
form(s) as promulgated by the City, shall be accompanied by all
necessary fees and deposits filed at least thirty (30) days in advance of
the scheduled events for which the permit is sought and shall contain
the following:
1. Completed application form(s) as required;
2. The name and address of the civic organization requesting the
permit;
3. The name, address and telephone number of the contact individual
for the application;
4. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the officers of the
civic organization applying for the permit;
5. The name, address and telephone number of all individuals
responsible for the operation of the event or responsible for
compliance with all applicable permit terms and conditions, City
ordinances and State laws and regulations;
6. A complete description of the proposed special event, including
dates, hours of operation, proposed method of merchandise display,
proposed signage and a list of all goods to be sold or dispensed and
equipment to be used in the event;
Section
135.073
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
135.075
AO:114
Section 135.076. Park Alcohol Use Permit — Site Requirements.
[R.O. 2008 §135.076; Ord. No. 6796 §1, 11-28-2005]
7. A map depicting the layout and location of the event relative to
other landmarks of the site;
8. A copy of the application for a Missouri picnic license for the event,
or a copy of a caterer's license or other applicable license for the
event, with contact information for the person or entity which will
be dispensing alcohol at the event. A copy of a valid Missouri picnic
license, if applicable, must be submitted prior to permit approval;
9. A certificate of insurance for the event providing for minimum
coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injury or
property damage and naming the City of Maryville, Maryville Park
and Recreation Department and their officers, employees and
agents as additional insureds;
10. The signature of the person responsible for the event and
application and evidence that the permit is executed with the
approval of the civic organization;
11. If the event involved the possession, sale or dispensing of food
products, a copy of all required permit(s) shall be attached to the
application; and
12. Any other information the City and/or Parks and Recreation
Department deems necessary.
A. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent any wholesaler or distributor
from providing customary storage, cooling or dispensing equipment for
use by the holder of the permit in accordance with the law.
B. Merchandise shall be displayed in a manner that does not create a
nuisance, negatively impact surrounding park area or usage of the park
by others or detract from the visual quality of the area.
C. Signage at the site location shall be limited to one (1) sign not to exceed
eight (8) square feet. Off-premises signs or attention-attracting devices
shall not be allowed.
D. The event shall be located in a manner so as not to cause vehicular
congestion.
E. The sponsor shall provide a "designated and controlled area" to
segregate individuals who are allowed to possess or consume alcohol
(people over twenty-one (21)).
F. A "designated serving table" shall be located within the serving area,
and individuals shall not be allowed to carry or bring alcohol into the
area except to be dispensed therein. Only liquor dispensed from the
serving area by the holder of the permit or its agent shall be permitted
to be possessed or consumed under the permit.
Section
135.075
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.076
AO:115
Section 135.080. Violations and Penalties. [R.O. 2008 §135.080;
Ord. No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 5416 §1, 5-13-1996]
Each and every person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty
of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by
a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in jail
for not more than three (3) months, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 140
RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Section 140.010. Missouri Local Government Employees
Retirement System — Adoption by City. [R.O. 2008 §140.010; Ord.
No. 4882 §1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 6460 §1, 3-25-2002]
G. During the event, trash and debris shall be maintained so as not to
create a nuisance or to litter the area. Upon conclusion of the event for
the day, all materials, equipment, trash and debris shall be promptly
removed from the property or placed in designated refuse containers.
A. The City of Maryville is a "political subdivision" as defined in Sections
70.600 through 70.755 RSMo., and hereby elects to have covered by
the Missouri Local Government Employees Retirement System all its
eligible employees in the following classes:
1. Present and future general employees (neither "Policemen" nor
"Firemen" as defined in the Act);
2. Present and future Policemen (as defined in the Act);
3. Present and future Firemen (as defined in the Act).
B. The City hereby elects that one hundred percent (100%) of prior
employment be considered for prior service credit in computing
benefits and contributions to the system.
C. The City of Maryville, Missouri, as an employer under the Missouri
Local Government Employees Retirement System, hereby elects the
following:
1. To adopt no change in the contributions from covered employees,
keeping the requirement of no contributions from covered
employees in accordance with the provisions of Section 70.705 and
Section 70.730, RSMo.
2. To adopt a change in the method of determining a member
employee's final average salary, changing to a thirty-six (36)
consecutive-month period for determining a member employee's
final average salary in accordance with Section 70.600 and Section
70.656, RSMo.
Section
135.076
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
140.010
AO:116
Section 140.020. Contributions. [R.O. 2008 §140.020; Ord. No. 4882
§1, 5-14-1990]
The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to deduct from the
wages and salaries of each employee member the member contributions
required by Section 70.705, RSMo., and to promptly remit the deductions to
the Retirement System, together with the employer contributions required
by Section 70.730, RSMo.
Chapter 145
TAXATION
3. To adopt a change in the Benefit Program of member employees,
changing to Benefit Program L-9.
4. To adopt no change in the Benefit Program of member employees,
keeping member employees option of retirement upon attaining
minimum service retirement age.
Section
140.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
140.020
AO:117

ARTICLE I
City Sales Taxes
Section 145.010. Tax for Park Purposes. [R.O. 2008 §145.010; Ord.
No. 5568 §1, 8-18-1997; Ord. No. 6808 §1, 1-23-2006; Ord. No. 6821
§1, 4-10-2006]
Pursuant to the authority granted by and subject to the provisions of
Sections 94.500 to 94.550, RSMo., a tax for the development of roads,
buildings, associated equipment and recreational facilities at Mozingo Lake
Park is hereby imposed at the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) on
the receipts from sale at retail of all tangible personal property or taxable
services at retail within the City of Maryville, if such property and services
are subject to taxation by the State of Missouri under the provisions of
Sections 144.010 to 144.510, RSMo. This action shall extend the current tax
and shall be effective for an additional ten (10) years and shall expire on
July 1, 2017, unless further extended by a vote of the people and shall be
collected pursuant to the provisions contained in the aforesaid Sections.
Section 145.020. Capital Improvements Tax. [R.O. 2008 §145.030;
Ord. No. 6969 §1, 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 6997 §1, 4-14-2008]
Pursuant to the authority granted by and subject to the provisions of
Sections 94.577, RSMo., a tax for capital improvements, is hereby imposed
at the rate of one-half of one percent (.5%) on the receipts from sale at
retail of all tangible personal property or taxable services at real within the
City of Maryville, if such property and services are subject to taxation by
the State of Missouri under the provisions of Sections 144.010 to 144.510,
RSMo. This action shall implement a tax and shall be effective for the ten
(10) years and shall expire on September 30, 2018, unless further extended
by a vote of the people and shall be collected pursuant to the provisions
contained in the aforesaid Sections.
Section 145.030. City Sales Tax. [Ord. No. 3960 §1, 8-7-1979; Ord.
No. 4634 §1, 11-9-1987]
Pursuant to the authority granted by and subject to the provisions of
Sections 144.010 — 144.510, RSMo., a tax for general revenue purposes
is hereby imposed on all sellers of tangible personal property or rendering
taxable service at retail at the additional rate of one-eighth percent (?%)
and seven-eighths percent (?%), making the total rate of City sales tax one
percent (1%), on the receipts from the sale at retail of all tangible personal
property or taxable service at retail within said City, if such property and
services are subject to taxation by the State of Missouri.
Section 145.040. Tax for Funding Local Parks. [Ord. No. 6137 §1,
11-9-1998]
Pursuant to the authority granted by and subject to the provisions of
Sections 144.010 — 144.525, RSMo., a sales tax is hereby imposed on all
Section
145.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.040
AO:119
retail sales made in the City which are subject to taxation at the rate of
one-eighth of one percent (?%) pursuant to the authority granted under the
provisions of Sections 644.032 and 644.033, RSMo., for the funding of local
parks.
Section 145.050. Community/Recreational Center Project Tax. [Ord.
No. 6311 §1, 8-14-2000]
Pursuant to the authority granted by and subject to the provisions of
Sections 144.010 — 144.510, RSMo., a tax is hereby imposed on all sellers
selling tangible personal property or rendering taxable service at retail at
the additional rate of one-eighth of one percent (?%) on the receipts from
the sale at retail of all tangible personal property or taxable service at retail
within the City, for a Community/Recreational Center project. The tax will
terminate twenty (20) years from the date on which said tax is first imposed.
Section 145.060. Conference Center Tax.14
Section 145.070. through Section 145.090. (Reserved)
A. The City of Maryville, Missouri shall be authorized to increase its local
sales tax by one-eighth of one percent (1%) until December 31, 2036,
unless extended by a vote of the people, for the purpose of providing
funds to construct, improve, operate and maintain a conference center
at Mozingo Lake Recreation Park.
B. The sales tax imposed by this Section shall become effective October 1,
2016, and be imposed until December 31, 2036, as provided by Sections
32.085 and 32.087, RSMo., as amended, and by all other applicable
laws, and shall be used for the purposes hereinabove authorized.
14.Editor's Note: This tax was approved by a majority of the qualified voters at an election
held 4-5-2016.
Section
145.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
145.070
AO:120
ARTICLE II
Transient Guest Tax
Section 145.100. Definitions. [Ord. No. 7929, 1-9-201715]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
HOTEL or MOTEL — Any structure or any portion of any structure that is
occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes and, includes, but is not limited to, any hotel,
inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging
house, rooming house, or public and private club. This definition is not
intended to include hospitals, nursing homes, or convalescent centers.
OCCUPANCY — The use or possession or the right to use or possession of
any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes.
OPERATOR — The person who is the proprietor of a hotel. Where the
operator performs functions through a managing agent or any type other
than an employee the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for
the purposes of this Chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities
as the principal. Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter by either
the principal or the managing agent shall be compliance by both.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or
combination acting as a unit.
RENT — The consideration charged for the occupancy of space in a hotel or
motel.
TENANT — Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy
by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement.
TRANSIENT — Any tenant who exercises occupancy or is entitled to
occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other
agreement for a period of thirty-one (31) days or less during a calendar
quarter, counting portions of days as full days. Any such tenant so occupying
space in a hotel or motel shall be deemed to be transient until the period of
thirty-one (31) days during a calendar quarter has expired unless there is an
agreement in writing between the operator and the occupancy providing for
a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is transient,
uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the
effective date of this Chapter may be considered.
15.Editor's Note: The transient guest tax rate of 5% as approved by the voters and certified by
Ord. No. 7913 is effective as of April 1, 2017.
Section
145.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.110
AO:121
Section 145.110. Levy Of Tax. [Ord. No. 7929, 1-9-2017]
There is hereby established and levied a tax on the charges for all sleeping
rooms paid by the transient guests of all hotels or motels situated in the
City, or a portion thereof, at the rate of five percent (5%) per occupied room
per night. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter or by law, the City
Treasurer shall be responsible for the administration and levy of this tax.
Section 145.120. Tax In Addition To Other Taxes And Fees. [Ord.
No. 7929, 1-9-2017]
The tax established under this Chapter shall be in addition to any other tax
or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any
governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room. The tax hereby
established shall be in addition to the charge for the sleeping room and all
other taxes imposed by law, and shall be shown separately from all other
charges and taxes.
Section 145.130. Reporting And Remitting Tax. [Ord. No. 7929,
1-9-2017]
Each operator shall on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the month
following the close of each month make a return to the City Treasurer on
City forms provided of total rents charged and the amount of tax collected
for transient occupancy. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of
the tax collected shall be remitted to the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer
may establish shorter reporting periods for any license holder that has
established a record of being delinquent in reporting and/or remitting taxes
accruing hereunder. The City Treasurer may also establish shorter or longer
reporting periods for any license holder to insure the efficient and effective
collection of the tax.
Section 145.140. Penalties And Interest. [Ord. No. 7929, 1-9-2017]
A. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter within
the time required shall pay a penalty of one percent (1%) and interest of
two percent (2%) each month, not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%)
per annum, of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the
tax.
B. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the
provisions of this Section shall become a part of the tax herein required
to be paid. Any penalty may for good cause be waived provided that a
report thereof be made to the City Council.
C. Any unpaid taxes shall be considered delinquent thirty (30) days after
the last day of each quarter.
Section
145.110
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
145.150
AO:122
Section 145.150. Failure To Collect And Report Tax. [Ord. No. 7929,
1-9-2017]
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect any tax or to submit within the
time provided in this Chapter any report and/or remittance of any tax or any
portion thereof required, the City Treasurer shall proceed to obtain facts
and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as
the City Treasurer procures such facts and information upon which to base
such an estimate or assessment against the operator of all tax, interest and
penalties provided for by this Chapter, the City Treasurer shall give notice
of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the
United States mail, postage or prepaid, addressed to the operator at the
business address.
Section 145.160. Right To Hearing. [Ord. No. 7929, 1-9-2017]
Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of any
notice make application in writing to the City Treasurer for a hearing on
the amount assessed as transient guest tax. If such application for a hearing
is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties,
shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable by such
operator. If an application is received for a hearing, the time and place of
such hearing shall be fixed within five (5) days of receipt of the request.
The notice for request of a hearing should show cause why the amount,
specifying tax, interest and penalties should not be fixed as specified in
the assessment. After such hearing, the City Treasurer shall determine the
proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the
operator of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and
penalties.
Section 145.170. Retention Of Records For Taxing Purposes. [Ord.
No. 7929, 1-9-2017]
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment
to the City of any tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve
for a period of three (3) years all records which may be necessary to
determine the amount of such taxes as may have occurred to the City and
for the collection or payment of which such operator is responsible. The City
Treasurer shall have the right to inspect and/or audit such records at all
reasonable times, but shall hold the same in confidence and utilize the same
only for the purposes of this Chapter.
Section 145.180. Refunds — Overpayment Of Taxes. [Ord. No. 7929,
1-9-2017]
A. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid
or paid more than once or has been erroneously collected or received
by the City under this Chapter, it may be refunded as provided in
Subsections (B) and (C) of this Section. A claim in writing must be
presented stating, under penalty of perjury, the specific grounds upon
Section
145.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.180
AO:123
Section 145.190. Actions To Collect Taxes Owed To The City. [Ord.
No. 7929, 1-9-2017]
Any tax required to be paid by any operator under the provisions of this
Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by such operator to the City. Any
person owing money to the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall
be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of
such amount.
Section 145.200. Unlawful Acts — Hotel Operator. [Ord. No. 7929,
1-9-2017]
It shall be unlawful for any operator to fail or refuse to register a hotel or to
submit any tax return or other financial records or to refuse to permit any
necessary inspection of hotel records by the City Treasurer or to willfully
render a false or fraudulent tax return or claim as required by this Chapter.
which claim is founded. The claim shall be on forms provided by the
City Treasurer.
B. An operator may claim a refund or take as a credit against taxes to be
remitted the amount previously overpaid, paid more than once or paid
after being erroneously collected or received when it is established in a
manner prescribed that the tax was paid on rent charged a person who
was not a transient. However, neither a refund nor a credit shall be
allowed unless the amount of the tax to be refunded or credited if
collected from a tenant or other person has either been refunded to
such person or credited to rent subsequently payable by such person to
the operator.
C. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this Section unless the
claimant establishes a right thereto by written records showing
entitlement.
Section
145.180
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
145.200
AO:124
Chapter 150
PROCUREMENT POLICY
Section 150.010. Generally. [Ord. No. 8006, 9-25-201716]
This manual establishes the rules and procedures for the purchase of
supplies and services for the City of Maryville.
Section 150.020. Responsibility For Purchasing. [Ord. No. 8006,
9-25-2017]
This responsibility for purchasing resides with the City Manager and
Department Heads. The Finance Director and City Clerk are authorized
to approve the purchase of supplies routinely used in the conduct of City
business in the absence of the City Manager.
Section 150.030. Procurement. [Ord. No. 8006, 9-25-2017]
All matters pertaining to the procurement of supplies and services for the
City shall be channeled through the various Department Heads, Finance
Director and to the City Manager.
Section 150.040. Finance Director — Duties And Functions. [Ord.
No. 8006, 9-25-2017]
Section 150.050. Ethical Practice. [Ord. No. 8006, 9-25-2017]
All officers and employees of the City shall keep themselves free of any real
or implied obligation by refusing to accept entertainment, gifts or services
offered by or on behalf of suppliers or contractors currently or potentially
serving the City.
Section 150.060. Responsibility Of Department Head. [Ord. No.
8006, 9-25-2017]
A. Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonable and necessary,
upon approval of the City Manager.
B. The Finance Director shall advise and assist the City Manager in
formulation of policies and procedures in connection with the
purchasing activities of the City.
A. The Department Head is responsible for the following:
1. To purchase the best valued materials/services for the purpose
intended.
2. To practice economy in the use of materials.
16.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 150, Procurement Policy, containing Sections 150.010
through 150.230, was repealed 9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 8006.
Section
145.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
150.060
AO:125
Section 150.070. Purchase Of Commodities/Services Costing $2,000
Or Less. [Ord. No. 8006, 9-25-2017]
Section 150.080. Purchase Of Commodities/Services In Excess Of
$2,000.00. [Ord. No. 8006, 9-25-2017]
3. To maintain equipment in a serviceable condition.
4. To plan future purchases to provide ample time to secure favorable
prices.
5. To insure compliance by employees with purchasing regulations
and procedures.
6. To advise the Finance Director of supplies and services required for
operations.
7. To combine like purchases and/or vendors within the same
purchase order form as possible.
A. Authority. Department heads are authorized to purchase items that cost
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or less without prior City Manager
approval. Department Heads are expected to investigate the local
market and select the item best suited to their needs by both quality
and price.
B. Invoice Necessary. A copy of the invoice signed by the Department
Head will be delivered to the Finance Director as soon as possible after
the purchase is made. The Department Head shall insure that the
invoice is to the City of Maryville and reflects the correct department
and account code for which the purchase is made. All employees are to
ensure that the vendor provides a legible and complete description of
the item purchased on the invoice. All invoices must be legibly signed
by a representative of the City upon receipt of the item(s).
C. Responsibility. The Department Head will be responsible for the correct
completion of items on the invoice. The Department Head shall sign all
invoices for his/her department.
A. Approval Required. The City Manager's approval must be secured for
all purchases in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). An
explanatory memorandum may be requested by the City Manager.
1. Blanket Price Agreements. Blanket price agreements which shall
be approved by the City Manager are used in long term situations.
The blanket price agreement remains open for one (1) fiscal year to
purchase the products or services specified on an "as needed" basis
and awarded using a purchasing manner corresponding with the
dollar amount. It shall not be necessary to obtain competitive
sealed bids or comparative prices for products covered under price
agreements.
Section
150.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
150.080
AO:126
Section 150.090. Formal Vendor Selection Methods. [Ord. No. 8006,
9-25-2017]
B. City Council Approval. City Council approval is required for any
purchase in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Otherwise, the
City Manager may approve purchases in excess of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
A. Request For Quotation. Normally, requests for quotations will be
obtained in writing from vendors. The Request for Quotation will show
the following information:
1. Time and date quotations to be received.
2. Quantity and description of item desired.
3. Delivery point and date desired.
If time is an element or conditions merit, upon the approval of the City
Manager, quotations may be solicited by telephone. Telephone quotations
shall be recorded showing date, vendors called, names of persons
submitting quotations, unit prices, terms and signature of person soliciting
the quotes. Quotations from three (3) vendors are usually sufficient to
establish competition. Written confirmation of all telephone proposals is
required. Failure to confirm the unit price may cause the proposal to be
rejected.
B. Formal Bid Procedure. Formal bidding will be used for the purchase of
major items or service. Each prospective bidder will be furnished an
invitation to bid, specifications and a bid proposal form. The invitation
to bid shall contain all information pertaining to terms of sale and
delivery, deadline for submission of bid and place and time where bids
will be publicly opened and read aloud. Specifications for the desired
quality and performance characteristics of an item or service shall
serve as the basis for competitive bidding. All bids must be submitted
on the bid proposal form provided by the City.
C. Where, When, And How To Bid. Advertisements for bids shall be placed
in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation most likely to reach
prospective bidders, may be advertised in at least two (2) weekly
minority newspapers, may be provided through any electronic medium
available to the general public, and shall be provided on the City of
Maryville website. All advertisements shall be published no less than
five (5) days before bids for such purchases are to be opened.
Additionally, the Request for Quotation shall be posted inside City Hall.
When deemed more advantageous, other methods of advertisement,
including notice to minority business purchase councils, may be
adopted by the City Council. Bids from prospective suppliers may be
delivered to the City Clerk by mail or other reasonable method
generally available to the public. It shall be the supplier's duty to insure
that supplier's bid is delivered in such a way as to reach the City Clerk
Section
150.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
150.090
AO:127
before the time set for opening bids. The contract shall be awarded
and let to the lowest and best bidder with the exception of Section
150.090(I) when applicable. The City Council shall have the right to
reject any or all bids and advertise for new bids, or purchase the
required supplies on the open market if they can be so purchased at a
better price.
D. Quotation Or Bid Summary. Upon the return of the bid proposals or
requests for quotations from the vendors, the Department head will
summarize the prices offered on a bid or quotation summary sheet and
recommend to the City Manager, the vendor to be chosen.
E. Transportation Charges. All orders to suppliers will specify that
transportation charges be prepaid by the supplier to point of delivery.
F. Limits On Competitive Bids/Proposals.
1. Competitive proposals/bids will be required on all those items that
cost up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Proposals may be
informal telephone quotations as directed by the Department Head.
Those items that cost more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
shall require formal bid procedures unless otherwise directed by
the City Manager. Written confirmation of price(s) shall be required
as directed by the City Manager. Proposals and competitive bid
requirements may be waived upon City Manager approval, if the
items can only be acquired from a single firm, an inventory item
protected by patents or proprietary interests, or if time is an
element to be considered.
2. It is policy of the City of Maryville to purchase products
manufactured, assembled or produced in the United States rather
than products manufactured, assembled or produced elsewhere if
the quality and price are comparable.
3. All proposals and bids received shall be retained in a designated
bid file for future reference.
G. Special Procurement Requirements. The City shall comply with any
special procurement requirements mandated by Federal, State, County,
or other granting or funding authorities, provided such requirements
achieve the minimum standards established by this policy and other
applicable Sections of the City Charter and Code of Ordinances, which
will include cost and price analysis for every United States Department
of Transportation procurement, including contract modifications.
H. Local Purchasing Preference Policy.
1. If a local bidder is within five percent (5%) of the lowest bid from an
out of town bidder on a construction or other formally bid project
from zero dollar ($0.00) to nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine
dollars and ninety-nine cents ($9,999.99), two percent (2%) on such
project(s) from ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) up to nine
Section
150.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
150.090
AO:128
hundred ninety-nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars
and ninety-nine cents ($999,999.99), and within one percent (1%)
on such project(s) from one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) up to
five million dollars ($5,000,000.00), then the local bidder will be
awarded the bid unless otherwise provided in this Section.
2. The local purchasing preference policy shall not apply in the
following instances:
a. When purchases and/or contracts are funded in whole or in
part by Federal funds;
b. When purchases are more than five million dollars
($5,000,000.00);
c. When purchases are not required to be formally bid, such as
sole source procurements, emergency procurements and any
other such procurements as defined in the City Procurement
Policy or the City Emergency Management Policy;
d. When professional services are procured through the issuance
of requests for qualifications and/or requests for proposals,
including design-build contracts; or,
e. When such preference is in conflict with any applicable State
or Federal laws, rules or regulations.
3. The local purchasing preference policy shall not apply to private
construction projects financed with public assistance, including,
but not limited to, tax increment financing, Chapter 100, Bonds,
Chapter 353, Redevelopment Projects and Enterprise Zone
Redevelopment.
4. "Local" is defined as a business operating within the corporate
limits of the City of Maryville, with the majority of its primary
business operations, including, but not necessarily limited to,
production, operation, purchasing, billing, marketing,
management, administration and ownership, occurring within the
City limits. "Local" shall not include the following:
a. Those businesses with only a local Maryville post office box; or
b. Those businesses with a sales presence in the City, but no
physical location within the City limits; or
c. Home based businesses that merely take orders for products
shipped from out-of-town to their customers. Exceptions will be
considered on a case-by-case basis when a written request is
submitted to the City Manager.
5. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the local bidder must otherwise
meet all qualifications and procurement policy requirements of the
Section
150.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
150.090
AO:129
Section 150.100. Purchase Of Repair Parts And Supplies. [Ord. No.
8006, 9-25-2017]
Section 150.110. Contractual Services. [Ord. No. 8006, 9-25-2017]
City, including, but not limited to, the "best bid" requirements, in
order to be awarded a bid under this Section.
A. Parts and supplies for the repair and maintenance of automotive and
mechanical equipment maintained by the Central Garage will be
purchased by the Mechanic, subject to approval by his/her Department
Head.
1. Local Purchases. The Shop Foreman will purchase necessary parts
and supplies for repair of equipment through the above listed
purchase order procedures.
2. Shop Tools And Major Supplies. The purchase of shop tools and
major supplies costing in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
will be approved by the Department Head established in these
regulations.
3. Major Repairs. If equipment will require major repair or rebuilding
to return it to service, the Shop Foreman will obtain estimates to
repair or rebuild and then obtain a recommendation for the
Department Head as to the advisability of repairing when
replacement or other disposition may be more economical. The
Department Head will advise the City Manager of his/her
recommendation. All repairs costing in excess of two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00) shall have prior City Manager approval.
A. Service Contracts Or Maintenance Agreements. All service contracts or
maintenance agreements will be approved by the City Council and/or
City Manager. The City Clerk will maintain a record of service
agreements and dates when such services start and terminate. Prior to
the termination date, the City Manager will coordinate with the
Department Head to determine if the service should be renewed.
B. Use Of Commercial Or Maintenance Agreements. City-owned
equipment shall not be repaired in commercial facilities without
advance approval of the Department Head. Conditions which permit the
use of commercial facilities are when the work is beyond the capability
of the Mechanic or when emergency repairs are required that cannot
be performed expediently by maintenance personnel. The Department
Head will secure the advance approval of the City Manager on those
items that exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Normal purchasing
procedures will be followed in obtaining this type of service.
C. Modifications To Equipment, Buildings And Structures. Any
modifications to buildings and structures of the City must be approved
by the City Manager.
Section
150.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
150.120
AO:130
Section 150.120. Emergency Purchases. [Ord. No. 8006, 9-25-2017]
Section 150.150. Lease-Purchase Agreements. [Ord. No. 8006,
9-25-2017]
No equipment or accessory will be obtained on a lease-purchase agreement
without the express approval of the City Council.
Section 150.160. Buying Equipment On Installment Payments.
[Ord. No. 8006, 9-25-2017]
No equipment or accessory will be purchased on an installment payment
plan without the express approval of the City Council.
Section 150.170. Accepting Equipment On Trial. [Ord. No. 8006,
9-25-2017]
No equipment or accessory will be accepted or used by a department to test
its suitability without the approval of the City Manager.
Section 150.180. Petty Cash Procedures. [Ord. No. 8006,
9-25-2017]
A. When as immediate need exists to prevent the disruption of operations
by unforeseen causes, supplies or services may be obtained without
prior approval. Only the minimum supplies or services necessary to
alleviate the emergency shall be purchased. Emergency purchases
must be reported to the City Manager as soon as possible after they
occur with an explanation of the nature of the emergency.
1. Administrative Requirements For Emergency Purchases. The
Department Head will, at the time of purchase, secure from the
vendor a sales ticket or invoice for the material or services. The
words "Emergency Purchase" must be indicated thereon. The
invoice will be forwarded to the City Manager as soon as possible.
A. The City Manager may establish a Petty Cash Fund where such a fund is
deemed advantageous and expedient in the routine purchase of items
costing less than fifty dollars ($50.00). The City Clerk shall be the
custodian of the Petty Cash Fund. The size of the Petty Cash Fund shall
be controlled by the City Manager based upon the amount of use of the
fund. Sound purchasing procedures will govern purchases made from
the Petty Cash Fund:
1. No personal checks are to be cashed.
2. Reimbursement is to be made only to personnel authorized by the
Department Head. It shall be the responsibility of the Department
Head to properly code or classify the item or expenditure, with
receipt and his/her written approval shall be taken as proper
authorization for the custodian of the fund to charge his/her
department when replenishing the fund.
Section
150.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
150.180
AO:131
Section 150.210. Surplus And Obsolete Material. [Ord. No. 8006,
9-25-2017]
Section 150.220. Change Order To Contracts. [Ord. No. 8006,
9-25-2017]
The City Manager is authorized to approve contract change orders up to ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00). However, each approval will be reported to
the City Council at the next scheduled meeting for Council confirmation.
3. Reimbursement is not to be made until an invoice marked "Paid," a
valid receipt, or certificate of expenditure is received by the fund
custodian.
4. No reimbursement is to be made for items over fifty dollars
($50.00), (no limit on freight payments), where it appears that
purchasing regulations or procedures are being evaded.
5. The Petty Cash Fund Shall Be Replenished Monthly. The
replenishment amount will be the total of "paid" invoices, valid
receipts and certificate of expenditures presented. The Accounting
Clerk will encumber the appropriate expenditure accounts of the
various funds monthly, reflecting expenditures made through the
Petty Cash Fund.
A. Methods Of Disposition. Surplus, worn-out or obsolete material and
equipment belonging to the City may be disposed of in the following
ways:
1. By transferring to other City departments.
2. By returning to the manufacturer or supplier.
3. By trading in on new equipment.
4. By advertising for sale.
5. By selling as scrap.
6. Junking. If any material is junked or lost, it shall be reported to the
City Manager by memorandum.
B. How To Report Property. Each department shall report its surplus or
obsolete stock, equipment or materials by memo to the City Manager.
C. How Disposition Is Made. If surplus equipment is sold, it will be
coordinated by the City Clerk in conformance with competitive
conditions including newspaper advertising, sealed bids or public sale.
Final acceptance of the sale and sale conditions will be given by the City
Manager. If material is sold as scrap, competitive quotes or sealed bids
will be solicited.
Section
150.180
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
150.230
AO:132
Section 150.230. Safety Training Requirements. [Ord. No. 8006,
9-25-2017]
Chapter 200
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
A. The Project approved by this Chapter is subject to the requirements of
Section 292.675, RSMo, which requires its on-site employees to
complete, a ten (10) hour course in construction safety and health
approved by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
("OSHA") or a similar program approved by the Missouri Department of
Labor and Industrial Relations which is at least as stringent as an
approved OSHA program. The training must be completed within sixty
(60) days of the date work on the Project commences. On-site
employees found on the worksite without documentation of the
required training shall have twenty (20) days to produce such
documentation.
B. The request for bids for this Project shall specify the requirements of
Section 292.675, RSMo.
C. The contract awarded for this Project shall specify the requirements of
Section 292.675, RSMo., and shall include a notice of the penalties for
contractor's failure to comply with that Statute.
Section
150.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
150.230
AO:133

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 200.010. Creation. [R.O. 2008 §200.010; Ord. No. 4890 §1,
7-9-1990]
There is hereby created the Department of Public Safety for the City. This
Department shall consist of the Director of Public Safety and such officers,
employees and reserve or volunteer personnel as may be provided for by
the City Council.
Section 200.020. Function. [R.O. 2008 §200.020; Ord. No. 4890 §1,
7-9-1990]
It shall be the function of the Department of Public Safety to preserve order,
enforce all ordinances and laws in the City, preserve the peace, mitigate
the results, render aid in the case of disaster or accident, and prevent and
extinguish accidental or destructive fires.
Section 200.030. Director of Public Safety. [R.O. 2008 §200.030;
Ord. No. 4890 §1, 7-9-1990]
A. There is hereby created the office of Director of Public Safety, who shall
be appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term. The Director
of Public Safety shall be the head of that Department, and all officers,
employees and reserve or volunteer personnel assigned to that
department shall perform their duties subject to his/her supervision.
The Director of Public Safety shall have all the powers and duties
assigned by law or ordinance to the Chief of the Fire Department and
the Chief of the Police Department, and shall perform such functions
and duties as may be prescribed by the Council, City Manager, City
ordinances and State law. It shall be the duty of the Director of Public
Safety and he/she shall:
1. Recommend to the City Manager the employment of persons to fill
positions within the Department.
2. Have the control, subject to the order and directive of the City
Manager, of all fire apparatus belonging to the City.
3. Keep or cause to be kept a record of all fires and training drills and
the attendance of the members of the Department thereat, and file,
with the City Manager a full report of such records and attendance.
4. Keep such records and make such reports concerning police
matters and the activities of his/her Department as may be
required by State law, City ordinance, the City Council or the City
Manager.
5. Have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen property
recovered in the City.
Section
200.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.040
AO:135
Section 200.040. Rules and Regulations. [R.O. 2008 §200.040; Ord.
No. 4890 §1, 7-9-1990]
The Director of Public Safety may make or prescribe such rules and
regulations for the conduct of his/her Department as shall be in accordance
with City personnel rules and regulations. When approved by the City
Manager, such rules shall be binding on the members of such Department.
The rules and regulations may cover the conduct of the members, uniforms
and equipment to be worn or carried, hours of service, the manner of
performance of duties, and other matters necessary or desirable for the
better efficiency of the Department.
Section 200.050. Status of Members. [R.O. 2008 §200.050; Ord. No.
4890 §1, 7-9-1990]
Officers, employees, and reserve or volunteer personnel of the Department
of Public Safety shall be appointed in the manner provided by City
personnel rules and regulations. Each officer of the Department shall be a
conservator of the peace and shall have all the responsibility, authority and
liability prescribed by State law or ordinance of the City.
Section 200.055. Notice to Law Enforcement Personnel —
Compliance With Federal and State Illegal Immigration Laws. [Ord.
No. 7105 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
The Director of Public Safety shall provide each Law Enforcement Officer
with written notice of their duty to cooperate with Federal and State
agencies and officials on matters pertaining to enforcement of State and
Federal laws governing immigration.
Section
200.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
200.055
AO:136
ARTICLE II
Fire Protection
Section 200.060. Fire Line. [R.O. 2008 §200.060; Ord. No. 4890 §1,
7-9-1990]
The Director of Public Safety and designated representative in command
at a fire prescribe the limits in the vicinity of any fire within which no
person, excepting those who reside therein and those admitted by order of
the City Manager, Director of Public Safety or Public Safety Officers of the
Department of Public Safety, shall be permitted.
Section
200.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.060
AO:137

ARTICLE III
Police Protection
Section 200.070. Police Duties. [R.O. 2008 §200.080; Ord. No. 4890
§1, 7-9-1990]
The officers of the Department of Public Safety shall be conservators of the
peace, and shall be active and vigilant in the preservation of good order
within the City, and it shall be their duty to see to the enforcement of
all of the ordinances of the City and all Statutes applicable therein, and
to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators
thereof.
Section 200.080. Rewards. [R.O. 2008 §200.090; Ord. No. 4890 §1,
7-9-1990; Ord. No. 5186 §1, 2-14-1994]
No member of the Department of Public Safety shall retain any reward or
present tendered him/her for his/her own benefit. Any rewards or presents
received shall be turned over to the Director of Public Safety, who shall
deposit the same with the City Treasurer. It shall be cause for removal, for
any member of the Department to receive any such reward or present.
Section
200.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.080
AO:139
Chapter 205
ANIMALS AND FOWL
Section
200.080
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
200.080
AO:140
ARTICLE I
Definitions
Section 205.005. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall mean:
ADEQUATE CARE — Care of an animal to include, but not be limited to,
clean water, shelter, wholesome food and health care.
ADEQUATE CONTROL — To reasonably restrain or govern an animal so that
the animal does not injure itself, any person, any other animal or property.
ANIMAL — Every living vertebrate except a human being and invertebrate
that has been tamed, domesticated or captured. Shall not include wildlife
that is under the control of the State Fish and Wildlife Agency, animals kept
in licensed research facilities, facilities operated by government agencies or
licensed animal dealer regulated by USDA.
ANIMAL SHELTER — A facility which is used to house or contain animals
and which is owned, operated or maintained by a duly incorporated humane
society or any other not-for-profit organization devoted to the welfare,
protection and humane treatment of animals.
FARM ANIMAL — Any horse, mule, donkey, cow or cattle, goat, sheep or
swine or any other bovine or equine or any other livestock animal.
HARBOR — To feed or shelter an animal at the same location for three (3)
or more consecutive days.
HUMANE KILLING — The destruction of an animal accomplished by a
method approved by the American Veterinary Medical Association's Panel
on Euthanasia (JAVMA 173:59-72, 1978); or more recent editions, but
animals killed during the feeding of pet predator shall be considered
humanely killed.
OWNER — In addition to its ordinary meaning, any person who keeps or
harbors an animal or professes to be owning, keeping or harboring an
animal.
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, partnership, firm, joint
stock company, corporation, association, trust, estate or other legal entity.
PESTS — Birds, rabbits or rodents which damage property or have an
adverse effect on the public health, but shall not include any endangered
species listed by the United States Department of the Interior nor any
endangered species listed in the Wildlife Code of Missouri.
Section
205.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.005
AO:141

ARTICLE II
Animal Abuse Laws
Section 205.010. Animal Abuse, Animal Neglect and Abandoment.
A. Animal Abuse. A person is guilty of animal abuse when a person
intentionally or purposely kills an animal in any manner not allowed by
or expressly exempted from the provisions of Sections 578.005,
578.023 and 273.030, RSMo., which are incorporated by reference
herein to this Article; purposely or intentionally causes injury or
suffering to an animal; or having ownership or custody of an animal and
knowingly fails to provide adequate care or adequate control.
B. Animal Neglect And Abandonment. A person is guilty of animal neglect
when he or she has custody or ownership of an animal and fails to
provide adequate care or adequate control, which results in harm to the
animal. A person is guilty of abandonment when he or she has
knowingly abandoned (left) an animal in any place without making
provisions for its adequate care.
C. Impoundment And Disposition Of Abused, Neglected And Abandoned
Animals.
1. A duly authorized Public Health Official, Law Enforcement Official
or Animal Control Officer may impound any animal found outside of
the owned or rented property of the owner or custodian of such
animal when such animal shows evidence of neglect or abuse.
Any animal impounded pursuant to this Section shall be:
a. If the owner can be ascertained and the animal is not diseased
or disabled beyond recovery for any useful purpose, held for
recovery by the owner. The owner shall be notified within five
(5) business days of impoundment by phone or by mail of the
animal's location and recovery procedures. The animal shall be
held for ten (10) business days. An animal unclaimed after ten
(10) business days may be put up for adoption or humanely
killed;
b. Placed in the care or custody of a veterinarian, the appropriate
animal control authority or animal shelter. The animal shall not
be disposed of, unless diseased or disabled beyond recovery for
any useful purpose, until after expiration of a minimum of five
(5) business days, during which time the public shall have clear
access to inspect or recover the animal through time periods
ordinarily accepted as usual business hours. After five (5)
business days, the animal may be put up for adoption or
humanely killed; or
c. If diseased or disabled beyond recovery for any useful purpose
as determined by a Public Health Official, Law Enforcement
Section
205.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.010
AO:143
Official, veterinarian or Animal Control Officer, humanely
killed.
2. The owner or custodian of an animal impounded pursuant to this
Section shall be liable for reasonable costs for the care and
maintenance of the animal. Any person incurring reasonable costs
for the care and maintenance of such animal shall have a lien
against such animal until the reasonable costs have been paid and
may put up for adoption or humanely kill any animal if such costs
are not paid within ten (10) days after demand. Any monies
received for an animal adopted pursuant to this Subsection in
excess of such costs shall be paid to the owner of such animal.
3. The owner or custodian of any animal killed pursuant to this
Section shall be entitled to recover the actual value of the animal
up to but not to exceed six hundred dollars ($600.00) if the owner
or custodian shows that such killing was unwarranted, if the animal
was properly tagged for ease of contacting owner.
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Section, the court
may order a person found guilty of animal abuse, neglect or
abandonment to pay all reasonable costs and expenses necessary
for:
a. The care and maintenance of abused animals within the
person's custody or ownership;
b. The disposal of any dead or diseased animals within the
person's custody or ownership;
c. The reduction of resulting organic debris affecting the
immediate area of the neglect or abandonment; and
d. The avoidance or minimization of any public health risks
created by the abuse of the animals.
4. Neglected or abused animal not to be returned to owner or
custodian, when. If a person is adjudicated guilty of the crime of
animal neglect or abuse and the court having jurisdiction is
satisfied that an animal owned or controlled by such person would
in the future be subject to such neglect or abuse, such animal shall
not be returned to or allowed to remain with such person, but its
disposition shall be determined by the court.
5. Exceptions. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the
following:
a. Care or treatment performed by a licensed veterinarian within
the provisions of Chapter 340, RSMo.;
b. Bona fide scientific experiments;
Section
205.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
205.010
AO:144
Section 205.020. Responsibility of Parent or Guardian of Minor
Owning.
The parent or guardian of a minor child is responsible for the adequate care
of any animal owned by, in the control of or harbored by that minor child.
Section 205.030. Poisoning Animals.
No person shall willfully administer or maliciously place, leave or expose
any poisonous substance or ingredient in any place accessible to wildlife
and domesticated animals, with the intent to kill or harm them.
Section 205.040. Selling Dyed Fowl or Rabbits as Pets or Novelties
Prohibited.
No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any animals, for pets
or novelties, which have been dyed or otherwise color treated.
c. Hunting, fishing or trapping as allowed by Chapter 252,
RSMo., including all practices and privileges as allowed under
the Missouri Wildlife Code;
d. Rodeo practices currently accepted by the Professional Rodeo
Cowboy's Association;
e. The killing of an animal by the owner thereof, the agent of such
owner or by a veterinarian at the request of the owner thereof;
a shelter, a veterinarian or Law Enforcement or Health Official;
f. The lawful, humane killing of an animal by an Animal Control
Officer, the operator of an animal shelter, a veterinarian or Law
Enforcement or Health Official;
g. With respect to farm animals, normal or accepted practices of
animal husbandry;
h. The killing of an animal by any person at any time if such
animal is outside of the owned or rented property of the owner
or custodian of such animal and the animal is injuring any
person or farm animal, but shall not include Police or guard
dogs while working;
i. Field trails, training and hunting practices as accepted by the
Professional Houndsmen of Missouri;
j. The killing of house or garden pests.
Section
205.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.040
AO:145

ARTICLE III
Dogs and Cats
Section 205.050. Investigations and Interference With Officers.
Any Public Safety Officer or Humane Officer is authorized to investigate
conditions under which an animal is kept or harbored and to require the
owner to exhibit a license for the animal(s). No person shall hinder, molest
or interfere with any officer in the performance of these duties. It shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Article and it
shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, obstruct or prevent any
official or employee of the City from the performance of his or her duties in
the enforcement of any Section of this Article.
Section 205.060. through Section 205.070. (Reserved)
Section 205.080. Leashing and Tethering Requirement.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons owning, controlling,
harboring, possessing or having the management of care, in whole or in
part, of any animal to permit such animal to run at large in the City.
For the purpose of this Article, every dog when on any street, alley
or other public place in the City which is not attached to a leash, the
other end of which is securely held by a person sufficiently capable of
restraining such dog or when on private property within the City, which
is either not attached to a leash, the other end of which is securely
held or is not so confined as to prevent its straying from the premises
or is on the private property not owned or leased by the dog's owner,
keeper or harborer, shall be deemed to be running at large, provided
however, that a dog bearing an identification tag stating thereon its
owner's name and address and being kept on the property of its owner
without leash or other confinement shall not be deemed to be running
at large.
B. A tether to which a dog is attached shall either be held by a person
sufficiently capable of restraining such dog or shall be securely
fastened to an object of sufficient weight and/or anchor to restrain such
dog. A tether which is fastened to an inanimate object shall:
1. Not allow a dog to be within three (3) feet of any public alley,
sidewalk or roadway;
2. Allow the dog access at all times to food, water and shelter;
3. Be attached to the dog by a well-fitted dog collar or harness in good
working condition and shall not be a slip, self-tightening or "prong"
collar;
4. Remain free of entangled objects;
5. Not allow the dog to come into contact with another tethered dog;
Section
205.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.080
AO:147
Section 205.090. Barking Dogs.
No person shall own or harbor within the City limits any dog that by loud
and frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling is an annoyance to the
peace of another.
Section 205.100. Breeder Requirements.
Breeders, as defined by Missouri Statute, must follow all Missouri
Department of Agriculture regulations as allowed by Sections 273.325 to
273.357, RSMo., in order to operate within the City.
Section 205.110. through Section 205.120. (Reserved)
Section 205.130. Dangerous Dog.
No person shall keep or harbor a fierce, vicious or dangerous dog or other
animal without being caged in a manner not to pose a danger to any
inhabitant of the City. Upon a plea or finding of guilt upon this Section, the
dog which is the subject of the violation shall be removed from the City as
part of the sentence ordered by the Municipal Judge.
Section 205.140. Licensing Fees.
6. Prevent the dog from crossing over any barrier which could result
in the dog being hung by its collar or harness without the dog's feet
being on the ground.
A. No person shall own, keep or harbor upon any premises in the City any
dog over sixteen (16) weeks of age without first procuring from the City
a license tag for such dog.
B. Dog licenses shall be issued by the City or its designee upon the
payment of the license fee and presentation of certificate of inoculation
against rabies, signed by a licensed veterinarian, which certificate shall
have been executed sometime during the previous thirty-six-month
period for a three-year type vaccination, or during the previous twelve
(12) months for other vaccination. No license shall be issued for a
spayed or neutered animal without a certification of verification from a
licensed veterinarian.
C. The license fees shall be as follows:
1. Basic rate for all tags: twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
2. Rate if spayed or neutered (the neutered rate): twenty dollars
($20.00) less than the basic rate.
3. Should an owner present written documentation from a licensed
veterinarian stating that the spaying or neutering procedure would
be hazardous to the dog due to its age or health and present
written documentation signed by the owner that it is not the
Section
205.080
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
205.140
AO:148
Section 205.150. Impounding Dogs.
Any dog running at large within the City, and whose owner, harborer or
keeper is not readily identifiable, shall be delivered to the new Nodaway
Humane Society.
owner's intent to breed the dog, then the license fee for such dog
shall be equal to the neutered rate.
D. City licenses are not transferable from one dog to another. Such
registration shall be renewed annually on or before December 31. The
full license fee shall be paid and collected for a partial year.
E. Replacement tags may be purchased for $1.50.
F. Removal Of Collar, Harness, Registration Tag. No person shall remove
or cause to be removed the collar, harness or registration tag from any
registered dog without the consent of the owner thereof.
G. The provisions of this Section do not apply to the following:
1. Dogs brought into the City for the purpose of participating in a dog
show.
2. Dogs which are categorized as "service animals" by the Americans
with Disabilities Act17 definition found in the Code of Federal
Regulations, as follows: Service animal means any dog that is
individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of
an individual with a disability, including a physical, sensory,
psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental disability. Other species of
animals, whether wild or domestic, trained or untrained, are not
service animals for the purposes of this definition. The work or
tasks performed by a service animal must be directly related to the
handler's disability. Examples of work or tasks include, but are not
limited to, assisting individuals who are blind or have low vision
with navigation and other tasks, alerting individuals who are deaf
or hard of hearing to the presence of people or sounds, providing
non-violent protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair,
assisting an individual during a seizure, alerting individuals to the
presence of allergens, retrieving items such as medicine or the
telephone, providing physical support and assistance with balance
and stability to individuals with mobility disabilities, and helping
persons with psychiatric and neurological disabilities by preventing
or interrupting impulsive or destructive behaviors. The crime
deterrent effects of an animal's presence and the provision of
emotional support, well-being, comfort, or companionship do not
constitute work or tasks for the purposes of this definition.
17.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. §12101 et seq.
Section
205.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.160
AO:149
Section 205.160. Redemption or Retrieval of Impounded Dog —
Fee.
Section 205.170. Disposition and Adoption of Impoundment Dogs.
Dogs that have been impounded for a period of more than seven (7) days are
eligible for adoption or may be disposed of, at the discretion of the Director
of the shelter, pursuant to the regulations of the Missouri Department of
Agricultures' Animal Care Facilities Act (ACFA).
Section 205.180. Violations and Penalties.
Any fine imposed by any Section of this Chapter shall not exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per charge and any jail sentence imposed upon
a violation of any Section of this Chapter shall not exceed ninety (90) days
per charge.
A. All dogs picked up and impounded due to any violation of this Article
may be redeemed by the owner or person entitled thereto upon proof of
ownership and the following conditions:
1. There shall be paid to new Nodaway Humane Society:
a. Impound and boarding fees as set forth by the Board of
Directors of the Society.
2. In the event the owner or person entitled to such dog or cat cannot
provide proof of rabies immunization prior to reclaiming the
animal, they shall be required to pay for the cost of immunization
prior to reclaiming the animal. If proof of immunization against
rabies is provided within seven (7) days, a refund will be granted.
3. The owner or person entitled thereto shall present proof of current
licensing and upon the failure to do so shall license such dog upon
compliance with all licensing requirements.
4. No person shall have the right to redemption of any impounded dog
unless such redemption is effected within seven (7) days after
impoundment.
Section
205.160
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
205.180
AO:150
ARTICLE IV
Rabies
Section 205.190. Rabies Vaccination Required.
All dogs and cats being kept within the City at the time they reach four (4)
months of age shall be vaccinated. Unvaccinated dogs over four (4) months
of age acquired or moved into the City shall be vaccinated. Every dog that
has been vaccinated shall thereafter be revaccinated as specified in Section
205.140 "Licensing Fees" of this Article.
Section 205.200. Proclamation Requiring Muzzling or Restraint.
At the discretion of the City Manager, if in his or her opinion the protection
of the citizens from the dangers of rabies so demands, he or she may issue
a proclamation notifying all of the residents of the City owning or having
dogs and cats in their possession to muzzle such dogs and cats or keep them
contained until such time as notified in his or her proclamation.
Section 205.210. Quarantine of Animals.
A. All animal bites or animals acting suspiciously shall be reported to
Public Safety, along with the name and address of the person bitten.
Any animal that has a bitten a person shall be placed into a veterinarian
clinic for a rabies evaluation. If said animal is to be quarantined for
observation for rabies, the ten (10) day observation period may be done
under the observation of an attending veterinarian in an animal shelter
or at a veterinarian clinic. Owner(s) of a quarantined animal shall be
liable for cost for the care and maintenance of said animal.
B. No Public Safety Officer or other person shall kill or cause to be killed
any animal suspected of being rabid, except when necessary to protect
the safety of persons or other animals or to effect the capture of said
animal.
C. If a veterinarian diagnoses rabies in a quarantined animal, then the
animal shall be humanely killed and the head of said animal shall be
sent to a laboratory for pathological examination and confirmation of
the diagnosis. Upon being advised of a confirmed diagnosis of rabies,
the veterinarian shall be required to notify the Director of Public Safety
or his duly authorized representative of said rabies diagnosis, who shall
notify the person bitten and the owner of the animal of said diagnosis.
D. The cost of the confinement of any animal as in this Section provided
and any laboratory tests that may be required shall be at the expense of
the person who owns or has control of said animal.
E. If after the period of observation of said animal it is determined that
said animal is not rabid, said animal shall be released to the person who
owns or controls said animal, upon payment by said person of all costs
for the confinement of said animal.
Section
205.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.210
AO:151

ARTICLE V
Keeping of Animals Other Than Dogs and Cats
Section 205.220. Keeping of Animals Other Than Dogs and Cats.
A. Farm animals shall be kept within an enclosure of at least three (3)
contiguous acres for the first (1st) two (2) farm animals and an
additional one (1) contiguous acre for each farm animal over two (2) in
number.
B. Domesticated birds housed primarily outside must be kept on three (3)
or more contiguous acres. Cooped domesticated birds can be kept on
less than three (3) contiguous acres based on species, provided the
coop does not pose a nuisance to neighbors.
C. No other animals may be kept within the City, except: ferrets, pet
rodents, hedge hogs, rabbits, non-venomous snakes and non-venomous
reptiles that are under fifteen (15) pounds, goldfish and tropical fish
commonly kept in aquariums or fish ponds, sugar gliders, pet shop
turtles and pet shop tarantulas. Domestic songbirds and nonendangered
birds commonly kept inside dwelling units in cages may be
kept.
D. This Section shall not apply to any duly licensed veterinarian, kennel,
pet shop or grooming parlor.
Section
205.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.220
AO:153

ARTICLE VI
General Provisions for Animals
Section 205.230. Trapping of Animals.
Except for traps which do not create a danger for dogs or cats (such as
traps of a size designed to entrap small rodents including mice), no person
other than the Animal Control Officer or an employee of the Maryville Public
Safety Department shall knowingly set a trap for any animal of any type
within the City limits of the City of Maryville, Missouri. Except for the
foregoing, no traps of any type shall be allowed within the City limits of the
City of Maryville, Missouri, except under the direction of the Animal Control
Officer or a Public Safety Officer. Any person convicted in violation of this
Section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable under the Municipal Code
of the City of Maryville, Missouri. Each day of illegal trapping by an illegal
trap shall constitute a separate violation of the Municipal Code of the City
of Maryville, Missouri.
Section 205.240. Animal Fighting.
No person shall promote, manage, attend or receive money for admission of
any person to any place kept or used for the purpose of baiting, fighting or
causing to fight any animal or fowl. Animal fighting is a Class D felony and
punishable as set out by State Statute.
Section 205.250. Breeding Animals in Public View Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to breed or to permit the
breeding of any animals, except fowls, within the City limits unless the same
is to be done within an enclosure so constructed that such animals are not
in view of persons outside such enclosure.
Section
205.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.250
AO:155
Chapter 210
OFFENSES
Section
205.250
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
205.250
AO:156
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 210.005. Definitions.
In this Chapter, unless the context requires a different definition, the
following shall apply:
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.056,
RSMo.
BURDEN OF INJECTING THE ISSUE — Has the meaning specified in
Section 556.051, RSMo.
COMMERCIAL FILM AND PHOTOGRAPHIC PRINT PROCESSOR — Any
person who develops exposed photographic film into negatives, slides or
prints or who makes prints from negatives or slides for compensation. The
term "commercial film and photographic print processor" shall include all
employees of such persons but shall not include a person who develops film
or makes prints for a public agency.
CONFINEMENT —
CONSENT — Consent or lack of consent may be expressed or implied.
Assent does not constitute consent if:
A person is in confinement when he/she is held in a place of
confinement pursuant to arrest or order of a court and remains in
confinement until:
a. A court orders his/her release;
He/she is released on bail, bond or recognizance, personal or
otherwise; or
b.
A public servant having the legal power and duty to confine him/
her authorizes his/her release without guard and without condition
that he/she return to confinement.
c.
1.
A person is not in confinement if:
a. He/she is on probation or parole, temporary or otherwise; or
He/she is under sentence to serve a term of confinement which
is not continuous, or is serving a sentence under a work-release
program, and in either such case is not being held in a place of
confinement or is not being held under guard by a person having
the legal power and duty to transport him/her to or from a place of
confinement.
b.
2.
It is given by a person who lacks the mental capacity to authorize the
conduct charged to constitute the offense and such mental incapacity is
manifest or known to the actor;
1.
Section
210.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.005
AO:157
CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.016,
RSMo.
CUSTODY — A person is in custody when he/she has been arrested but has
not been delivered to a place of confinement.
DANGEROUS FELONY — The felonies of arson in the first degree, assault in
the first degree, attempted forcible rape if physical injury results, attempted
forcible sodomy if physical injury results, forcible rape, forcible sodomy,
kidnapping, murder in the second degree, assault of a Law Enforcement
Officer in the first degree, domestic assault in the first degree, elder abuse
in the first degree, robbery in the first degree, statutory rape in the first
degree when the victim is a child less than twelve (12) years of age at
the time of the commission of the act giving rise to the offense, statutory
sodomy in the first degree when the victim is a child less than twelve (12)
years of age at the time of the commission of the act giving rise to the
offense, and abuse of a child pursuant to Subdivision (2) of Subsection
(3) of Section 568.060, RSMo., child kidnapping, and parental kidnapping
committed by detaining or concealing the whereabouts of the child for not
less than one hundred twenty (120) days under Section 565.153, RSMo.
DANGEROUS INSTRUMENT — Any instrument, article or substance which,
under the circumstances in which it is used, is readily capable of causing
death or other serious physical injury.
DEADLY WEAPON — Any firearm, loaded or unloaded, or any weapon from
which a shot, readily capable of producing death or serious physical injury,
may be discharged or a switchblade knife, dagger, billy, blackjack or metal
knuckles.
FELONY — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.016, RSMo.
FORCIBLE COMPULSION — Means either:
INCAPACITATED — That physical or mental condition, temporary or
permanent, in which a person is unconscious, unable to appraise the nature
of his/her conduct, or unable to communicate unwillingness to an act. A
person is not "incapacitated" with respect to an act committed upon him/
her if he/she became unconscious, unable to appraise the nature of his/her
conduct, or unable to communicate unwillingness to an act after consenting
to the act.
It is given by a person who by reason of youth, mental disease or defect,
or intoxication is manifestly unable or known by the actor to be unable
to make a reasonable judgment as to the nature or harmfulness of the
conduct charged to constitute the offense; or
2.
3. It is induced by force, duress or deception.
1. Physical force that overcomes reasonable resistance; or
A threat, express or implied, that places a person in reasonable fear
of death, serious physical injury, or kidnapping of himself/herself or
another person.
2.
Section
210.005
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.005
AO:158
INFRACTION — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.021, RSMo.
INHABITABLE STRUCTURE — Has the meaning specified in Section
569.010, RSMo.
KNOWINGLY — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.016, RSMo.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any public servant having both the
power and duty to make arrests for violations of the laws of this State, and
Federal Law Enforcement Officers authorized to carry firearms and to make
arrests for violations of the laws of the United States.
MISDEMEANOR — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.016, RSMo.
OFFENSE — Any felony, misdemeanor, ordinance violation or infraction.
PHYSICAL INJURY — Physical pain, illness, or any impairment of physical
condition.
PLACE OF CONFINEMENT — Any building or facility and the grounds
thereof wherein a court is legally authorized to order that a person charged
with or convicted of a crime be held.
POSSESS or POSSESSED — Having actual or constructive possession of an
object with knowledge of its presence. A person has actual possession if he/
she has the object on his/her person or within easy reach and convenient
control. A person has constructive possession if he/she has the power and
the intention at a given time to exercise dominion or control over the
object either directly or through another person or persons. Possession may
also be sole or joint. If one (1) person alone has possession of an object,
possession is sole. If two (2) or more persons share possession of an object,
possession is joint.
PUBLIC SERVANT — Any person employed in any way by a government
of this State who is compensated by the government by reason of his/her
employment, any person appointed to a position with any government of
this State, or any person elected to a position with any government of this
State. It includes, but is not limited to, legislators, jurors, members of the
judiciary and Law Enforcement Officers. It does not include witnesses.
PURPOSELY — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.016, RSMo.
RECKLESSLY — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.016, RSMo.
RITUAL or CEREMONY — An act or series of acts performed by two (2) or
more persons as part of an established or prescribed pattern of activity.
SERIOUS EMOTIONAL INJURY — An injury that creates a substantial risk
of temporary or permanent medical or psychological damage manifested
by impairment of a behavioral, cognitive or physical condition. "Serious
emotional injury" shall be established by testimony of qualified experts upon
the reasonable expectation of probable harm to a reasonable degree of
medical or psychological certainty.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY — Physical injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes serious disfigurement or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any part of the body.
Section
210.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.005
AO:159
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Acts of human masturbation; deviate sexual
intercourse; sexual intercourse; or physical contact with a person's clothed
or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the breast of a female in an
act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Any touching of the genitals or anus of any person, or
the breast of any female person, or any such touching through the clothing
for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire of any person.
SEXUAL PERFORMANCE — Any performance, or part thereof, which
includes sexual conduct by a child who is less than seventeen (17) years of
age.
VOLUNTARY ACT — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.011, RSMo.
Section
210.005
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.005
AO:160
ARTICLE II
Offenses Against the Person
Section 210.010. Assault.
Section 210.015. Domestic Assault.18
A. A person commits the offense of assault if:
1. The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury
to another person;
2. With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to
another person by means of a deadly weapon;
3. The person purposely places another person in apprehension of
immediate physical injury;
4. The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave
risk of death or serious physical injury to another person;
5. The person knowingly causes physical contact with another person
knowing the other person will regard the contact as offensive or
provocative; or
6. The person knowingly causes physical contact with an
incapacitated person, as defined in Section 475.010, RSMo., which
a reasonable person, who is not incapacitated, would consider
offensive or provocative.
A. A person commits the offense of domestic assault if the act involves a
family or household member or an adult who is or has been in a
continuing social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with the
actor as defined in Section 455.010, RSMo.; and
1. The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury
to such family or household member;
2. With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to such
family or household member by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous instrument;
3. The person purposely places such family or household member in
apprehension of immediate physical injury by any means;
4. The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave
risk of death or serious physical injury to such family or household
member;
18.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.015
AO:161
Section 210.020. Assault of a Law Enforcement Officer, Corrections
Officer, Emergency Personnel, Highway Worker or Probation and
Parole Officer.
5. The person knowingly causes physical contact with such family or
household member knowing the other person will regard the
contact as offensive; or
6. The person knowingly attempts to cause or causes the isolation of
such family or household member by unreasonably and
substantially restricting or limiting such family or household
member's access to other persons, telecommunication devices or
transportation for the purpose of isolation.
A. A person commits the offense of assault of a Law Enforcement Officer,
Corrections Officer, Emergency Personnel, highway worker in a
construction zone or work zone, or Probation and Parole Officer if:
1. Such person recklessly causes physical injury to a Law
Enforcement Officer, Corrections Officer, Emergency Personnel,
highway worker in a construction zone or work zone or Probation
and Parole Officer;
2. Such person purposely places a Law Enforcement Officer,
Corrections Officer, Emergency Personnel, highway worker in a
construction zone or work zone, or Probation and Parole Officer in
apprehension of immediate physical injury;
3. Such person knowingly causes or attempts to cause physical
contact with a Law Enforcement Officer, Corrections Officer,
Emergency Personnel, highway worker in a construction zone or
work zone, or Probation and Parole Officer without the consent of
the Law Enforcement Officer, Corrections Officer, Emergency
Personnel, highway worker in a construction zone or work zone, or
Probation and Parole Officer.
B. As used in this Section, "emergency personnel" means any paid or
volunteer firefighter, emergency room or trauma center personnel, or
emergency medical technician as defined in Subdivisions (15), (16),
(17) and (18) of Section 190.100, RSMo.
C. As used in this Section, the term "Corrections Officer" includes any
jailor or Corrections Officer of the State or any political subdivision of
the State.
D. As used in this Section, the term "highway worker", "construction zone"
or "work zone" shall have the same meaning as such terms are defined
in Section 304.580, RSMo.
E. Assault of a Law Enforcement Officer, Corrections Officer, Emergency
Personnel, highway worker in a construction zone or work zone, or
Probation and Parole Officer is an ordinance violation.
Section
210.015
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.025
AO:162
Section 210.025. Harassment of a Bicyclist, Pedestrian or Person in
a Wheelchair. [Ord. No. 7210 §1, 5-10-2010]
Section 210.030. Harassment.19
A. A person commits the offense of harassment of a bicyclist, pedestrian or
person in a wheelchair if the person:
1. Knowingly throws an object at or in the direction of any person
riding a bicycle, walking, running or operating a wheelchair for the
purpose of frightening, disturbing or injuring that person; or
2. Threatens any person riding a bicycle, walking, running or
operating a wheelchair for the purpose of frightening or disturbing
that person; or
3. Sounds a horn, shouts or otherwise directs sound toward any
person riding a bicycle, walking, running or operating a wheelchair
for the purpose of frightening or disturbing that person; or
4. Knowingly places a person riding a bicycle, walking, running or
operating a wheelchair in apprehension of immediate physical
injury; or
5. Knowingly engages in conduct that creates a risk of death or
serious physical injury to a person riding a bicycle, walking,
running or operating a wheelchair.
B. Harassment of a bicyclist, pedestrian or person in a wheelchair is a
misdemeanor.
A. A person commits the offense of harassment if he or she:
1. Knowingly communicates a threat to commit any felony to another
person and in so doing frightens, intimidates, or causes emotional
distress to such other person;
2. When communicating with another person, knowingly uses coarse
language offensive to one of average sensibility and thereby puts
such person in reasonable apprehension of offensive physical
contact or harm;
3. Knowingly frightens, intimidates, or causes emotional distress to
another person by anonymously making a telephone call or any
electronic communication;
4. Knowingly communicates with another person who is, or who
purports to be, seventeen (17) years of age or younger and in so
doing and without good cause recklessly frightens, intimidates, or
causes emotional distress to such other person;
19.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.025
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.030
AO:163
Section 210.035. Stalking — Definitions.20
5. Knowingly makes repeated unwanted communication to another
person; or
6. Without good cause engages in any other act with the purpose to
frighten, intimidate, or cause emotional distress to another person,
cause such person to be frightened, intimidated, or emotionally
distressed, and such person's response to the act is one of a person
of average sensibilities considering the age of such person.
B. Harassment is an ordinance violation unless:
1. Committed by a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older
against a person seventeen (17) years of age or younger; or
2. The person has previously pleaded guilty to or been found guilty of
a violation of this Section, or of any offense committed in violation
of any County or Municipal ordinance in any State, any State law,
any Federal law, or any military law which, if committed in this
State, would be chargeable or indictable as a violation of any
offense listed in this Subsection.
C. This Section shall not apply to activities of Federal, State, County, or
Municipal Law Enforcement Officers conducting investigations of
violation of Federal, State, County, or Municipal law.
A. As used in this Section, the following terms shall mean:
COURSE OF CONDUCT — A pattern of conduct composed of two (2)
or more acts, which may include communication by any means, over
a period of time, however short, evidencing a continuity of purpose.
Constitutionally protected activity is not included within the meaning
of course of conduct. Such constitutionally protected activity includes
picketing or other organized protests.
CREDIBLE THREAT — A threat communicated with the intent to cause
the person who is the target of the threat to reasonably fear for his
or her safety, or the safety of his or her family, or household members
or domestic animals or livestock as defined in Section 276.606, RSMo.,
kept at such person's residence or on such person's property. The threat
must be against the life of, or a threat to cause physical injury to,
or the kidnapping of, the person, the person's family, or the person's
household members or domestic animals or livestock as defined in
Section 276.606, RSMo., kept at such person's residence or on such
person's property.
HARASSES — To engage in a course of conduct directed at a specific
person that serves no legitimate purpose, that would cause a
reasonable person under the circumstances to be frightened,
intimidated, or emotionally distressed.
20.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.035
AO:164
Section 210.040. False Imprisonment.21
A person commits the offense of false imprisonment if he/she knowingly
restrains another unlawfully and without consent so as to interfere
substantially with his/her liberty.
Section 210.050. Endangering the Welfare of a Child.22
B. A person commits the offense of stalking if he or she purposely, through
his or her course of conduct, harasses or follows with the intent of
harassing another person.
C. The offense of stalking shall be an ordinance violation unless the person
has previously pleaded guilty to or been found guilty of a violation of
this Section, or of any offense committed in violation of any County or
Municipal ordinance in any State, any State law, any Federal law, or any
military law which, if committed in this State, would be chargeable or
indictable as a violation of any offense listed in this Section.
D. Any Law Enforcement Officer may arrest, without a warrant, any
person he or she has probable cause to believe has violated the
provisions of this Section.
E. This Section shall not apply to activities of Federal, State, County, or
Municipal Law Enforcement Officers conducting investigations of
violation of Federal, State, County, or Municipal law.
A. A person commits the offense of endangering the welfare of a child if:
1. He/she with criminal negligence acts in a manner that creates a
substantial risk to the life, body or health of a child less than
seventeen (17) years old;
2. He/she knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than
seventeen (17) years old to engage in any conduct which causes or
tends to cause the child to come within the provisions of Paragraph
(d) of Subdivision (2) of Subsection (1) or Subdivision (3) of
Subsection (1) of Section 211.031, RSMo.;
3. Being a parent, guardian or other person legally charged with the
care or custody of a child less than seventeen (17) years old, he/she
recklessly fails or refuses to exercise reasonable diligence in the
care or control of such child to prevent him/her from coming within
the provisions of Paragraph (c) of Subdivision (1) of Subsection (1)
or Paragraph (d) of Subdivision (2) of Subsection (1) or Subdivision
(3) of Subsection (1) of Section 211.031, RSMo.;
4. He/she knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than
seventeen (17) years of age to enter into any room, building or
21.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
22.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.035
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.050
AO:165
Section 210.055. Leaving a Child Unattended in a Motor Vehicle.23
other structure which is a public nuisance as defined in Section
195.130, RSMo.; or
5. He/she operates a vehicle in violation of Subdivision (2) or (3) of
Subsection (1) of Section 565.024, RSMo., or Subdivision (4) of
Subsection (1) of Section 565.060, RSMo., or Sections 342.020 or
342.030 of this Code, while a child less than seventeen (17) years
old is present in the vehicle.
B. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to mean the welfare of a child
is endangered for the sole reason that he/she is being provided nonmedical
remedial treatment recognized and permitted under the laws
of this State.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these
prescribed meanings:
COLLISION — The act of a motor vehicle coming into contact with an
object or a person.
INJURY — Physical harm to the body of a person.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any automobile, truck, truck-tractor, or any
motorbus or motor-propelled vehicle not exclusively operated or driven
on fixed rails or tracks.
UNATTENDED — Not accompanied by an individual fourteen (14) years
of age or older.
B. A person commits the offense of leaving a child unattended in a motor
vehicle if such person knowingly leaves a child ten (10) years of age or
less unattended in a motor vehicle and such child injures another
person by causing a motor vehicle collision or by causing the motor
vehicle to injure a pedestrian.
23.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.055
AO:166
ARTICLE III
Offenses Concerning Administration of Justice
Section 210.060. Concealing an Offense.24
Section 210.070. Hindering Prosecution.25
Section 210.080. Refusal to Identify as a Witness.
A person commits the offense of refusal to identify as a witness if, knowing
he/she has witnessed any portion of a crime, or of any other incident
resulting in physical injury or substantial property damage, upon demand
by a Law Enforcement Officer engaged in the performance of his/her official
duties, he/she refuses to report or gives a false report of his/her name and
present address to such officer.
A. A person commits the offense of concealing an offense if:
1. He/she confers or agrees to confer any pecuniary benefit or other
consideration to any person in consideration of that person's
concealing of any offense, refraining from initiating or aiding in the
prosecution of an offense, or withholding any evidence thereof; or
2. He/she accepts or agrees to accept any pecuniary benefit or other
consideration in consideration of his/her concealing any offense,
refraining from initiating or aiding in the prosecution of an offense,
or withholding any evidence thereof.
A. A person commits the offense of hindering prosecution if for the
purpose of preventing the apprehension, prosecution, conviction or
punishment of another for conduct constituting a crime he/she:
1. Harbors or conceals such person;
2. Warns such person of impending discovery or apprehension, except
this does not apply to a warning given in connection with an effort
to bring another into compliance with the law;
3. Provides such person with money, transportation, weapon, disguise
or other means to aid him/her in avoiding discovery or
apprehension; or
4. Prevents or obstructs, by means of force, deception or intimidation,
anyone from performing an act that might aid in the discovery or
apprehension of such person.
24.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
25.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.090
AO:167
Section 210.090. Disturbing a Judicial Proceeding.
A person commits the offense of disturbing a judicial proceeding if, with
purpose to intimidate a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness and thereby
to influence a judicial proceeding, he/she disrupts or disturbs a judicial
proceeding by participating in an assembly and calling aloud, shouting,
or holding or displaying a placard or sign containing written or printed
matter concerning the conduct of the judicial proceeding or the character
of a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness engaged in such proceeding,
or calling for or demanding any specified action or determination by such
judge, attorney, juror, party or witness in connection with such proceeding.
Section 210.100. Tampering With a Witness — Tampering With a
Victim.26
Section 210.105. Tampering With Physical Evidence.
A. A person commits the offense of tampering with a witness if, with
purpose to induce a witness or a prospective witness to disobey a
subpoena or other legal process, or to absent himself/herself or avoid
subpoena or other legal process, or to withhold evidence, information
or documents, or to testify falsely, he/she:
1. Threatens or causes harm to any person or property;
2. Uses force, threats or deception;
3. Offers, confers or agrees to confer any benefit, direct or indirect,
upon such witness; or
4. Conveys any of the foregoing to another in furtherance of a
conspiracy.
B. A person commits the offense of "victim tampering" if, with purpose to
do so, he/she prevents or dissuades or attempts to prevent or dissuade
any person who has been a victim of any crime or a person who is acting
on behalf of any such victim from:
1. Making any report of such victimization to any Peace Officer or
State, local or Federal Law Enforcement Officer or prosecuting
agency or to any judge;
2. Causing a complaint, indictment or information to be sought and
prosecuted or assisting in the prosecution thereof; or
3. Arresting or causing or seeking the arrest of any person in
connection with such victimization.
A. A person commits the offense of tampering with physical evidence if he/
she:
26.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.105
AO:168
Section 210.110. Improper Communication.
A person commits the offense of improper communication if he/she
communicates, directly or indirectly, with any juror, special master, referee
or arbitrator in a judicial proceeding, other than as part of the proceedings
in a case, for the purpose of influencing the official action of such person.
Section 210.120. False Impersonation.
1. Alters, destroys, suppresses or conceals any record, document or
thing with the purpose to impair its verity, legibility or availability
in any official proceeding or investigation; or
2. Makes, presents or uses any record, document or thing knowing it
to be false with purpose to mislead a public servant who is or may
be engaged in any official proceeding or investigation.
A. A person commits the offense of false impersonation if such person:
1. Falsely represents himself/herself to be a public servant with
purpose to induce another to submit to his/her pretended official
authority or to rely upon his/her pretended official acts, and
a. Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b. Causes another to act in reliance upon his/her pretended
official authority.
2. Falsely represents himself/herself to be a person licensed to
practice or engage in any profession for which a license is required
by the laws of this State with purpose to induce another to rely
upon such representation, and
a. Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b. Causes another to act in reliance upon such representation.
3. Upon being arrested, falsely represents himself/herself, to a Law
Enforcement Officer, with the first and last name, date of birth or
Social Security number, or a substantial number of identifying
factors or characteristics as that of another person that results in
the filing of a report or record of arrest or conviction for an
infraction, misdemeanor, ordinance violation or felony that
contains the first and last name, date of birth and Social Security
number, or a substantial number of identifying factors or
characteristics to that of such other person as to cause such other
person to be identified as the actual person arrested or convicted.
B. If a violation of Subsection (A)(3) hereof is discovered prior to any
conviction of the person actually arrested for an underlying charge,
then the prosecuting attorney, bringing any action on the underlying
charge shall notify the court thereof, and the court shall order the falseidentifying
factors ascribed to the person actually arrested as are
Section
210.105
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.120
AO:169
Section 210.130. False Reports.
Section 210.140. Resisting or Interfering With Arrest, Detention or
Stop.27
contained in the arrest and court records amended to correctly and
accurately identify the defendant and shall expunge the incorrect and
inaccurate identifying factors from the arrest and court records.
C. Any person who is the victim of a false impersonation and whose
identity has been falsely reported in arrest or conviction records may
move for expungement and correction of said records under the
procedures set forth in Section 610.123, RSMo. Upon a showing that a
substantial number of identifying factors of the victim was falsely
ascribed to the person actually arrested or convicted, the court shall
order the false identifying factors ascribed to the person actually
arrested as are contained in the arrest and court records amended to
correctly and accurately identify the defendant and shall expunge the
incorrect and inaccurate factors from the arrest and court records.
A. A person commits the offense of making a false report if he/she
knowingly:
1. Gives false information to any person for the purpose of implicating
another person in a crime or offense;
2. Makes a false report to a Law Enforcement Officer that a crime or
offense has occurred or is about to occur; or
3. Makes a false report or causes a false report to be made to a Law
Enforcement Officer, security officer, Fire Department or other
organization, official or volunteer which deals with emergencies
involving danger to life or property that a fire or other incident
calling for an emergency response has occurred or is about to
occur.
B. It is a defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section that
the actor retracted the false statement or report before the Law
Enforcement Officer or any other person took substantial action in
reliance thereon.
C. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction
under Subsection (B) of this Section.
A. A person commits the offense of resisting or interfering with arrest,
detention or stop if, knowing that a Law Enforcement Officer is making
an arrest or attempting to lawfully detain or stop an individual or
vehicle, or the person reasonably should know that a Law Enforcement
Officer is making an arrest or attempting to lawfully detain or lawfully
27.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.120
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.140
AO:170
Section 210.150. Escape or Attempted Escape From Custody.28
A person commits the offense of escape from custody or attempted escape
from custody if, while being held in custody after arrest for any crime or
offense, he/she escapes or attempts to escape from custody.
Section 210.155. Interference With Legal Process.
stop an individual or vehicle, for the purpose of preventing the officer
from effecting the arrest, stop or detention, the person:
1. Resists the arrest, stop or detention of such person by using or
threatening the use of violence or physical force or by fleeing from
such officer; or
2. Interferes with the arrest, stop or detention of another person by
using or threatening the use of violence, physical force or physical
interference.
B. This Section applies to:
1. Arrests, stops or detentions with or without warrants;
2. Arrests, stops or detentions for any crime, infraction or ordinance
violation; and
3. Arrests for warrants issued by a court or a probation and parole
officer.
C. A person is presumed to be fleeing a vehicle stop if that person
continues to operate a motor vehicle after that person has seen or
should have seen clearly visible emergency lights or has heard or
should have heard an audible signal emanating from the law
enforcement vehicle pursuing that person.
D. It is no defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section
that the Law Enforcement Officer was acting unlawfully in making the
arrest. However, nothing in this Section shall be construed to bar civil
suits for unlawful arrest.
A. A person commits the offense of interference with legal process if,
knowing any person is authorized by law to serve process, for the
purpose of preventing such person from effecting the service of any
process, he/she interferes with or obstructs such person.
B. "Process" includes any writ, summons, subpoena, warrant other than an
arrest warrant, or other process or order of a court.
28.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.155
AO:171

ARTICLE IV
Offenses Concerning Public Safety
Section 210.160. Abandonment of Airtight or Semi-Airtight
Containers.
Section 210.170. Littering. [R.O. 2008 §212.600(D); Ord. No. 5448
§1, 7-29-1996]
Section 210.180. Littering Via Carcasses.
A. A person commits the offense of abandonment of airtight icebox if he/
she abandons, discards or knowingly permits to remain on premises
under his/her control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned
or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half (1½) cubic feet or
more and an opening of fifty (50) square inches or more and which has a
door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable
of securing such door or lid without rendering such equipment
harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches or other
hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein.
B. Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply to an icebox, refrigerator
or other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a
building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman.
C. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue under
Subsection (B) of this Section.
A. A person commits the offense of littering if he/she throws or places or
causes to be thrown or placed any glass, glass bottles, wire, nails, tacks,
hedge, cans, garbage, trash, refuse or rubbish of any kind, nature or
description on the right-of-way of any public road or State highway or
on or in any of the waters in this City or on the banks of any stream or
on any land or water owned, operated or leased by the State, any board,
department, agency or commission thereof or on any land or water
owned, operated or leased by the Federal Government or the City, or on
any private real property owned by another without his/her consent.
B. Presumption Of Responsibility. The operator of a vehicle or vessel shall
be presumed responsible for litter which is thrown, dropped or left from
the vehicle or vessel on Mozingo Park property or waters.
A. If any person or persons shall put any dead animal, carcass or part
thereof, the offal or any other filth into any well, spring, brook, branch,
creek, pond or lake, every person so offending shall, on conviction
thereof, be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
B. If any person shall remove or cause to be removed and placed in or near
any public road or highway, or upon premises not his/her own, or in any
Section
210.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.180
AO:173
Section 210.190. Corrupting or Diverting Water Supply.
Whoever willfully or maliciously poisons, defiles or in any way corrupts the
water of a well, spring, brook or reservoir used for domestic or municipal
purposes, or whoever willfully or maliciously diverts, dams up and holds
back from its natural course and flow any spring, brook or other water
supply for domestic or municipal purposes, after said water supply shall
have once been taken for use by any person or persons, corporation, Town
or City for their use, shall be adjudged guilty of an ordinance violation and
punished by a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the City or County Jail
not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and
shall be liable to the party injured for three (3) times the actual damage
sustained, to be recovered by suit at law.
river, stream or watercourse any dead animal, carcass or part thereof,
or other nuisance to the annoyance of the citizens of this City, or any
of them, every person so offending shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined for every offense not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and if such nuisance be not
removed within three (3) days thereafter, it shall be deemed a second
(2nd) offense against the provisions of this Section.
Section
210.180
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.190
AO:174
ARTICLE V
Offenses Concerning Public Peace
Section 210.200. Peace Disturbance.
Section 210.205. Profane Language in Public. [R.O. 2008 §210.030;
Ord. No. 4944 §1, 12-10-1990]
No person shall speak, utter, shout or yell or use in the presence of others
profane, vulgar or indecent language in a public place or from private
property which is calculated to be heard by others including those on or off
the premises of the private property.
Section 210.207. Disorderly Conduct. [R.O. 2008 §210.140, 210.190;
Ord. No. 4944 §1, 12-10-1990]
A. A person commits the offense of peace disturbance if:
1. He/she unreasonably and knowingly disturbs or alarms another
person or persons by:
a. Loud noise;
b. Offensive language addressed in a face-to-face manner to a
specific individual and uttered under circumstances which are
likely to produce an immediate violent response from a
reasonable recipient;
c. Threatening to commit a felonious act against any person
under circumstances which are likely to cause a reasonable
person to fear that such threat may be carried out;
d. Fighting; or
e. Creating a noxious and offensive odor.
2. He/she is in a public place or on private property of another without
consent and purposely causes inconvenience to another person or
persons by unreasonably and physically obstructing:
a. Vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
b. The free ingress or egress to or from a public or private place.
A. No person shall engage in violent, offensive, or disorderly conduct,
naturally calculated to annoy or disturb others, or use in reference to
and in the presence of any member of the family of another, abusive,
offensive, indecent or profane language intended to or which is
naturally calculated to provoke a breach of the peace.
B. No person shall willfully disturb the peace of any neighborhood or of
any family or of any person by loud and unusual noises or by an
Section
210.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.207
AO:175
Section 210.210. Private Peace Disturbance.
Section 210.215. Liability of Permitting Peace Disturbance or
Disorderly Conduct on Premises. [R.O. 2008 §210.210; Ord. No.
4944 §1, 12-10-1990]
Section 210.220. Peace Disturbance Definitions.
For the purposes of Sections 210.200 and 210.210, the following words shall
have the meanings set out herein:
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any place which at the time is not open to the
public. It includes property which is owned publicly or privately.
PROPERTY OF ANOTHER — Any property in which the actor does not have
a possessory interest.
offensive or indecent conversation or by threatening, quarreling,
challenging or fighting another.
C. No person shall urinate or defecate in any place open to public view.
D. No two (2) or more persons shall, in any public place, voluntarily or by
agreement engage in any fight or use any blows of violence toward each
other, in any angry or quarrelsome manner, or do each other any wilful
mischief. No person shall assault another and strike him/her in any
public place, to the terror or disturbance of others.
A. A person commits the offense of private peace disturbance if he/she is
on private property and unreasonably and purposely causes alarm to
another person or persons on the same premises by:
1. Threatening to commit a crime or offense against any person; or
2. Fighting.
A. No person, group of persons, organization or club shall keep or
maintain any disorderly house or room nor shall any person or persons,
organization or club suffer or permit to assemble in or congregate
about their house or place of business any idle, facetious, drunken or
swearing person making such noises as to disturb the peace of others.
B. This Section shall include, but in no way be limited to, noise created by
the use, operation or permitting the use or operation of any radio,
musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for
producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet or comfort of others.
C. If this Section is violated by an organization, club or group of persons
who own or occupy a common premises, the officers, directors, leader's
organizers, or sponsors of said organization, club or group may in
addition to the organization, club or group collectively be held
individually liable and be found guilty of an ordinance violation.
Section
210.207
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.220
AO:176
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place which at the time is open to the public. It
includes property which is owned publicly or privately.
If a building or structure is divided into separately occupied units, such
units are separate premises.
Section 210.225. Unlawful Assembly.
A person commits the offense of unlawful assembly if he/she knowingly
assembles with six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons
to violate any of the criminal laws of this State or of the United States with
force or violence.
Section 210.230. Rioting.29
A person commits the offense of rioting if he/she knowingly assembles with
six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons to violate any of
the criminal laws of this State or of the United States with force or violence
and thereafter, while still so assembled, does violate any of said laws with
force or violence.
Section 210.235. Refusal to Disperse.
A person commits the offense of refusal to disperse if, being present at the
scene of an unlawful assembly or at the scene of a riot, he/she knowingly
fails or refuses to obey the lawful command of a Law Enforcement Officer
to depart from the scene of such unlawful assembly or riot.
29.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.235
AO:177

ARTICLE VI
Offenses Concerning Weapons and Firearms
Section 210.240. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings set
out herein:
ANTIQUE, CURIO OR RELIC FIREARM — Any firearm so defined by the
National Gun Control Act, 18 U.S.C. Title 26, Section 5845, and the United
States Treasury/Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 27 CFR Section
178.11:
BLACKJACK — Any instrument that is designed or adapted for the purpose
of stunning or inflicting physical injury by striking a person, and which is
readily capable of lethal use.
BLASTING AGENT — Any material or mixture, consisting of fuel and
oxidizer that is intended for blasting, but not otherwise defined as an
explosive under this Section, provided that the finished product, as mixed
for use of shipment, cannot be detonated by means of a numbered 8 test
blasting cap when unconfined.
CONCEALABLE FIREARM — Any firearm with a barrel less than sixteen
(16) inches in length, measured from the face of the bolt or standing breech.
DEFACE — To alter or destroy the manufacturer's or importer's serial
number or any other distinguishing number or identification mark.
DETONATOR — Any device containing a detonating charge that is used for
initiating detonation in an explosive, including but not limited to, electric
blasting caps of instantaneous and delay types, non-electric blasting caps
for use with safety fuse or shock tube and detonating cord delay connectors.
EXPLOSIVE WEAPON — Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb
or similar device designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting death,
serious physical injury or substantial property damage; or any device
designed or adapted for delivering or shooting such a weapon. For the
purposes of this Article, the term "explosive" shall mean any chemical
compound mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to
function by explosion, including but not limited to, dynamite and other high
Antique firearm is any firearm not designed or redesigned for using
rim fire or conventional center fire ignition with fixed ammunition
and manufactured in or before 1898, said ammunition not being
manufactured any longer; this includes any matchlock, wheel lock,
flintlock, percussion cap or similar type ignition system, or replica
thereof.
1.
Curio or relic firearm is any firearm deriving value as a collectible
weapon due to its unique design, ignition system, operation or at least
fifty (50) years old, associated with a historical event, renown
personage or major war.
2.
Section
210.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.240
AO:179
explosives, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses,
squibs, detonating cords, igniter cords, and igniters or blasting agents.
FIREARM — Any weapon that is designed or adapted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosive.
FIREARM SILENCER — Any instrument, attachment or appliance that is
designed or adapted to muffle the noise made by the firing of any firearm.
GAS GUN — Any gas ejection device, weapon, cartridge, container or
contrivance, other than a gas bomb, that is designed or adapted for the
purpose of ejecting any poison gas that will cause death or serious physical
injury, but not any device that ejects a repellant or temporary incapacitating
substance.
INTOXICATED — Substantially impaired mental or physical capacity
resulting from introduction of any substance into the body.
KNIFE — Any dagger, dirk, stiletto, or bladed hand instrument that is
readily capable of inflicting serious physical injury or death by cutting or
stabbing a person. For purposes of this Article, "knife" does not include any
ordinary pocketknife with no blade more than four (4) inches in length.
KNUCKLES — Any instrument that consists of finger rings or guards made
of a hard substance that is designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting
serious physical injury or death by striking a person with a fist enclosed in
the knuckles.
MACHINE GUN — Any firearm that is capable of firing more than one (1)
shot automatically, without manual reloading, by a single function of the
trigger.
PROJECTILE WEAPON — Any bow, crossbow, pellet gun, slingshot or other
weapon that is not a firearm, which is capable of expelling a projectile that
could inflict serious physical injury or death by striking or piercing a person.
RIFLE — Any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder
and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed metallic cartridge to fire a
projectile through a rifled bore by a single function of the trigger.
SHORT BARREL — A barrel length of less than sixteen (16) inches for a rifle
and eighteen (18) inches for a shotgun, both measured from the face of the
bolt or standing breech, or an overall rifle or shotgun length of less than
twenty-six (26) inches.
SHOTGUN — Any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder
and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed shotgun shell to fire a
number of shot or a single projectile through a smooth bore barrel by a
single function of the trigger.
SPRING GUN — Any fused, timed or non-manually controlled trap or device
designed or adapted to set off an explosion for the purpose of inflicting
serious physical injury or death.
SWITCHBLADE KNIFE — Any knife which has a blade that folds or closes
into the handle or sheath, and
Section
210.240
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.240
AO:180
Section 210.250. Weapons — Carrying Concealed — Other Unlawful
Use.30
That opens automatically by pressure applied to a button or other
device located on the handle; or
1.
That opens or releases from the handle or sheath by the force of gravity
or by the application of centrifugal force.
2.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons if he/she
knowingly:
1. Carries concealed upon or about his/her person a knife, a firearm, a
blackjack or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use;
2. Sets a spring gun;
3. Discharges or shoots a firearm within the City limits;*
4. Exhibits, in the presence of one (1) or more persons, any weapon
readily capable of lethal use in an angry or threatening manner;
5. Possesses a firearm or projectile weapon while intoxicated;
6. Openly carries a firearm or any other weapon readily capable of
lethal use within the City limits;
7. Carries a firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, or any other
weapon readily capable of lethal use into any school, onto any
school bus, or onto the premises of any function or activity
sponsored or sanctioned by school officials or the district school
board.
B. Subparagraphs (1), (3), (4), (6) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section
shall not apply to or affect any of the following:
1. All State, County and Municipal Peace Officers who have completed
the training required by the Police Officer Standards and Training
Commission pursuant to Sections 590.030 to 590.050, RSMo., and
possessing the duty and power of arrest for violation of the general
criminal laws of the State or for violation of ordinances of Counties
or Municipalities of the State, whether such officers are on or off
duty, and whether such officers are within or outside of the law
enforcement agency's jurisdiction, or all qualified retired Peace
Officers, as defined in Subsection (10) of Section 571.030, RSMo.,
and who carry the identification defined in Subsection (11) of
Section 571.030, RSMo., or any person summoned by such officers
to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while actually
engaged in assisting such officer;
30.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law. *State
Law Reference — Section 252.243.3, RSMo., limits the discharge of firearms in certain
areas known as Hunting Heritage Protection Areas, which are defined therein.
Section
210.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.250
AO:181
2. Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or
convicted of crime;
3. Members of the Armed Forces or National Guard while performing
their official duty;
4. Those persons vested by Article V, Section 1 of the Constitution of
Missouri with the judicial power of the State and those persons
vested by Article III of the Constitution of the United States with
the judicial power of the United States, the members of the Federal
judiciary;
5. Any person whose bona fide duty is to execute process, civil or
criminal;
6. Any Federal Probation Officer or Federal Flight Deck Officer as
defined under the Federal Flight Deck Officer Program, 49 U.S.C.
Section 44921;
7. Any State Probation or Parole Officer, including supervisors and
members of the Board of Probation and Parole;
8. Any corporate security advisor meeting the definition and fulfilling
the requirements of the regulations established by the Board of
Police Commissioners under Section 84.340, RSMo.; and
9. Any coroner, deputy coroner, medical examiner or assistant
medical examiner.
C. Subparagraphs (1), (5), (6) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section do
not apply when the actor is transporting such weapons in a nonfunctioning
state or in an unloaded state when ammunition is not
readily accessible or when such weapons are not readily accessible.
Subparagraph (1) of Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply to any
person twenty-one (21) years of age or older transporting a concealable
firearm in the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle, so long as
such concealable firearm is otherwise lawfully possessed, nor when the
actor is also in possession of an exposed firearm or projectile weapon
for the lawful pursuit of game, or is in his/her dwelling unit or upon
premises over which the actor has possession, authority or control, or is
traveling in a continuous journey peaceably through this State.
Subparagraph (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply if the
firearm is otherwise lawfully possessed by a person while traversing
school premises for the purposes of transporting a student to or from
school, or possessed by an adult for the purposes of facilitation of a
school-sanctioned firearm-related event.
D. Subparagraphs (1), (6) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section shall not
apply to any person who has a valid concealed carry endorsement
issued pursuant to Sections 571.101 to 571.121, RSMo., or a valid
Section
210.250
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.250
AO:182
Section 210.255. Possession, Manufacture, Transport, Repair, Sale
of Certain Weapons.31
permit or endorsement to carry concealed firearms issued by another
State or political subdivision of another State.
E. Subparagraphs (3), (4), (5), (6) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section
shall not apply to persons who are engaged in a lawful act of defense
pursuant to Section 563.031, RSMo.
F. Nothing in this Section shall make it unlawful for a student to actually
participate in school-sanctioned gun safety courses, student military or
ROTC courses, or other school-sponsored firearm-related events,
provided the student does not carry a firearm or other weapon readily
capable of lethal use into any school, onto any school bus, or onto the
premises of any other function or activity sponsored or sanctioned by
school officials or the district school board.
A. A person commits an offense if such person knowingly possesses,
manufactures, transports, repairs, or sells:
1. An explosive weapon;
2. An explosive, incendiary or poison substance or material with the
purpose to possess, manufacture or sell an explosive weapon;
3. A machine gun;
4. A gas gun;
5. A short-barreled rifle or shotgun;
6. A firearm silencer;
7. A switchblade knife;
8. A bullet or projectile which explodes or detonates upon impact
because of an independent explosive charge after having been shot
from a firearm; or
9. Knuckles.
B. A person does not commit an offense under this Section if his/her
conduct:
1. Was incident to the performance of official duty by the Armed
Forces, National Guard, a governmental law enforcement agency
or a penal institution;
2. Was incident to engaging in a lawful commercial or business
transaction with an organization enumerated in Paragraph (1) of
this Subsection;
31.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.255
AO:183
Section 210.260. Defacing Firearm.
A person commits the offense of defacing a firearm if he/she knowingly
defaces any firearm.
Section 210.270. Unlawful Transfer of Weapons.32
Section 210.275. Possession of Firearm Unlawful for Certain
Persons.33
3. Was incident to using an explosive weapon in a manner reasonably
related to a lawful industrial or commercial enterprise;
4. Was incident to displaying the weapon in a public museum or
exhibition; or
5. Was incident to dealing with the weapon solely as a curio,
ornament, or keepsake, or to using it in a manner reasonably
related to a lawful dramatic performance; but if the weapon is the
type described in Paragraphs (1) or (4) of Subsection (A) of this
Section it must be in such a non-functioning condition that it cannot
readily be made operable. No barreled rifle, short-barreled
shotgun, machine gun, or firearm silencer may be possessed,
manufactured, transported, repaired or sold as a curio, ornament,
or keepsake unless such person is an importer, manufacturer,
dealer, or collector licensed by the Secretary of the Treasury
pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, U.S.C. Title 18, or unless
such firearm is an "antique firearm" as defined in Subsection (3) of
Section 571.080, RSMo., or unless such firearm has been
designated a "collectors item" by the Secretary of the Treasury
pursuant to the U.S.C. Title 26, Section 5845(a).
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful transfer of weapons if he/she:
1. Knowingly sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers a blackjack to
a person less than eighteen (18) years old without the consent of
the child's custodial parent or guardian or recklessly, as defined in
Section 562.016, RSMo., sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers
any firearm to a person less than eighteen (18) years old without
the consent of the child's custodial parent or guardian; provided
that this does not prohibit the delivery of such weapons to any
Peace Officer or member of the Armed Forces or National Guard
while performing his/her official duty; or
2. Recklessly, as defined in Section 562.016, RSMo., sells, leases,
loans, gives away or delivers a firearm or ammunition for a firearm
to a person who is intoxicated.
32.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
33.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.255
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.275
AO:184
Section 210.280. Carrying Concealed Firearms Prohibited —
Penalty for Violation.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of a firearm if such
person knowingly has any firearm in his or her possession and:
1. Such person has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this
State, or of a crime under the laws of any State or of the United
States which, if committed within this State, would be a felony; or
2. Such person is a fugitive from justice, is habitually in an intoxicated
or drugged condition, or is currently adjudged mentally
incompetent.
A. It shall be a violation of this Section, punishable as hereinafter
provided, for any person to carry any concealed firearm into:
1. Any Police, Sheriff or Highway Patrol office or station without the
consent of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer in charge of that
office or station. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises of the office or station shall not be a criminal offense so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises.
2. Within twenty-five (25) feet of any polling place on any election day.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of the polling
place shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not
removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the
premises.
3. The facility of any adult or juvenile detention or correctional
institution, prison or jail. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises of any adult, juvenile detention or correctional institution,
prison or jail shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises.
4. Any courthouse solely occupied by the Circuit, Appellate or
Supreme Court, or any courtrooms, administrative offices, libraries
or other rooms of any such court whether or not such court solely
occupies the building in question. This Subdivision shall also
include, but not be limited to, any juvenile, family, drug or other
court offices, any room or office wherein any of the courts or offices
listed in this Subdivision are temporarily conducting any business
within the jurisdiction of such courts or offices, and such other
locations in such manner as may be specified by Supreme Court
Rule pursuant to Subdivision (6) of this Subsection. Nothing in this
Subdivision shall preclude those persons listed in Subsection (B)(1)
of Section 210.250 while within their jurisdiction and on duty, those
persons listed in Subsections (B)(2) and (3) of Section 210.250, or
such other persons who serve in a law enforcement capacity for a
Section
210.275
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.280
AO:185
court as may be specified by Supreme Court Rule pursuant to
Subdivision (6) of this Subsection from carrying a concealed
firearm within any of the areas described in this Subdivision.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any of the
areas listed in this Subdivision shall not be a criminal offense so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises.
5. Any meeting of the City Council. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle
on the premises shall not be a criminal offense so long as the
firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the
vehicle is on the premises.
6. Any building owned, leased or controlled by the City of Maryville
identified by signs posted at the entrance to the building. This
Subsection shall not apply to any building used for public housing
by private persons, highways or rest areas, firing ranges, and
private dwellings owned, leased, or controlled by the City of
Maryville. Persons violating this Subsection may be denied
entrance to the building, ordered to leave the building and, if
employees of the City, be subjected to disciplinary measures for
violation.
7. Any establishment licensed to dispense intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the premises, which portion is primarily devoted to
that purpose, without the consent of the owner or manager. The
provisions of this Subdivision shall not apply to the licensee of said
establishment. The provisions of this Subdivision shall not apply to
any bona fide restaurant open to the general public having dining
facilities for not less than fifty (50) persons and that receives at
least fifty-one percent (51%) of its gross annual income from the
dining facilities by the sale of food. This Subdivision does not
prohibit the possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of
the establishment and shall not be a criminal offense so long as the
firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the
vehicle is on the premises. Nothing in this Subdivision authorizes
any individual who has been issued a concealed carry endorsement
to possess any firearm while intoxicated.
8. Any area of an airport to which access is controlled by the
inspection of persons and property. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the airport shall not be a violation so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises.
9. Any place where the carrying of a firearm is prohibited by Federal
law.
10. Any higher education institution or elementary or secondary school
facility without the consent of the Governing Body of the higher
education institution or a school official or the district school board.
Section
210.280
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.280
AO:186
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any higher
education institution or elementary or secondary school facility
shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed
from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
11. Any portion of a building used as a child care facility without the
consent of the manager. Nothing in this Subdivision shall prevent
the operator of a child care facility in a family home from owning or
possessing a firearm or a driver's license or non-driver's license
containing a concealed carry endorsement.
12. Any riverboat gambling operation accessible by the public without
the consent of the owner or manager pursuant to rules
promulgated by the Gaming Commission. Possession of a firearm in
a vehicle on the premises of a riverboat gambling operation shall
not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
13. Any gated area of an amusement park. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the amusement park shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
14. Any church or other place of religious worship without the consent
of the minister or person or persons representing the religious
organization that exercises control over the place of religious
worship. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall
not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
15. Any private property whose owner has posted the premises as
being off-limits to concealed firearms by means of one (1) or more
signs displayed in a conspicuous place of a minimum size of eleven
(11) inches by fourteen (14) inches with the writing thereon in
letters of not less than one (1) inch. The owner, business or
commercial lessee, manager of a private business enterprise, or
any other organization, entity or person may prohibit persons
holding a concealed carry endorsement from carrying concealed
firearms on the premises and may prohibit employees, not
authorized by the employer, holding a concealed carry
endorsement from carrying concealed firearms on the property of
the employer. If the building or the premises are open to the public,
the employer of the business enterprise shall post signs on or about
the premises if carrying a concealed firearm is prohibited.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. An
employer may prohibit employees or other persons holding a
concealed carry endorsement from carrying a concealed firearm in
vehicles owned by the employer.
Section
210.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.280
AO:187
Section 210.285. Discharging Air Gun, Etc.
Any person within the limits of this City who shall discharge any BB gun
which expels a projectile by means of a spring, air or any other means,
paintball gun or air gun or shall shoot any pebble, bullet, slug, arrow or
16. Any sports arena or stadium with a seating capacity of five
thousand (5,000) or more. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on
the premises shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises.
17. Any hospital accessible by the public. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of a hospital shall not be a criminal offense
so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or
brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection (A) of this
Section shall be punished as follows:
1. If the violator holds a concealed carry endorsement issued
pursuant to State law, the violator may be subject to denial to the
premises or removal from the premises. If such person refuses to
leave the premises and a Peace Officer is summoned, such person
may be issued a citation for an amount not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the first (1st) offense. If a second (2nd)
citation for a similar violation occurs within a six (6) month period,
such person shall be fined an amount not to exceed two hundred
dollars ($200.00). If a third (3rd) citation for a similar violation is
issued within one (1) year of the first (1st) citation such person
shall be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00). Upon conviction of charges arising from a citation
issued pursuant to this Section, the court shall notify the Sheriff of
the County which issued the certificate of qualification for a
concealed carry endorsement and the Department of Revenue.
2. If the violator does not hold a current valid concealed carry
endorsement issued pursuant to State law, upon conviction of a
charge of violating this Section the defendant shall be punished as
provided in Section 100.120 of this Code of Ordinances.
3. Employees of the City of Maryville may, in addition to any other
punishment hereby, be subject to disciplinary action.
C. It shall be a violation of this Section, punishable by a citation for an
amount not to exceed thirty-five dollars ($35.00), for any person issued
a concealed carry endorsement pursuant to State law to fail to carry the
concealed carry endorsement at all times the person is carrying a
concealed firearm, or to fail to display the concealed carry endorsement
upon the request of any Peace Officer.
Section
210.280
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.285
AO:188
other hard substance by means of a sling, crossbow, rubber band or bow or
any other means shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation.
Section
210.285
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.285
AO:189

ARTICLE VII
Offenses Concerning Property
Section 210.290. Tampering.34
Section 210.300. Property Damage.35
Section 210.305. Barbed Wire Fence. [R.O. 2008 §210.270; Ord. No.
4944 §1, 12-10-1990]
No person shall within the City construct any fence wholly or in part with
what is known as barbed wire, where such fence or any part thereof runs
along any public street or thoroughfare; provided that every person shall
A. A person commits the offense of tampering if he/she:
1. Tampers with property of another for the purpose of causing
substantial inconvenience to that person or to another;
2. Unlawfully rides in or upon another's automobile, airplane,
motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle;
3. Tampers or makes connection with property of a utility; or
4. Tampers with, or causes to be tampered with, any meter or other
property of an electric, gas, steam or water utility, the effect of
which tampering is either:
a. To prevent the proper measuring of electric, gas, steam or
water service; or
b. To permit the diversion of any electric, gas, steam or water
service.
B. In any prosecution under paragraph (4) of Subsection (A), proof that a
meter or any other property of a utility has been tampered with, and the
person or persons accused received the use or direct benefit of the
electric, gas, steam or water service with one (1) or more of the effects
described in paragraph (4) of Subsection (A), shall be sufficient to
support an inference which the trial court may submit to the trier of fact
from which the trier of fact may conclude that there has been a
violation of such subdivision by the person or persons who use or
receive the direct benefit of the electric, gas, steam or water service.
A. A person commits the offense of property damage if:
1. He/she knowingly damages property of another; or
2. He/she damages property for the purpose of defrauding an insurer.
34.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
35.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.305
AO:191
have the right to use said wire in the construction of fences upon alleys not
used as public thoroughfares.
Section 210.310. Claim of Right.
Section 210.315. Obstructing Public Places.
A. A person does not commit an offense by damaging, tampering with,
operating, riding in or upon or making connection with property of
another if he/she does so under a claim of right and has reasonable
grounds to believe he/she has such a right.
B. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of claim of
right.
A. Definition. The following term shall be defined as follows:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the general public has access and
a right of resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose,
but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the
public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store,
shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public
grounds, areas or parks.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or remain idle either alone
or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to:
1. Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending
to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles,
traffic or pedestrians;
2. Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing
which is an obstruction or interference to the free and
uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully
conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such
public street, public highway, public sidewalk, or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted
ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto;
3. Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so
doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of
the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of
the building or premises.
C. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions in this
Section, a Police Officer or any Law Enforcement Officer shall order
that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move
on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall
be guilty of a violation of this Section.
Section
210.305
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.320
AO:192
Section 210.320. Trespass in the First Degree.
Section 210.330. Trespass in the Second Degree.
Section 210.335. Trespass of a School Bus.
A person commits the offense of trespass of a school bus if he/she knowingly
and unlawfully enters any part of or unlawfully operates any school bus.
Section 210.337. Trespassing on School Grounds. [R.O. 2008
§210.250; Ord. No. 4944 §1, 12-10-1990]
No person shall trespass upon the grounds of the Maryville public schools
or on or in the buildings belonging thereto. No person shall loiter on said
grounds or about or in said buildings, nor shall any person cut, mark or
deface any of the buildings or any part thereof belonging to said public
schools. No person shall climb or be on the fire escapes now erected or
hereafter to be erected on said public school buildings unless in case of fire
or when taking part in fire drills.
Section 210.340. Reckless Burning or Exploding.
A person commits the offense of reckless burning or exploding when he/
she knowingly starts a fire or causes an explosion and thereby recklessly
damages or destroys a building or an inhabitable structure of another.
Section 210.350. Negligent Burning or Exploding.
A person commits the offense of negligent burning or exploding when he/
she with criminal negligence causes damage to property of another by fire
or explosion.
A. A person commits the offense of trespass in the first degree if he/she
knowingly enters unlawfully or knowingly remains unlawfully in a
building or inhabitable structure or upon real property.
B. A person does not commit the offense of trespass by entering or
remaining upon real property unless the real property is fenced or
otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or as to
which notice against trespass is given by:
1. Actual communication to the actor; or
2. Posting in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of
intruders.
A. A person commits the offense of trespass in the second degree if he/she
enters unlawfully upon real property of another. This is an offense of
absolute liability.
B. Trespass in the second degree is an infraction.
Section
210.320
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.360
AO:193
Section 210.360. Stealing.36
Section 210.365. Theft of Motor Fuel.
Section 210.370. Receiving Stolen Property.37
A. A person commits the offense of stealing if he/she appropriates
property or services of another with the purpose to deprive him/her
thereof, either without his/her consent or by means of deceit or
coercion.
B. Evidence of the following is admissible in any prosecution pursuant to
this Section on the issue of the requisite knowledge or belief of the
alleged stealer that:
1. He/she failed or refused to pay for property or services of a hotel,
restaurant, inn or boarding house;
2. He/she gave in payment for property or services of a hotel,
restaurant, inn or boarding house a check or negotiable paper on
which payment was refused;
3. He/she left the hotel, restaurant, inn or boarding house with the
intent to not pay for property or services;
4. He/she surreptitiously removed or attempted to remove his/her
baggage from a hotel, inn or boarding house; or
5. He/she, with intent to cheat or defraud a retailer, possesses, uses,
utters, transfers, makes, alters, counterfeits or reproduces a retail
sales receipt, price tag or universal price code label or possesses,
with intent to cheat or defraud, the device that manufactures
fraudulent receipts or universal price code labels.
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle so as to cause it to leave the
premises of an establishment at which motor fuel offered for retail sale
was dispensed into the fuel tank of such motor vehicle unless payment
or authorized charge for motor fuel dispensed has been made.
B. A person found guilty or pleading guilty to stealing pursuant to Section
210.360 for the theft of motor fuel as described in Subsection (A) shall
have his/her driver's license suspended by the court beginning on the
date of the court's order of conviction. The person shall submit all of
his/her operator's and chauffeur's licenses to the court upon conviction
and the court shall forward all such driver's licenses and the order of
suspension of driving privileges to the Department of Revenue for
administration of such order.
36.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
37.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.360
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.370
AO:194
Section 210.373. Financial Exploitation of the Elderly and
Disabled.38
A. A person commits the offense of receiving stolen property if, for the
purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest therein, he/she
receives, retains or disposes of property of another knowing that it has
been stolen or believing that it has been stolen.
B. Evidence of the following is admissible in any criminal prosecution
pursuant to this Section to prove the requisite knowledge or belief of
the alleged receiver that:
1. He/she was found in possession or control of other property stolen
on separate occasions from two (2) or more persons;
2. He/she received other stolen property in another transaction within
the year preceding the transaction charged;
3. He/she acquired the stolen property for a consideration which he/
she knew was far below its reasonable value; or
4. He/she obtained control over stolen property knowing the property
to have been stolen or under such circumstances as would
reasonably induce a person to believe the property was stolen.
A. A person commits the offense of financial exploitation of an elderly or
disabled person if such person knowingly and by deception,
intimidation or force obtains control over the elderly or disabled
person's property with the intent to permanently deprive the elderly or
disabled person of the use, benefit or possession of his/her property
thereby benefiting such person or detrimentally affecting the elderly or
disabled person. Financial exploitation of an elderly or disabled person
is an ordinance violation if the value of the property is less than fifty
dollars ($50.00).
B. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these
prescribed meanings:
DECEPTION — A misrepresentation or concealment of material fact
relating to the terms of a contract or agreement entered into with the
elderly or disabled person or to the existing or pre-existing condition of
any of the property involved in such contract or agreement or the use or
employment of any misrepresentation, false pretense or false promise
in order to induce, encourage or solicit the elderly or disabled person
to enter into a contract or agreement.
"Deception" includes:
Creating or confirming another person's impression which is false
and which the offender does not believe to be true.
1.
38.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.370
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.373
AO:195
Section 210.375. Theft of Trash Services. [R.O. 2008 §210.125; Ord.
No. 5149 §1, 8-9-1993]
DISABLED PERSON — A person with a mental, physical or
developmental disability that substantially impairs the person's ability
to provide adequately for the person's care or protection.
ELDERLY PERSON — A person sixty (60) years of age or older.
INTIMIDATION — A threat of physical or emotional harm to an elderly
or disabled person, or the communication to an elderly or disabled
person that he/she will be deprived of food and nutrition, shelter,
prescribed medication, or medical care and treatment.
Failure to correct a false impression which the offender previously
has created or confirmed.
2.
Preventing another person from acquiring information pertinent to
the disposition of the property involved.
3.
Selling or otherwise transferring or encumbering property, failing
to disclose a lien, adverse claim or other legal impediment to the
enjoyment of the property, whether such impediment is or is not
valid or is or is not a matter of official record.
4.
Promising performance which the offender does not intend to
perform or knows will not be performed. Failure to perform
standing alone is not sufficient evidence to prove that the offender
did not intend to perform.
5.
C. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the remedies
available to the victim pursuant to any State law relating to domestic
violence.
D. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to impose criminal liability on
a person who has made a good faith effort to assist the elderly or
disabled person in the management of his/her property, but through no
fault of his/her own has been unable to provide such assistance.
E. Nothing in this Section shall limit the ability to engage in bona fide
estate planning, to transfer property, and to otherwise seek to reduce
estate and inheritance taxes; provided that such actions do not
adversely impact the standard of living to which the elderly or disabled
person has become accustomed at the time of such actions.
F. It shall not be a defense to financial exploitation of an elderly or
disabled person that the accused reasonably believed that the victim
was not an elderly or disabled person.
A. A person is guilty of the offense of theft of trash services if the
individual:
Section
210.373
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.375
AO:196
Section 210.380. Fraudulent Use of a Credit or Debit Device.39
Section 210.390. Deceptive Business Practice.
1. Obtains or attempts to obtain trash or refuse services by means of
artifice, trick, deception or device without paying all lawful
compensation to the operator of said services; or
2. Assists another person in obtaining or attempting to obtain trash or
refuse services by means of artifice, trick, deception or device
without paying lawful compensation to the operator of such
service; or
3. Obtains or attempts to obtain trash or refuse services by causing
any solid waste, trash, refuse, recyclables or other materials to be
deposited in any container, holder or site for the collection of said
trash, refuse, recyclables or other materials without paying all
lawful compensation to the operator of said service; or
4. Assists another in obtaining trash or refuse services by causing any
solid waste, trash, refuse, recyclables or other materials to be
deposited in any container, holder or site for the collection of said
trash, refuse, recyclables or other materials without paying all
lawful compensation to the operator of said service.
B. The finding of any five (5) separate pieces of documentation, articles or
other evidence directly attributable to or bearing the name or
identification of a specific individual within any container, holder or site
used for the collection of solid waste, trash, refuse or recyclables shall
be prima facie evidence of an intent by that individual to obtain trash or
refuse services without paying all lawful compensation to the operator
of said service.
A. A person commits the offense of fraudulent use of a credit device or
debit device if the person uses a credit device or debit device for the
purpose of obtaining services or property knowing that:
1. The device is stolen, fictitious or forged;
2. The device has been revoked or canceled;
3. For any other reason his/her use of the device is unauthorized; or
4. Uses a credit device or debit device for the purpose of paying
property taxes and knowingly cancels said charges or payment
without just cause. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this Section if a person cancels said charges or payment after
obtaining a property tax receipt to obtain license tags from the
Missouri Department of Revenue.
39.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.375
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.390
AO:197
Section 210.400. Alteration or Removal of Item Numbers With
Intent to Deprive Lawful Owner.40
Section 210.410. Failure to Return Rented Personal Property —
Enforcement Procedure — Penalty — Venue.41
A. A person commits the offense of deceptive business practice if in the
course of engaging in a business, occupation or profession he/she
recklessly:
1. Uses or possesses for use a false weight or measure or any other
device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity;
2. Sells, offers or exposes for sale or delivers less than the
represented quantity of any commodity or service;
3. Takes or attempts to take more than the represented quantity of
any commodity or service when as buyer he/she furnishes the
weight or measure;
4. Sells, offers or exposes for sale adulterated or mislabeled
commodities; or
5. Makes a false or misleading written statement for the purpose of
obtaining property or credit.
A. A person commits the offense of alteration or removal of item numbers
if he/she with the purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest
therein:
1. Destroys, removes, covers, conceals, alters, defaces or causes to be
destroyed, removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced the
manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing
owner-applied number or mark on any item which bears a serial
number attached by the manufacturer or distinguishing number or
mark applied by the owner of the item for any reason whatsoever;
2. Sells, offers for sale, pawns or uses as security for a loan any item
on which the manufacturer's original serial number or other
distinguishing owner-applied number or mark has been destroyed,
removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced; or
3. Buys, receives as security for a loan or in pawn, or in any manner
receives or has in his/her possession any item on which the
manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing
owner-applied number or mark has been destroyed, removed,
covered, concealed, altered or defaced.
40.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
41.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.390
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.410
AO:198
A. A person commits the offense of failing to return leased or rented
property if, with the intent to deprive the owner thereof, he/she
purposefully fails to return leased or rented personal property to the
place and within the time specified in an agreement in writing providing
for the leasing or renting of such personal property. In addition, any
person who has leased or rented personal property of another, who
conceals the property from the owner or who otherwise sells, pawns,
loans, abandons or gives away the leased or rented property is guilty of
the offense of failing to return leased or rented property. The provisions
of this Section shall apply to all forms of leasing and rental agreements
including, but not limited to, contracts which provide the consumer
options to buy the leased or rented personal property, lease-purchase
agreements and rent-to-own contracts. For the purpose of determining
if a violation of this Section has occurred, leasing contracts which
provide options to buy the merchandise are owned by the owner of the
property until such time as the owner endorses the sale and transfer of
ownership of the leased property to the lessee.
B. It shall be prima facie evidence of the offense of failing to return leased
or rented property when a person who has leased or rented personal
property of another willfully fails to return or make arrangements
acceptable with the lessor to return the personal property to its owner
at the owner's place of business within ten (10) days after proper notice
following the expiration of the lease or rental agreement, except that if
the motor vehicle has not been returned within seventy-two (72) hours
after the expiration of the lease or rental agreement, such failure to
return the motor vehicle shall be prima facie evidence of the intent of
the offense of failing to return leased or rented property. Where the
leased or rented property is a motor vehicle, if the motor vehicle has not
been returned within seventy-two (72) hours after the expiration of the
lease or rental agreement, the lessor may notify the local law
enforcement agency of the failure of the lessee to return such motor
vehicle, and the local law enforcement agency shall cause such motor
vehicle to be put into any appropriate State and local computer system
listing stolen motor vehicles. Any Law Enforcement Officer which stops
such a motor vehicle may seize the motor vehicle and notify the lessor
that he/she may recover such motor vehicle after it is photographed and
its vehicle identification number is recorded for evidentiary purposes.
Where the leased or rented property is not a motor vehicle, if such
property has not been returned within the ten (10) day period
prescribed in this Subsection, the owner of the property shall report the
failure to return the property to the local law enforcement agency, and
such law enforcement agency may within five (5) days notify the person
who leased or rented the property that such person is in violation of this
Section, and that failure to immediately return the property may
subject such person to arrest for the violation.
C. This Section shall not apply if such personal property is a vehicle and
such return is made more difficult or expensive by a defect in such
vehicle which renders such vehicle inoperable if the lessee shall notify
Section
210.410
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.410
AO:199
Section 210.420. Passing Bad Checks.42
the lessor of the location of such vehicle and such defect before the
expiration of the lease or rental agreement or within ten (10) days after
proper notice.
D. Proper notice by the lessor shall consist of a written demand addressed
and mailed by certified or registered mail to the lessee at the address
given at the time of making the lease or rental agreement. The notice
shall contain a statement that the failure to return the property may
subject the lessee to criminal prosecution.
E. Any person who has leased or rented personal property of another who
destroys such property so as to avoid returning it to the owner shall be
guilty of property damage pursuant to Section 210.300 in addition to
being in violation of this Section.
F. Venue shall lie in the County where the personal property was originally
rented or leased.
A. A person commits the offense of passing a bad check when:
1. With purpose to defraud, the person makes, issues or passes a
check or other similar sight order or any other form of presentment
involving the transmission of account information for the payment
of money knowing that it will not be paid by the drawee or that
there is no such drawee; or
2. The person makes, issues or passes a check or other similar sight
order or any other form of presentment involving the transmission
of account information for the payment of money, knowing that
there are insufficient funds in or on deposit with that account for
the payment of such check, sight order or other form of
presentment involving the transmission of account information in
full and all other checks, sight orders or other forms of
presentment involving the transmission of account information
upon such funds then outstanding, or that there is no such account
or no drawee and fails to pay the check or sight order or other form
of presentment involving the transmission of account information
within ten (10) days after receiving actual notice in writing that it
has not been paid because of insufficient funds or credit with the
drawee or because there is no such drawee.
B. As used in Subparagraph (2) of Subsection (A) of this Section, "actual
notice in writing" means notice of the non-payment which is actually
received by the defendant. Such notice may include the service of
summons or warrant upon the defendant for the initiation of the
prosecution of the check or checks which are the subject matter of the
prosecution if the summons or warrant contains information of the ten
42.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.410
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.420
AO:200
Section 210.425. Shoplifting — Detention of Suspect by Merchant
— Liability Presumption.
(10) day period during which the instrument may be paid and that
payment of the instrument within such ten (10) day period will result
in dismissal of the charges. The requirement of notice shall also be
satisfied for written communications which are tendered to the
defendant and which the defendant refuses to accept.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT — Any mercantile place of business
in, at or from which goods, wares and merchandise are sold, offered for
sale or delivered from and sold at retail or wholesale.
MERCHANDISE — All goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale
or displayed by a merchant.
MERCHANT — Any corporation, partnership, association or person
who is engaged in the business of selling goods, wares and merchandise
in a mercantile establishment.
WRONGFUL TAKING — Includes stealing of merchandise or money and
any other wrongful appropriation of merchandise or money.
B. Any merchant, his/her agent or employee, who has reasonable grounds
or probable cause to believe that a person has committed or is
committing a wrongful taking of merchandise or money from a
mercantile establishment, may detain such person in a reasonable
manner and for a reasonable length of time for the purpose of
investigating whether there has been a wrongful taking of such
merchandise or money. Any such reasonable detention shall not
constitute an unlawful arrest or detention, nor shall it render the
merchant, his/her agent or employee criminally or civilly liable to the
person so detained.
C. Any person willfully concealing unpurchased merchandise of any
mercantile establishment, either on the premises or outside the
premises of such establishment, shall be presumed to have so
concealed such merchandise with the intention of committing a
wrongful taking of such merchandise within the meaning of Subsection
(A), and the finding of such unpurchased merchandise concealed upon
the person or among the belongings of such person shall be evidence of
reasonable grounds and probable cause for the detention in a
reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time of such person
by a merchant, his/her agent or employee in order that recovery of such
merchandise may be effected, and any such reasonable detention shall
not be deemed to be unlawful nor render such merchant, his/her agent
or employee criminally or civilly liable.
Section
210.420
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.426
AO:201
Section 210.426. Copper Wire or Cable, Collectors and Dealers to
Keep Register, Information Required — Penalty — Exempt
Transactions.
A. Every purchaser or collector of, or dealer in, junk, scrap metal or any
secondhand property shall keep a register containing a written or
electronic record for each purchase or trade in which each type of
metal subject to the provisions of this Section is obtained for value.
There shall be a separate record for each transaction involving any:
1. Copper, brass or bronze;
2. Aluminum wire, cable, pipe, tubing, bar, ingot, rod, fitting or
fastener; or
3. Material containing copper or aluminum that is knowingly used for
farming purposes as farming is defined in Section 350.010, RSMo.;
whatever may be the condition or length of such metal. The
record shall contain the following data: a copy of the driver's
license or photo identification issued by the State or by the
United States Government or agency thereof to the person
from whom the material is obtained, which shall contain a
current address of the person from whom the material is
obtained and the date, time and place of and a full description
of each such purchase or trade including the quantity by
weight thereof.
B. The records required under this Section shall be maintained for a
minimum of twenty-four (24) months from when such material is
obtained and shall be available for inspection by any Law Enforcement
Officer.
C. Anyone convicted of violating this Section shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation.
D. This Section shall not apply to any of the following transactions:
1. Any transaction for which the total amount paid for all regulated
scrap metal purchased or sold does not exceed fifty dollars
($50.00);
2. Any transaction for which the seller, including a farm or farmer, has
an existing business relationship with the scrap metal dealer and is
known to the scrap metal dealer making the purchase to be an
established business or political subdivision that operates a
business with a fixed location that can be reasonably expected to
generate regulated scrap metal and can be reasonably identified as
such a business; or
3. Any transaction for which the type of metal subject to Subsection
(A) of this Section is a minor part of a larger item, except for
Section
210.426
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.426
AO:202
Section 210.427. Metal Beer Keg, Prohibition on Purchase or
Possession by Scrap Metal Dealer — Violation, Penalty.
Section 210.428. Metal Belonging to Cemeteries, Political
Subdivisions, Electric Cooperatives and Utilities — Scrap Yard Not
to Purchase — Violation, Penalty.
Section 210.429. Scrap Metal Dealers — Payments in Excess of
$500.00 to Be Made by Check — Exceptions.
equipment used in the generation and transmission of electrical
power or telecommunications.
A. No scrap metal dealer shall knowingly purchase or possess a metal beer
keg, whether damaged or undamaged, or any reasonably recognizable
part thereof, on any premises that the dealer uses to buy, sell, store,
shred, melt, cut or otherwise alter scrap metal except when the
purchase is from the brewer or its authorized representative. For
purposes of this Section, "keg" shall have the same meaning as in
Section 311.082, RSMo.
B. Anyone who is found guilty of, or pleads guilty to, violating this Section
shall be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable only by fine.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to preclude a person
violating this Section from also being prosecuted for any applicable
criminal offense.
A. No scrap yard shall purchase any metal that can be identified as
belonging to a public or private cemetery or to a political subdivision or
electrical cooperative, municipal utility or a utility regulated under
Chapter 386 or 393, RSMo., including bleachers, guardrails, signs,
street and traffic lights or signals, and manhole cover or covers,
whether broken or unbroken, from anyone other than the cemetery or
monument owner, political subdivision, electrical cooperative or utility,
or manufacturer of the metal or item described in this Section unless
such person is authorized in writing by the cemetery or monument
owner, political subdivision, electrical cooperative or utility, or
manufacturer to sell the metal.
B. Anyone convicted of violating this Section shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation.
A. Any scrap metal dealer paying out an amount that is five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or more shall make such payment in the form of a
check or shall pay by any method in which a financial institution makes
and retains a record of the transaction.
B. This Section shall not apply to any transaction for which the seller has
an existing business relationship with the scrap metal dealer and is
known to the scrap metal dealer making the purchase to be an
established business or political subdivision that operates a business
Section
210.426
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.429
AO:203
with a fixed location that can be reasonably expected to generate
regulated scrap metal and can be reasonably identified as such a
business.
Section
210.429
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.429
AO:204
ARTICLE VIII
Offenses Concerning Prostitution and Morals
Section 210.430. Article Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:
PATRONIZING PROSTITUTION — A person patronizes prostitution if:
PROSTITUTION — A person commits prostitution if he/she engages or
offers or agrees to engage in sexual conduct with another person in return
for something of value to be received by the person or by a third (3rd)
person.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Occurs when there is:
SOMETHING OF VALUE — Money or property or any token, object or
article exchangeable for money or property.
Section 210.440. Prostitution.43
A person commits the offense of prostitution if the person performs an act
of prostitution.
Section 210.450. Patronizing Prostitution.44
Pursuant to a prior understanding, he/she gives something of value to
another person as compensation for that person or a third (3rd) person
having engaged in sexual conduct with him/her or with another;
1.
He/she gives or agrees to give something of value to another person on
an understanding that in return therefor that person or a third (3rd)
person will engage in sexual conduct with him/her or with another; or
2.
He/she solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual conduct
with him/her or with another, or to secure a third (3rd) person to
engage in sexual conduct with him/her or with another, in return for
something of value.
3.
Sexual intercourse. Any penetration, however slight, of the female sex
organ by the male sex organ, whether or not an emission results.
1.
Deviate sexual intercourse. Any sexual act involving the genitals of one
(1) person and the mouth, hand, tongue or anus of another person.
2.
Sexual contact. Any touching, manual or otherwise, of the anus or
genitals of one (1) person by another done for the purpose of arousing
or gratifying sexual desire of either party.
3.
A. A person commits the offense of patronizing prostitution if he/she
patronizes prostitution.
43.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
44.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.430
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.450
AO:205
Section 210.460. Prostitution and Patronizing Prostitution — Sex of
Parties No Defense, When.
Section 210.465. Prostitution Houses Deemed Public Nuisances.
B. It shall not be an affirmative defense that the defendant believed that
the person he/she patronized for prostitution was eighteen (18) years of
age or older.
A. In any prosecution for prostitution or patronizing a prostitute, the sex of
the two (2) parties or prospective parties to the sexual conduct engaged
in, contemplated or solicited is immaterial, and it is no defense that:
1. Both persons were of the same sex; or
2. The person who received, agreed to receive or solicited something
of value was a male and the person who gave or agreed or offered
to give something of value was a female.
A. Any room, building or other structure regularly used for sexual contact
for pay as defined in Section 210.430 or any unlawful prostitution
activity prohibited by this Article is a public nuisance.
B. The City Prosecuting Attorney may, in addition to all other sanctions,
prosecute a suit in equity to enjoin the nuisance. If the court finds that
the owner of the room, building or structure knew or had reason to
believe that the premises were being used regularly for sexual contact
for pay or unlawful prostitution activity, the court may order that the
premises shall not be occupied or used for such period as the court may
determine, not to exceed one (1) year.
C. All persons, including owners, lessees, officers, agents, inmates or
employees, aiding or facilitating such a nuisance may be made
defendants in any suit to enjoin the nuisance, and they may be enjoined
from engaging in any sexual contact for pay or unlawful prostitution
activity anywhere within the jurisdiction of the court.
D. Appeals shall be allowed from the judgment of the court as in other civil
actions.
Section
210.450
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.465
AO:206
ARTICLE IX
Sexual Offenses
Section 210.470. Article Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
DEVIATE SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any act involving the genitals of one
person and the hand, mouth, tongue, or anus of another person or a sexual
act involving the penetration, however slight, of the male or female sex
organ or the anus by a finger, instrument or object done for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person or for the purpose of
terrorizing the victim.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Sexual intercourse, deviate sexual intercourse or
sexual contact.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Any touching of another person with the genitals or
any touching of the genitals or anus of another person, or the breast of a
female person, or such touching through the clothing, for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying sexual desire of any person.
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any penetration, however slight, of the female
sex organ by the male sex organ, whether or not an emission results.
Section 210.475. Indecent Exposure (Sexual Misconduct).
Section 210.480. Sexual Misconduct.45
A person commits the offense of sexual misconduct in the first degree if
such person purposely subjects another person to sexual contact without
that person's consent.
Section 210.483. Certain Offenders Not to Physically Be Present or
Loiter Within Five Hundred Feet of a Child Care Facility — Violation
— Penalty.
A. A person commits the offense of indecent exposure (sexual misconduct)
if such person:
1. Exposes his/her genitals under circumstances in which he/she
knows that his/her conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm;
2. Has sexual contact in the presence of a third (3rd) person or
persons under circumstances in which he/she knows that such
conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm; or
3. Has sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse in a public
place in the presence of a third (3rd) person.
45.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.470
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.483
AO:207
Section 210.485. Certain Offenders Not to Be Present Within Five
Hundred Feet of School Property, Exception — Permission Required
for Parents or Guardians Who Are Offenders, Procedure.
A. Any person who has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to, or been
convicted of, or been found guilty of:
1. Violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or the
provisions of Subsection (2) of Section 568.020, RSMo., Incest;
Section 568.045, RSMo., Endangering The Welfare Of A Child In
The First Degree; Subsection (2) of Section 568.080, RSMo., Use Of
A Child In A Sexual Performance; Section 568.090, RSMo.,
Promoting A Sexual Performance By A Child; Section 573.023,
RSMo., Sexual Exploitation Of A Minor; Section 573.025, RSMo.,
Promoting Child Pornography In The First Degree; Section
573.035, RSMo., Promoting Child Pornography In The Second
Degree; Section 573.037, RSMo., Possession Of Child Pornography;
or Section 573.040, RSMo., Furnishing Pornographic Material To
Minors; or
2. Any offense in any other State or Foreign Country, or under federal,
tribal or military jurisdiction which, if committed in this State,
would be a violation listed in this Section;
shall not knowingly be physically present in or loiter within five
hundred (500) feet of or to approach, contact, or communicate
with any child under eighteen (18) years of age in any child
care facility building, on the real property comprising any child
care facility when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are
present in the building, on the grounds, or in the conveyance,
unless the offender is a parent, legal guardian, or custodian of
a student present in the building or on the grounds.
B. For purposes of this Section, "child care facility" shall have the same
meaning as such term is defined in Section 210.201, RSMo.
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section is guilty of an
ordinance violation.
A. Any person who has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to, or been
convicted of, or been found guilty of:
1. Violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or the
provisions of Subsection (2) of Section 568.020, RSMo., Incest;
Section 568.045, RSMo., Endangering The Welfare Of A Child In
The First Degree; Subsection (2) of Section 568.080, RSMo., Use Of
A Child In A Sexual Performance; Section 568.090, RSMo.,
Promoting A Sexual Performance By A Child; Section 573.023,
RSMo., Sexual Exploitation Of A Minor; Section 573.025, RSMo.,
Promoting Child Pornography; or Section 573.040, RSMo.,
Furnishing Pornographic Material To Minors; or
Section
210.483
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.485
AO:208
Section 210.487. Halloween, Restrictions on Conduct — Violations.
2. Any offense in any other State or foreign country, or under tribal,
federal or military jurisdiction which, if committed in this State,
would be a violation listed in this Section;
shall not be present in or loiter within five hundred (500)
feet of any school building, on real property comprising any
school, or in any conveyance owned, leased or contracted by
a school to transport students to or from school or a schoolrelated
activity when persons under the age of eighteen (18)
are present in the building, on the grounds or in the
conveyance, unless the offender is a parent, legal guardian or
custodian of a student present in the building and has met the
conditions set forth in Subsection (B) of this Section.
B. No parent, legal guardian or custodian who has pleaded guilty or nolo
contendere to, or been convicted of, or been found guilty of violating
any of the offenses listed in Subsection (A) of this Section shall be
present in any school building, on real property comprising any school,
or in any conveyance owned, leased or contracted by a school to
transport students to or from school or a school-related activity when
persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present in the building, on
the grounds or in the conveyance unless the parent, legal guardian or
custodian has permission to be present from the Superintendent or
School Board or in the case of a private school from the Principal. In the
case of a public school, if permission is granted, the Superintendent or
School Board President must inform the Principal of the school where
the sex offender will be present. Permission may be granted by the
Superintendent, School Board, or in the case of a private school from
the Principal for more than one (1) event at a time, such as a series of
events, however, the parent, legal guardian or custodian must obtain
permission for any other event he/she wishes to attend for which he/she
has not yet had permission granted.
C. Regardless of the person's knowledge of his or her proximity to school
property or a school-related activity, violation of the provisions of this
Section shall be an ordinance violation.
A. Any person required to register as a sexual offender under Sections
589.400 to 589.425, RSMo., shall be required on October thirty-first
(31st) of each year to:
1. Avoid all Halloween-related contact with children;
2. Remain inside his or her residence between the hours of 5:00 P.M.
and 10:30 P.M. unless required to be elsewhere for just cause
including, but not limited to, employment or medical emergencies;
3. Post a sign at his or her residence stating "No candy or treats at
this residence"; and
Section
210.485
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.487
AO:209
4. Leave all outside residential lighting off during the evening hours
after 5:00 P.M.
B. Any person required to register as a sexual offender under Sections
589.400 to 589.425, RSMo., who violates the provisions of Subsection
(A) of this Section shall be guilty of an ordinance violation.
Section
210.487
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.487
AO:210
ARTICLE X
Offenses Concerning Pornography
Section 210.490. Definitions.
When used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set
out herein:
FURNISH — To issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer,
circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or otherwise provide.
MATERIAL — Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture film, videotape or videotape production, or
pictorial representation, or any recording or transcription, or any
mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or stored computer data,
or anything which is or may be used as a means of communication.
"Material" includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates,
stored computer data, and other latent representational objects.
MINOR — Any person under the age of eighteen (18).
NUDITY — The showing of post-pubertal human genitals or pubic area with
less than a fully opaque covering.
OBSCENE — Any material or performance is obscene if, taken as a whole:
PERFORMANCE — Any play, motion picture film, videotape, dance or
exhibition performed before an audience of one (1) or more.
PORNOGRAPHIC FOR MINORS — Any material or performance is
pornographic for minors if the following apply:
PROMOTE — To manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer,
transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or
Applying contemporary community standards, its predominant appeal
is to prurient interest in sex;
1.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find the material depicts or describes sexual conduct in a
patently offensive way; and
2.
A reasonable person would find the material lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
3.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find that the material or performance, taken as a whole, has a
tendency to cater or appeal to a prurient interest of minors;
1.
The material or performance depicts or describes nudity, sexual
conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse in a way which is
patently offensive to the average person applying contemporary adult
community standards with respect to what is suitable for minors; and
2.
The material or performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value for minors.
3.
Section
210.490
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.490
AO:211
advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same, by any means including a
computer.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Actual or simulated, normal or perverted acts of
human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse; sexual intercourse; or
physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, or the breast of a female in an act of apparent sexual stimulation
or gratification; or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or
any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Section 210.500. Promoting Pornography for Minors or Obscenity.46
Section 210.510. Furnishing Pornographic Materials to Minors.
A. A person commits the offense of promoting pornography for minors or
obscenity if he/she:
1. Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any obscene
materials for pecuniary gain;
2. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any obscene
performance for pecuniary gain;
3. Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any material
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain;
4. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain; or
5. Promotes, possesses with the purpose to promote, produces,
presents, directs or participates in any performance that is
pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet
or computer network if the person made the matter available to a
specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor.
A. A person commits the offense of furnishing pornographic material to
minors if he/she:
1. Furnishes any material pornographic for minors knowing that the
person to whom it is furnished is a minor or acting in reckless
disregard of the likelihood that such person is a minor;
2. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors that is furnished to a minor knowing that
any person viewing such performance is a minor or acting in
46.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.490
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.510
AO:212
reckless disregard of the likelihood that a minor is viewing the
performance; or
3. Furnishes, produces, presents, directs, participates in any
performance or otherwise makes available material that is
pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet
or computer network if the person made the matter available to a
specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor.
B. It is not an affirmative defense to a prosecution for a violation of this
Section that the person being furnished the pornographic material is a
Peace Officer masquerading as a minor.
C. Furnishing pornographic material to minors or attempting to furnish
pornographic material to minors is an ordinance violation.
Section
210.510
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.510
AO:213

ARTICLE XI
Offenses Concerning Drugs
Section 210.520. Possession of Marijuana.47
Except as authorized by Sections 195.005 to 195.425, RSMo., it is unlawful
for any person to possess or have under his/her control marijuana as defined
in Section 195.010, RSMo.
Section 210.530. Possession or Control of a Controlled Substance.48
Except as authorized by Sections 195.005 to 195.425, RSMo., it is unlawful
for any person to possess or have under his/her control a controlled
substance as defined by Section 195.010, RSMo.
Section 210.535. Limitations on the Retail Sale of
Methamphetamine Precursor Drugs.
Section 210.540. Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia.49
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia as defined by Section 195.010, RSMo., to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
A. The retail sale of methamphetamine precursor drugs shall be limited to:
1. Sales in packages containing not more than a total of three (3)
grams of one (1) or more methamphetamine precursor drugs
calculated in terms of ephedrine base, pseudoephedrine base and
phenylpropanolamine base; and
2. For non-liquid products, sales in blister packs, each blister
containing not more than two (2) dosage units, or where the use of
blister packs is technically infeasible, sales in unit dose packets or
pouches.
B. Any person holding a retail sales license pursuant to Chapter 144,
RSMo., who knowingly violates Subsection (A) of this Section is guilty of
an ordinance violation.
C. Any person who is considered the general owner or operator of the
outlet where ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine
products are available for sale who violates Subsection (A) of this
Section shall not be penalized pursuant to this Section if such person
documents that an employee training program was in place to provide
the employee with information on the State and Federal regulations
regarding ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine.
47.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
48.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
49.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.520
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.540
AO:215
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance as defined by Section 195.010, RSMo., or an imitation controlled
substance as defined by Section 195.010, RSMo., in violation of Sections
195.005 to 195.425, RSMo.
Section 210.550. Inhalation or Inducing Others to Inhale Solvent
Fumes to Cause Certain Reactions, Prohibited — Exceptions.
No person shall intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any solvent,
particularly toluol, amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite,
pentyl nitrite and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues or induce any other
person to do so for the purpose of causing a condition of, or inducing
symptoms of, intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement,
irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, or dulling of senses
or nervous system, or for the purpose of, in any manner, changing,
distorting or disturbing the audio, visual or mental processes; except that
this Section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical
or dental purposes.
Section 210.560. Inducing, or Possession With Intent to Induce,
Symptoms by Use of Solvents, Prohibited.
A. As used in this Section "alcohol beverage vaporizer" means any device
which, by means of heat, a vibrating element, or any method, is capable
of producing a breathable mixture containing one (1) or more alcoholic
beverages to be dispensed for inhalation into the lungs via the nose or
mouth or both.
B. No person shall intentionally or willfully induce the symptoms of
intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational
behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses
or nervous system, distortion of audio, visual or mental processes by
the use or abuse of any of the following substances:
1. Solvents, particularly toluol;
2. Ethyl alcohol;
3. Amyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
4. Butyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
5. Cyclohexyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
6. Ethyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
7. Pentyl nitrite and its iso-analogues; and
8. Propyl nitrite and its iso-analogues.
C. This Section shall not apply to substances that have been approved by
the United States Food and Drug Administration as therapeutic drug
products or are contained in approved over-the-counter drug products
Section
210.540
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.560
AO:216
Section 210.570. Possession or Purchase of Solvents to Aid Others
in Violations, Prohibited — Violations of Sections 210.550 to
210.560 — Penalty.50
or administered lawfully pursuant to the order of an authorized medical
practitioner.
D. No person shall intentionally possess any solvent, particularly toluol,
amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite, pentyl nitrite
and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues for the purpose of using it in
the manner prohibited by Section 210.550 and this Section.
E. No person shall possess or use an alcoholic beverage vaporizer.
F. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the legal
consumption of intoxicating liquor.
A. No person shall intentionally possess or buy any solvent, particularly
toluol, amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite, pentyl
nitrite and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues for the purpose of
inducing or aiding any other person to violate the provisions of Sections
210.550 and 210.560 hereof.
B. Any person who violates any provision of Sections 210.550 — 210.570 is
guilty of an ordinance violation for the first (1st) violation.
50.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.560
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.570
AO:217

ARTICLE XII
Offenses Concerning Tobacco
Section 210.580. Definitions.
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
DISTRIBUTE — A conveyance to the public by sale, barter, gift or sample.
MINOR — A person under the age of eighteen (18).
PROOF OF AGE — A driver's license or other generally accepted means of
identification that contains a picture of the individual and appears on its
face to be valid.
ROLLING PAPERS — Paper designed, manufactured, marketed or sold for
use primarily as a wrapping or enclosure for tobacco which enables a
person to roll loose tobacco into a smokeable cigarette.
SAMPLE — A tobacco product distributed to members of the general public
at no cost or at nominal cost for product promotional purposes.
SAMPLING — The distribution to members of the general public of tobacco
product samples.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Any substance containing tobacco leaf including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco
or dipping tobacco.
VENDING MACHINE — Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service
device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses tobacco products.
Section 210.590. Unlawful to Sell or Distribute Tobacco Products to
Minors — Vending Machine Requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, provide or distribute tobacco
products to persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
B. All vending machines that dispense tobacco products shall be located
within the unobstructed line of sight and under the direct supervision of
an adult responsible for preventing persons less than eighteen (18)
years of age from purchasing any tobacco product from such machine
or shall be equipped with a lock-out device to prevent the machines
from being operated until the person responsible for monitoring sales
from the machines disables the lock. Such locking device shall be of a
design that prevents it from being left in an unlocked condition and
which will allow only a single sale when activated. A locking device
shall not be required on machines that are located in areas where
persons less than eighteen (18) years of age are not permitted or
prohibited by law. An owner of an establishment whose vending
machine is not in compliance with the provisions of this Subsection
shall be subject to the penalties contained in Subsection (E) of this
Section. A determination of non-compliance may be made by a local law
Section
210.580
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.590
AO:219
enforcement agency or the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco Control.
Nothing in this Section shall apply to a vending machine if located in
a factory, private club or other location not generally accessible to the
general public.
C. No person or entity shall sell, provide or distribute any tobacco product
or rolling papers to any minor or sell any individual cigarettes to any
person in this State. This Subsection shall not apply to the distribution
by family members on property that is not open to the public.
D. Any person, including, but not limited to, a sales clerk, owner or
operator, who violates Subsections (A), (B) or (C) of this Section or
Section 210.620 of this Article shall be penalized as follows:
1. For the first (1st) offense, twenty-five dollars ($25.00);
2. For the second (2nd) offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00); and
3. For a third (3rd) and subsequent offense, two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
E. Any owner of the establishment where tobacco products are available
for sale who violates Subsection (C) of this Section shall not be
penalized pursuant to this Section if such person documents the
following:
1. An in-house or other tobacco compliance employee training
program was in place to provide the employee with information on
the State and Federal regulations regarding tobacco sales to
minors. Such training program must be attended by all employees
who sell tobacco products to the general public;
2. A signed statement by the employee stating that the employee has
been trained and understands the State laws and Federal
regulations regarding the sale of tobacco to minors; and
3. Such in-house or other tobacco compliance training meets the
minimum training criteria, which shall not exceed a total of ninety
(90) minutes in length, established by the Division of Alcohol and
Tobacco Control.
F. The exemption in Subsection (E) of this Section shall not apply to any
person who is considered the general owner or operator of the outlet
where tobacco products are available for sale if:
1. Four (4) or more violations per location of Subsection (C) of this
Section occur within a one (1) year period; or
2. Such person knowingly violates or knowingly allows his/her
employees to violate Subsection (C) of this Section.
G. If a sale is made by an employee of the owner of an establishment in
violation of this Article, the employee shall be guilty of an offense
Section
210.590
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.590
AO:220
Section 210.600. Minors Prohibited From Purchase or Possession of
Tobacco — Misrepresentation of Age.
Section 210.610. Retail Sales Tax License Required for Sale of
Tobacco Products.
No person shall sell cigarettes or tobacco products unless the person has a
retail sales tax license.
established in Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this Section. If a vending
machine is in violation of Section 210.620, the owner of the
establishment shall be guilty of an offense established in Subsections
(C) and (D) of this Section. If a sample is distributed by an employee of
a company conducting the sampling, such employee shall be guilty of
an offense established in Subsections (C) and (D) of this Section.
H. A person cited for selling, providing or distributing any tobacco product
to any individual less than eighteen (18) years of age in violation of
Subsections (A), (B) or (C) of this Section shall conclusively be
presumed to have reasonably relied on proof of age of the purchaser or
recipient, and such person shall not be found guilty of such violation if
such person raises and proves as an affirmative defense that:
1. Such individual presented a driver's license or other governmentissued
photo identification purporting to establish that such
individual was eighteen (18) years of age or older.
I. Any person adversely affected by this Section may file an appeal with
the Administrative Hearing Commission which shall be adjudicated
pursuant to the procedures established in Chapter 621, RSMo.
A. No person less than eighteen (18) years of age shall purchase, attempt
to purchase or possess cigarettes or other tobacco products unless such
person is an employee of a seller of cigarettes or tobacco products and
is in such possession to effect a sale in the course of employment or an
employee of the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco Control for
enforcement purposes pursuant to Subsection (5) of Section 407.934,
RSMo.
B. Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age shall not misrepresent
his/her age to purchase cigarettes or tobacco products.
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be
penalized as follows:
1. For the first (1st) violation, the person is guilty of an infraction and
shall have any cigarettes or tobacco products confiscated;
2. For a second (2nd) violation and any subsequent violations, the
person is guilty of an infraction, shall have any cigarettes or
tobacco products confiscated and shall complete a tobacco
education or smoking cessation program, if available.
Section
210.590
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.620
AO:221
Section 210.620. Required Sign Stating Violation of State Law to
Sell Tobacco to Minors Under Age Eighteen — Display of Sign
Required Where.
Section 210.630. Restrictions on Sales of Individual Packs of
Cigarettes.
Section 210.640. Proof of Age Required, When Defense to Action
for Violation Is Reasonable Reliance on Proof — Liability.
A. The owner of an establishment at which tobacco products or rolling
papers are sold at retail or through vending machines shall cause to be
prominently displayed in a conspicuous place at every display from
which tobacco products are sold and on every vending machine where
tobacco products are purchased a sign that shall:
1. Contain in red lettering at least one-half (½) inch high on a white
background the following:
"IT IS A VIOLATION OF STATE LAW FOR CIGARETTES OR OTHER
TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO BE SOLD OR OTHERWISE PROVIDED
TO ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN OR FOR SUCH
PERSON TO PURCHASE, ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE OR POSSESS
CIGARETTES OR OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS"; and
2. Include a depiction of a pack of cigarettes at least two (2) inches
high defaced by a red diagonal diameter of a surrounding red circle
and the words "Under 18"
A. No person or entity shall sell individual packs of cigarettes or smokeless
tobacco products unless such packs satisfy one (1) of the following
conditions prior to the time of sale:
1. It is sold through a vending machine; or
2. It is displayed behind the checkout counter or it is within the
unobstructed line of sight of the sales clerk or store attendant from
the checkout counter.
A. A person or entity selling tobacco products or rolling papers or
distributing tobacco product samples shall require proof of age from a
prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would
conclude on the basis of appearance that such prospective purchaser or
recipient may be under the age of eighteen (18).
B. The operator's or chauffeur's license issued pursuant to the provisions
of Section 302.177, RSMo., or the operator's or chauffeur's license
issued pursuant to the laws of any State or possession of the United
States to residents of those States or possessions, or an identification
card as provided for in Section 302.181, RSMo., or the identification
card issued by any uniformed service of the United States, or a valid
passport shall be presented by the holder thereof upon request of any
Section
210.620
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.640
AO:222
agent of the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco Control or any owner
or employee of an establishment that sells tobacco for the purpose of
aiding the registrant, agent or employee to determine whether or not
the person is at least eighteen (18) years of age when such person
desires to purchase or possess tobacco products procured from a
registrant. Upon such presentation, the owner or employee of the
establishment shall compare the photograph and physical
characteristics noted on the license, identification card or passport
with the physical characteristics of the person presenting the license,
identification card or passport.
C. Any person who shall, without authorization from the Department of
Revenue, reproduce, alter, modify or misrepresent any chauffeur's
license, motor vehicle operator's license or identification card shall be
deemed guilty of an ordinance violation.
D. Reasonable reliance on proof of age or on the appearance of the
purchaser or recipient shall be a defense to any action for a violation of
Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of Section 210.590 of this Article. No
person shall be liable for more than one (1) violation of Subsections (B)
and (C) of Section 210.590 on any single day.
Section
210.640
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.640
AO:223
Chapter 212
MOZINGO PARK REGULATIONS
Section
210.640
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
210.640
AO:224
ARTICLE I
Regulations — Generally
Section 212.010. Scope. [R.O. 2008 §212.010; Ord. No. 5448 §1,
7-29-1996]
The provisions of this Chapter govern the use and management of the
Mozingo Park.
Section 212.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §212.020; Ord. No. 5448
§1, 7-29-1996]
When used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings. If any words or phrases are not defined by this Chapter,
but are defined in the State laws regulating the use of parks, the State
definition shall apply.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle manufactured and used
exclusively for off-highway use, which is fifty (50) inches or less in width,
with an unladen dry weight of six hundred (600) pounds or less, traveling
on three (3), four (4) or more low pressured tires, with a seat design to be
straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
CLASS OF VESSELS — Those classes as set forth in Chapter 306, RSMo.
DESIGNATED AREAS — Those areas designated by the purpose described
as set forth on the Official Map for Mozingo Park as approved by the City
Council of the City of Maryville, Missouri.
FIREWORKS — Any composition or device for producing a visible, audible,
or both visible and audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation
and that meets the definition of consumer, proximate, or display fireworks
as set forth by 49 CFR Part 171 to end, United States Department of
Transportation hazardous materials regulations, and American
Pyrotechnics Association 87-1 standards.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively on
tracks.
MOZINGO PARK — All land, shoreline and any body of water, including
lakes, ponds, streams or tributaries owned, whether in whole or in part,
or controlled by the City of Maryville, Missouri, and located upon the
real estate adjoining Highway 136 East, also known as the Mozingo Creek
Watershed Project.
PARK — Mozingo Park.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — A class of vessel, which is less than sixteen
(16) feet in length, propelled by machinery which is designed to be operated
by a person sitting, standing or kneeling on the vessel, rather than being
operated by a person sitting or standing inside the vessel.
SKI MIRROR, APPROVED — Ski mirror approved by the Missouri State
Water Patrol defined by the following parameters: three (3) inches in height,
eight (8) inches in length and being convexed (curved outward) in a shape
Section
212.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.020
AO:225
to give one hundred eighty degrees (180°) of vision behind the operator.
However, large flat mirror such as those found on professional ski boats are
also acceptable for skiing operations.
SLOW, NO WAKE ZONE — "Slow, no wake zone" "idle speed" and "no wake
area" are areas in which vessels must operate at idle speed. "Idle speed" is
the slowest speed at which a vessel will move through the water while able
to maintain course. A vessel operating at idle speed creates very little boat
wake.
VESSEL — Every motorboat and every description of motorized watercraft,
and any watercraft more than twelve (12) feet in length which is powered
by sail alone or by a combination of sail and machinery, used or capable of
being used as a means of transportation on water, but not any watercraft
having as the only means of propulsion a paddle or oars.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water carried waste and sewage, whether
treated or untreated.
WATERCRAFT — Any boat or craft, including a vessel, used or capable of
being used as a means of transport on waters.
WATERWAY — Any body of water, lake, pond, stream or waterway owned or
controlled by the City of Maryville at Mozingo Park.
Section 212.030. Park Security Officers. [R.O. 2008 §212.030; Ord.
No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Section 212.040. General Park Provisions. [R.O. 2008 §212.040;
Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
A. Establishment. Park Security Officers shall assist in the control,
management and protection of the Mozingo Park, including park
property, waterways and all wildlife, natural and cultural resources of
the park.
B. General Duties. Park Security Officers shall strive to assure the
convenience and safety of all persons using the Mozingo Park as
permitted by this Chapter.
C. Enforcement. Park Security Officers, in conjunction with Maryville
Public Safety Officers, shall have authority to enforce all regulations set
forth in this Chapter or as otherwise established in the Maryville
Municipal Code.
A. Quiet Hours. Quiet shall be maintained daily at Mozingo Park between
the hours of 10:30 P.M. and 6:00 A.M.
B. Park Closing. The park may be closed to the public entirely or closed for
certain uses for a period of time as directed by the City Council or the
City Manager. Said closing shall be effected by the posting of signs or
other means which notify the public that the park or a portion thereof is
closed to the public. During the period of time when the park or any
Section
212.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.040
AO:226
Section 212.050. Sales and Concessions. [R.O. 2008 §212.050; Ord.
No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Section 212.060. Motor Vehicle Regulations. [R.O. 2008 §212.060;
Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996; Ord. No. 6030 §1, 2-23-1998; Ord. No.
6232 §1, 9-20-1999]
portion or use thereof is closed, no unauthorized person shall enter or
occupy the park contrary to posted notices.
A. Sales And Concessions. Sales and advertisements of merchandise or
other goods for sale or hire in Mozingo Park are prohibited except by
written permission of the City Council of the City of Maryville, or under
licenses as otherwise provided by this Chapter.
B. Display Of Written Permits. Written permits issued pursuant to this
Section for the sale or advertisement of merchandise or other goods for
sale or hire in Mozingo Park shall be displayed conspicuously at all
times.
C. Schedule Of Fees And Charges. Fees and charges shall be in conformity
to the schedule establishing charges for concession items, souvenirs,
rental fees and related charges for the use of City recreational
equipment and for the use of the park facilities at Mozingo Park as
adopted by the City Council. Fees and charges shall remain in effect
until superseded. The provisions of this Section do not apply to fees set
by concession contracts.
A. Operation. Motor vehicles may only be operated only on designated
roadways or in designated parking areas. No person shall operate any
motor vehicle through, around or beyond a restrictive sign,
recognizable barricade, fence, gate or other traffic control barrier
device.
B. All-Terrain Vehicles. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle in
Mozingo Park.
C. Truck Sizes. No person shall operate a truck rated over one and onehalf
(1½) tons in Mozingo Park, unless authorized by the City.
D. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limit on all paved and gravel roads within Mozingo Lake
Park, unless otherwise marked, shall be twenty (20) miles per hour.
2. The speed limit in the RV Park area shall be fifteen (15) miles per
hour.
3. The City Manager is hereby directed to post signs along the roads
in Mozingo Lake Park which specify the miles per hour speed limit.
Section
212.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.070
AO:227
Section 212.070. Parking Regulations. [R.O. 2008 §212.070; Ord.
No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Section 212.080. Vehicle Removal. [R.O. 2008 §212.080; Ord. No.
5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Whenever a Public Safety Officer finds a motor vehicle or trailer parked in
violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, such officer is authorized
to remove such vehicle or require the driver or other person in charge of
the vehicle to do so.
Section 212.090. Firearm/Archery Regulations. [R.O. 2008
§212.090; Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996; Ord. No. 5519 §1,
4-21-1997]
A. Motor Vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave
unattended any motor vehicle except in areas clearly designated for
vehicle parking.
B. Trailers. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended
any motor vehicle with attached trailer, or trailer alone, except in places
clearly designated for trailer parking.
C. Horse Trailer Parking. No person shall park a trailer or other
conveyance designed to transport horses in the designated trail head
parking area without a permit. Permits shall be issued for a definite
time and duration and will not be transferable. Permits must be clearly
displayed on the rear trailer or transport.
D. Handicapped. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave
attended or unattended, a motor vehicle or trailer within an area where
any authorized signs are erected or other markings exist, designating
an area for handicapped parking, unless that person is entitled to, and
that vehicle bears and properly displays a valid, distinguishing license
plate or placard, issued by the State in which the owner is a resident.
A. Firearms and Other Weapons. With the exception of Law Enforcement
Officers, Police Officers and others authorized by law, no person shall
use, carry or possess any longbow, crossbow, sling shot, pistol, revolver,
rifle, shot gun, air gun, spring gun or any other weapon in which the
force used to propel projectiles is gunpowder, compressed air, or
springs or any other instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank
cartridges. However, nothing in this Section shall be construed to
prohibit the lawful hunting of wildlife by persons who have obtained a
valid Mozingo Park hunting permit issued by the Maryville Department
of Public Safety.
B. Skeet Range. This Section shall not prohibit the use of firearms or other
authorized weapons on a skeet range solely on the area designated by
Northwest Missouri State University and in accordance with all rules
and regulations promulgated for the use of said skeet range.
Section
212.070
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.090
AO:228
Section 212.100. Hunting. [R.O. 2008 §212.100; Ord. No. 5448 §1,
7-29-1996; Ord. No. 5520 §1, 4-21-1997; Ord. No. 6485 §1,
7-15-2002; Ord. No. 6873 §§1 — 2, 10-23-2006; Ord. No. 7087 §1,
2-9-2009; Ord. No. 7158 §1, 10-12-2009]
C. Archery Equipment. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the firing of
any crossbow or longbow in designated areas at Mozingo Park and in
accordance with the applicable regulations thereof. However, it shall be
unlawful to possess, shoot, or use any type of archery equipment on any
designated archery range without first purchasing a proper archery
permit from the Maryville Public Safety Department.
D. Shooting Into Park. No person shall discharge a firearm or other
weapon into the park from outside park boundaries.
A. Hunting, under Statewide permits, seasons, methods, and limits, is
permitted in Mozingo Park in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
12 of the Wildlife Code of Missouri except as further restricted below.
1. Hunting is restricted to that area of Mozingo Park as depicted on
the official map, which is attached as Exhibit A, of Ordinance No.
7087 and is on file in the office of the City Clerk. That area is
generally described as the area of Mozingo Park located north of
245th Street on the west side of the lake and north of 230th Street
on the east side of the lake. However, the area of authorized
hunting as depicted on the official map referred to in this Section
shall be controlling.
The following species can be found at Mozingo Park and are
allowed to be hunted during seasons specified by Chapter 12
of the Wildlife Code of Missouri: Waterfowl (with non-toxic
ammunition only), woodcock, dove, rail, snipe, pheasant, quail,
rabbit, squirrel, deer (bow hunting only), turkey (bow hunting
only), bullfrogs and green frogs (only by hand, handnet, atlatl,
gig, snagging, snaring, grabbing, or pole and line).
B. Single-Projectile Firearms Prohibited. Subject to the provisions of
Section 212.090(A), it shall be unlawful for any person to use, carry,
possess or discharge a single-projectile firearm anywhere in Mozingo
Park.
C. Shotguns. Hunters may not use any weapon other than a shotgun or
bow to hunt upon the property at Mozingo Park. It shall be unlawful to
use any single-projectile weapon or single-projectile ammunition at
Mozingo Park.
D. Trapping. It shall be unlawful for any person to set or possess in
Mozingo Park any metal, plastic or wooden traps unless authorized by
the City Manager or his/her designee through a trapping permit. The
applicant shall provide a copy of his/her Missouri trapping license,
photo identification, and must agree to a hold harmless agreement,
Section
212.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.100
AO:229
Section 212.110. Feeding or Baiting of Wildlife — Prohibited. [R.O.
2008 §212.110; Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Section 212.120. Domestic Animal and Horse Regulations. [R.O.
2008 §212.120; Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Section 212.130. Migratory Waterfowl. [R.O. 2008 §212.130; Ord.
No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
releasing the City of any liability. The City reserves the right to limit the
number of permits approved, the time period of trapping and number of
animals trapped. If trapping is authorized, trappers must comply with
Chapter 8 of the Wildlife Code of Missouri.
E. Tree Stands. Portable tree stands may be placed at Mozingo Park only
from (September 1 — January 31). The stands must be identified with
the full name and address of the owner and shall be removed from
Mozingo Park by February first (1st). The use of any item which will
damage the ground, trees or foliage of Mozingo Park is prohibited.
A. No person shall feed or bait any wildlife, including all mammals, birds
(excluding feeding at designated songbird stations), deer, raccoons and
other species of wildlife, which feeding:
1. Results in a threat to the public health, safety or welfare of park
visitors, patrons or employees; or
2. Draws birds or wildlife to an area for any purpose, including
hunting or poaching.
B. Non-Game Fish. Except at designated fish feeding stations, no person
shall feed non-game fish.
A. Domestic Animals. No person shall bring or keep any domestic animal
into Mozingo Park, unless such animal be under the immediate and
direct control of such person and is on a leash not exceeding six (6) feet
in length. This restriction applies to cats, dogs and other domestic
animals.
B. Horseback Riding. No person shall engage in horseback riding in
Mozingo Park, except on designated paths or in designated areas.
C. Livestock. No person shall graze any livestock in or on Mozingo Park.
A. Definition. "Migratory waterfowl" shall be understood to include any
species of birds commonly known as swans, geese, brants, river and sea
ducks, and any other waterfowl falling under the jurisdiction of the
Missouri Conservation Commission or otherwise defined by the
Commission as migratory waterfowl.
Section
212.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.130
AO:230
Section 212.140. Fishing. [R.O. 2008 §212.140; Ord. No. 5448 §1,
7-29-1996; Ord. No. 7087 §1, 2-9-2009; Ord. No. 7158 §1,
10-12-2009]
Section 212.150. Fishing Tournaments. [R.O. 2008 §212.150; Ord.
No. 6058 §§1 — 4, 4-27-1998; Ord. No. 7311 §1, 3-28-2011]
B. Feeding Prohibitions. No person shall feed any migratory waterfowl or
create or allow any condition to exist which results in the congregation
or congestion of migratory waterfowl which:
1. Results in an accumulation of waterfowl feces or droppings;
2. Results in damage of flora, fauna, or private public property;
3. Results in a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Results in a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of migratory
waterfowl.
A. Fish may be taken from Mozingo Park in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter 12 of the Wildlife Code of Missouri.
B. However, fishing from docks reserved for boats is prohibited, and
accessing Mozingo Lake while ice covered is at your own risk.
A. Fishing Tournaments Permitted. Fishing tournaments, in which a group
of persons participate in a competition to catch fish from boats, are
hereby permitted at Mozingo Lake.
B. Tournament Rules And Regulations. The following rules and regulations
shall apply to all groups and persons participating in fishing
tournaments at Mozingo Lake:
1. No more than one (1) fishing tournament per day is permitted at
Mozingo Lake.
2. Fishing tournaments may begin no earlier than thirty (30) minutes
prior to sunrise and must be concluded within eight (8) hours of
starting time.
3. Fishing tournaments must be scheduled in advance through the
office of the City Clerk.
4. All requests for fishing tournaments must be accompanied by the
name of the sponsoring entity and include the name, address and
telephone number of the tournament director.
5. Persons participating in fishing tournaments shall maintain and use
a livewell for the keeping of fish on their boats.
6. Tournament participants shall return to the lake all fish that are
caught.
Section
212.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.150
AO:231
Section 212.160. Natural Terrain Maintained. [R.O. 2008 §212.160;
Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
The natural terrain, plants and animals shall not be disturbed in any way. No
person shall collect, destroy or remove any tree, plant or other vegetation
from the Mozingo Park or its waterways. However, this provision shall not
prohibit the harvesting of mushrooms and berries. Dead, fallen wood may
be collected for use as firewood at park campgrounds and picnic areas.
However, no person shall collect standing timber for use as firewood.
Section 212.170. Swimming Regulations. [R.O. 2008 §212.170; Ord.
No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Section 212.180. Miscellaneous Activities. [R.O. 2008 §212.180;
Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996; Ord. No. 6471 §1, 6-10-2002]
C. Fees. The following fees shall apply for fishing tournaments:
1. A registration fee for each tournament of one hundred dollars
($100.00), such fee to be paid at the time the lake is reserved for
the tournament.
2. Each boat participating in a fishing tournament must display an
appropriate Mozingo Lake access permit sticker.
D. Point Of Access. The staging area and lake access point for all fishing
tournaments shall be at the boat ramp located on the east side of
Mozingo Lake on 245th Street.
A. Swimming. No person shall swim, bathe or wade, nor shall any person
float in or on any non-licensed device in the Mozingo Park, except in
specifically designated areas. No person shall swim from any privately
owned boat, including from any boat which is moored. No person shall
swim in the area of any boat ramp.
B. Designated Beaches. Upon payment of the appropriate fee therefore,
persons may swim at designated Mozingo Park beach areas during the
hours established and subject to the rules promulgated and posted at
beach areas.
C. Diving Or Jumping From Bridge. No person shall dive or jump from any
bridge or natural structure into the Mozingo Lake or any waterway
thereof.
D. Glass Bottles And Cans. No glass containers or cans of any type shall be
possessed on the designated beach or where such prohibition is
designated.
A. Hot Air Balloons. No person shall launch, float or land a hot air balloon
at Mozingo Park, except at a designated site and in accordance with
permits and regulations promulgated by the City Council. The City
Council may authorize such launches as a special event.
Section
212.150
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.180
AO:232
Section 212.190. Other Activities. [R.O. 2008 §212.190; Ord. No.
5448 §1, 7-29-1996; Ord. No. 7087 §1, 2-9-2009; Ord. No. 7158 §1,
10-12-2009]
Operation of motorized vehicles off roadways is prohibited.
Section 212.200. Radio-Controlled Aircraft or Boats. [R.O. 2008
§212.200; Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
B. Ultralight Aircraft. No person shall operate any ultralight aircraft on
any portion of Mozingo Park.
C. Bicycles/Mountain Bikes/All-Terrain Bikes. The operation of bicycles,
mountain bikes and all-terrain bikes is authorized except in area in
which such operation is specifically prohibited and in which said
prohibition is posted. As used in this Section, the term "bike" or
"bicycle" shall not include any motorized bike, any motorized bicycle or
any other motorized means of transportation.
D. Snowmobiles. No person shall operate any snowmobile or other similar
vehicle at Mozingo Park.
A. The following Section shall apply to radio controlled aircraft:
1. Operation of radio-controlled aircraft or boats. No person shall
operate radio-controlled aircraft or boats except in areas
designated for such operation.
2. Display of frequency and channel. Any person operating a radiocontrolled
aircraft within designated areas in Mozingo Park shall
prominently display on the transmitter at all times, frequency flags
and transmitter numbers.
3. Liability insurance required. No person shall operate a radiocontrolled
aircraft or boat on or above park land or waterways
unless said person has liability insurance at least at minimum limits
offered by the Academy of Model Aeronautics to its members, with
regard to the aircraft or minimum limits offered by the American
Powerboat Association to its members, with regard to boats. Any
person holding a current Academy of Model Aeronautics
membership card will be presumed to have met the above
requirement with regard to aircraft. Any person holding a current
American Power Boat Association membership card will be
presumed to have met the above requirement with regard to boats.
4. Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any type of
radio-controlled equipment for the purpose of operating miniature
model airplanes, ground running vehicles, waterborne boats or
vehicles, rockets or any other similar device within the physical
boundary of the Mozingo Park without first purchasing the proper
operating permit.
Section
212.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.200
AO:233
Section 212.210. Airplanes/Hydroplanes. [R.O. 2008 §212.210; Ord.
No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
No person shall land or take off an airplane or hydroplane in Mozingo Park.
Section 212.220. Mozingo Lake Recreation Park Fee Structure.
[R.O. 2008 §212.220; Ord. No. 5521 §1, 4-28-1997; Ord. No. 6078 §1,
6-22-1998; Ord. No. 6272 §1, 4-10-2000; Ord. No. 6470 §1,
6-10-2002; Ord. No. 6743 §§1 — 2, 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 6872 §§1 —
2, 10-23-2006; Ord. No. 6887 §§1 — 2, 12-11-2006; Ord. No. 6920 §1,
7-9-2007; Ord. No. 7349 §1, 8-8-2011; Ord. No. 7397 §§1 — 2,
2-13-2012; Ord. No. 7586 §1, 12-23-2013; Ord. No. 7802 §1,
10-26-2015; Ord. No. 8007A, 9-25-201751]
5. Radio-controlled flying field sound level. No person shall operate
any radio-controlled flying device with a sound level in excess of
ninety-eight (98) decibels on an "A" weighted scale measured from
a distance of fifty (50) or more feet.
A. Camping Fees. The following fees are established for camping at
Mozingo Lake Recreation Park. For the purposes of this Section, peak
season shall be from April 1 through October 31, and off season shall be
from November 1 through March 31 of the following year.
1. RV Camping.
a. Peak season: twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per night.
b. Off season: eighteen dollars ($18.00) per night.
c. Excessive Water Usage. Water usage at the RV camping shall
be designated only for use within the RV unit renting space.
Any additional usage, including but not limited to washing of
vehicles of any kind, sprinklers, slip and slides, etc., shall
require an additional fee of five dollars ($5.00) per RV campsite
per day.
2. Reserved RV Camping. Twenty (20) spaces, being spaces 76 thru
95 of the Mozingo Lake RV Park and thirteen (13) spaces being 301
thru 313 of the Mozingo Lake Equestrian RV Park. Signs shall be
posted at the designated locations denoting reservation
requirements and availability.
a. Peak season: twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per night.
b. Off season: eighteen dollars ($18.00) per night.
c. Reservation Fee: At the time the reservation is made, a onetime
reservation fee of ten ($10.00) shall be paid for each RV
space rented.
51.Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 8007A also changed the title of this Section from “Mozingo Park
Fee Structure” to “Mozingo Lake Recreation Park Fee Structure.”
Section
212.200
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.220
AO:234
d. Reservations. All reservations shall be made no more than one
hundred and eighty (180) days (six (6) months) prior to the first
day of reservation and shall not be accepted beyond the
Tuesday of the same week the reservation is made for.
Camping fees shall be paid at the time reservations are made
and will be non-refundable.
e. Check Out. Check-out time for reserved RV camping is 3:00
P.M. Any vehicle occupying a space beyond 3:00 P.M. shall be
charged another day's fee.
3. Tent Camping — Primitive.
a. Peak season and off season: ten dollars ($10.00) per night per
tent.
b. Group tent camping (youth camp area): two dollars ($2.00) per
night per person.
c. Group tent camping (youth camp area, non-profit
organization): one dollar ($1.00) per night per person.
B. Boat Fees.
1. Permit Sticker, Non-Motor.
a. Daily pass: five dollars ($5.00).
b. Annual pass: thirty-five dollars ($35.00).
2. Permit Sticker Motor.
a. Daily pass: nine dollars ($9.00).
b. Annual pass: forty-five dollars ($45.00).
3. Permit Sticker Display. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a boat or personal watercraft at Mozingo Lake Recreation
Park which does not visibly and conspicuously display a lake use
permit sticker issued by the City of Maryville on the left side hull of
the boat or on the left side windshield.
C. Boat Slips. Boat slips shall be established near the area of the RV
camping site, family cabin site, and tent camping site at Mozingo Lake
Recreation Park. Within each boat dock there shall be established areas
specifically designated as loading zones and other areas designated for
boat slip rental.
1. Free Loading Zones. Any area designated by signage as a loading
zone may be used by an operator of a boat on Mozingo Lake for the
purpose of loading or unloading passengers or cargo for short
periods of time. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any boat to
occupy any loading zone for a continuous period exceeding thirty
(30) minutes. After using the loading zone, any boat shall not make
Section
212.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.220
AO:235
use of the zone for a period of at least thirty (30) minutes before
again using the loading zone. There shall be no charge for the
use of such loading zone, and it shall be occupied on a firstcome,
first-served basis within the parameters of the foregoing
time limitations.
2. Boat Slip Area. Other areas within the boat dock areas shall be
designated as slip rental areas to be used by RV campers and tent
campers upon payment of the requisite fee. A boat slip at the
docking area may be rented on a first-come, first-served basis, but
may be rented only to individuals at the same time the individual is
paying the fee to use the RV park area or tent camping area. The
rental of said boat slips shall be restricted to individuals who are
actually parking an RV in the RV park area or actually camping in
the tent camping area of Mozingo Lake Recreation Park and
additionally are towing a boat for use on Mozingo Lake.
3. Boat Slip Fee. The fee for a boat slip at the boat dock area shall be
eight dollars ($8.00) per day, payable in advance at the time the fee
for the RV park rental or tent camping rental is collected. No boat
slip may be rented continuously either to the same person or for the
same boat for a continuous period of greater than seven (7) days.
4. Rental Period. The fee charged pursuant to this Section shall entitle
the lessee to use the boat slip for a twenty-four (24) hour rental
period commencing at 3:00 P.M. local time on the day for which
rental is sought and ending at 2:59 P.M. the next day. As used in this
Section, the term "day" shall be understood to represent the
twenty-four (24) hour period commencing with the 3:00 P.M. rental
period.
5. Boat Slip Violations. It shall be illegal for any individual to possess,
operate or dock a boat in violation of these regulations, including:
a. Docking a boat at, using or blocking use of the loading zone for
a continuous period of greater than thirty (30) minutes.
b. Docking a boat at a boat slip without having paid the requisite
fee and/or without the boat bearing proof of said payment.
D. Cabin Rental Fees. The following fees and deposits are established for
rental of the cabins at Mozingo Lake Recreation Park. In each
circumstance, the highest rate applicable to the rental date shall apply.
For the purposes of this Section, peak season shall be from April 1
through November 30, and off season shall be from December 1
through March 31 of the following year.
1. Small Family Cabins. Cabins 1, 2, 3 and 6 are considered small
family cabins. Cabins 1, 2, and 3 are one-bedroom and sleep six (6)
persons each. Cabin 6 is one-bedroom and sleeps four (4) persons.
The following rates shall apply to small family cabins:
Section
212.220
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.220
AO:236
a. Peak Season.
(1) Sunday through Thursday rentals: one hundred dollars
($100.00) per night.
(2) Friday, Saturday and holiday rentals: one hundred twenty
dollars ($120.00) per night.
b. Off Season.
(1) Sunday through Thursday rentals: seventy-five dollars
($75.00) per night.
(2) Friday, Saturday and holiday rentals: ninety dollars
($90.00) per night.
2. Medium Family Cabins. Cabin 4 is considered a medium family
cabin. This cabin is two-bedroom and sleeps ten (10) persons. The
following rental rates shall apply to medium family cabins:
a. Peak Season.
(1) Sunday through Thursday rentals: one hundred forty-five
dollars ($145.00) per night.
(2) Friday, Saturday and holiday rentals: one hundred seventy
dollars ($170.00) per night.
b. Off Season.
(1) Sunday through Thursday rentals: one hundred twenty
dollars ($120.00) per night.
(2) Friday, Saturday and holiday rentals: one hundred thirtyfive
dollars ($135.00) per night.
3. Large Family Cabins. Cabins 5 and 7 are considered large family
cabins. These cabins are two-bedroom and sleep twelve (12)
persons. The following rental rates shall apply to large family
cabins:
a. Peak Season.
(1) Sunday through Thursday rentals: one hundred seventy
dollars ($170.00) per night.
(2) Friday, Saturday and holiday rentals: one hundred ninety
dollars ($190.00) per night.
b. Off Season.
(1) Sunday through Thursday rentals: one hundred forty
dollars ($140.00) per night.
Section
212.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.220
AO:237
(2) Friday, Saturday and holiday rentals: one hundred sixty
dollars ($160.00) per night.
4. Extra-Large Family Cabins. Cabin 8 is considered an extra-large
family cabin. This cabin is a three-bedroom and sleeps sixteen (16)
persons. The following rental rates shall apply to the extra-large
family cabin:
a. Peak Season.
(1) Sunday through Thursday rentals: two hundred dollars
($200.00) per night.
(2) Friday, Saturday and holiday rentals: two hundred thirty
dollars ($230.00) per night.
b. Off Season.
(1) Sunday through Thursday rentals: one hundred seventy
dollars ($170.00) per night.
(2) Friday, Saturday and holiday rentals: one hundred ninety
dollars ($190.00) per night.
5. Holiday Rates. The holiday rental rates shall apply during the
period forty-eight (48) hours preceding the holiday until forty-eight
(48) hours after the holiday and shall prevail over any other rates.
For example, if July 4 is the holiday, holiday rate would be charged
for the evenings of July 2 through July 6. Holiday rates shall apply
to the following holidays: Easter Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day and
New Year's Eve. In the event a rental on a holiday period includes
either Friday or Saturday, the weekend rental requirement shall
apply, and both Friday and Saturday night must be rented.
6. Weekly Rates. If a unit is rented for seven (7) or more consecutive
nights, the applicable rental rates for the entire stay shall be
reduced by fifteen percent (15%).
7. Taxes. All applicable taxes shall be applied to the unit rental rates.
8. Reservations. Reservations may be made in advance up to one (1)
year prior to the date of the rental period. The tenant shall execute
such rental agreements and other documents as promulgated by
the City and shall pay all deposits required by this Section and/or
the rental agreement at the time of making said reservation.
9. Deposits.
a. A reservation deposit equal to the total rental cost for the
entire stay shall be paid at the time the reservation is made.
b. At the time the reservation is made, in addition to the
reservation deposit, a cleaning/damage deposit shall be paid in
Section
212.220
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.220
AO:238
the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each cabin
rented.
c. Deposits shall be returned upon the following conditions:
(1) If the reservation is canceled sixty (60) or more days prior
to the first rental date, the entire reservation deposit and
the entire cleaning/damage deposit shall be refunded.
(2) If the reservation is canceled fifty-nine (59) days to fifteen
(15) days prior to the first rental date, a late cancellation
fee of twenty-five percent (25%) of the entire reservation
deposit up to a maximum of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
shall be retained by the City, and the balance of the
reservation deposit shall be refunded. The entire cleaning/
damage deposit shall be refunded.
(3) If the reservation is canceled fourteen (14) or fewer days
prior to the first rental date, the entire reservation deposit
shall be forfeited to the City. The entire cleaning/damage
deposit shall be refunded.
(4) The cleaning/damage deposit shall be returned after
inspection of the unit by the City, if the unit is returned in
satisfactory condition, ordinary wear and tear expected. In
the event damages exist or cleaning is necessary, the
actual costs of repair or cleaning and reasonable labor
costs shall be applied first to the deposit, and any
additional amounts shall be paid by the renter.
10. Return Of Deposit. Any excess deposit shall be returned within
fifteen (15) days of the end of the rental period or termination of
the reservation, whichever is applicable.
11. Weekend/Maximum Rental Periods.
a. Weekend Rental Period. Weekend rentals must include both
Friday and Saturday nights.
b. Maximum Rental Period. The maximum consecutive rental
period shall be fourteen (14) nights.
E. Cabin Rental And Golf Package Fees ("Stay And Play"). Discounted fees
for a combined cabin rental and golf course use are determined
administratively and are subject to multiple factors, including, but not
limited to, market rates, tee times, cabin availability, group size, and
length of stay. All requirements for cabin taxes, reservations, and
deposits are outlined in Section 212.220(D).
F. Golf Fees. The following fees are established for standard golf
operations at Mozingo Lake Recreation Park. Tournament fees and
promotional rates are determined administratively and are subject to
Section
212.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.220
AO:239
multiple factors, including, but not limited to, course availability, group
size, and course staffing levels.
1. Sechrest 18. The following daily green, season pass, and cart pass
fees are hereby established.
Daily Green Fees Fee
9 holes (Monday through Thursday) $16.00
9 holes (Friday through Sunday, holiday) $18.00
18 holes (Monday through Thursday) $25.00
18 holes (Friday through Sunday, holiday) $28.00
Student/senior 9 holes (Monday through
Thursday)
$14.00
Student/senior 18 holes (Monday through
Thursday)
$20.00
Student/senior 9 holes (Friday through
Sunday, holiday)
$16.00
Student/senior 18 holes (Friday through
Sunday, holiday)
$23.00
Cart fees/18 holes $15.00
Cart fees/9 holes $10.00
Season Passes Fee
Single, 5-day (Monday through Friday) $450.00
Single, 7-day (Monday through Sunday) $655.00
Family/couple $850.00
Senior, 5-day (Monday through Friday) $375.00
Senior, 7-day (Monday through Sunday) $575.00
Student $210.00
Spring pass (Jan 1 to April 30) $120.00
Fall pass (Sept 1 to Dec 31) $130.00
Cart Passes Fee
Single, 5-day (Monday through Friday) $370.00
Single, 7-day (Monday through Sunday) $450.00
Couple/family $625.00
Trail fee $300.00
2. Watson 9. The following daily green and season pass fees are
hereby established. No carts are allowed on the Watson 9.
Section
212.220
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.220
AO:240
Daily Green Fees Fee
Adult (Monday through Thursday) $14.00
Adult (Friday through Sunday, holiday) $16.00
Student/senior (Monday through Thursday) $10.00
Student/senior (Friday through Sunday,
holiday)
$12.00
Junior (Monday through Sunday, holiday) $5.00
Season Passes Fee
Adult/senior* $175.00
Student (16+) $165.00
Junior (5-15) $110.00
* Must have Sechrest 18 season pass to purchase
G. Youth Cabin Fees. The following fees are established for youth cabins at
Mozingo Lake Recreation Park:
Youth Cabin Fees
Type Fee Conditions
*Youth cabins 1
through 4
$30.00 per night, per
cabin
Youth/chaperone use
only
*Youth cabin 5 $40.00 per night Youth/chaperone use
only
*Youth cabin 5 for
other uses
$60.00 per night, per
cabin
1. All cabins
referenced in Section
212.220(D) are
occupied for requested
time frame.
2. No youth
organization has
requested usage of the
cabins within one (1)
week prior to family
request.
*Youth cabins 1
through 4 for other
uses
$50.00 per night, per
cabin
1. All cabins
referenced in Section
212.220(D) are
occupied for requested
time frame.
Section
212.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.220
AO:241
Youth Cabin Fees
Type Fee Conditions
2. No youth
organization has
requested usage of the
cabins within one (1)
week prior to family
request.
* Alcohol and smoking prohibited in these areas.
H. Other Fees. The following fees are established for other amenities at
Mozingo Lake Recreation Park:
Park Fees
Type Fee Conditions
Multipurpose building $50.00 first
day/$20.00 following
consecutive days
For use by youth
groups
$200.00 deposit
Multipurpose building $100.00 per day For use by non-profit
organizations. Open to
youth up to 30 days
prior to rental date
$200.00 deposit
Multipurpose building $150.00 per day For use by business or
social gathering. Open
to youth up to 30 days
prior to rental date
$200.00 deposit
Kiwanis shelter house $35.00 full day 8:00 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
$25.00 half day 4:00 P.M. to 10:30 P.M.
Pride lions shelter $35.00 full day 8:00 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
$25.00 half day 4:00 P.M. to 10:30 P.M.
Host lions shelter $75.00 full day 8:00 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
$45.00 half day 4:00 P.M. to 10:30 P.M.
Phillips shelter $75.00 full day 8:00 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
$45.00 half day 4:00 P.M. to 10:30 P.M.
Special event permit $100.00 Events such as dog
tournament, water
skiing tournament, etc.
I. Penalty. Violation of this Section or any provision of any document
referenced herein shall be punishable by a jail term not to exceed
Section
212.220
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.220
AO:242
Section 212.225. (Reserved)52
Section 212.230. Camping. [R.O. 2008 §212.230; Ord. No. 5448 §1,
7-29-1996; Ord. No. 6765 §§1 — 2, 7-11-2005; Ord. No. 7348 §§1 —
2, 8-8-2011; Ord. No. 7354 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2011]
Section 212.235. (Reserved)53
ninety (90) days in jail or by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00), or both such jail term and fine.
A. The following regulations shall apply to camping at Mozingo Park:
1. General. No person shall engage in camping or the overnight use of
the Mozingo Park lands except in areas as shall be designated and
in accordance with the promulgated rules and regulations. Such
rules and regulations shall be posted at park camping areas.
2. Time limit. Camping at one (1) or more campsites at the Mozingo
Park for a period in excess of fourteen (14) consecutive days is
prohibited without written permission from the City Manager or
his/her designee. Written permission is additionally required to
camp at Mozingo Park in excess of fourteen (14) days during any
consecutive thirty-day period.
3. Limit. There shall be no more than two (2) units per campsite.
4. Unattended camps and unattended RV campsite reservation. No
campsite shall be left unattended for more than twenty-four (24)
consecutive hours. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an RV campsite
may only be reserved (unattended) by placing a vehicle directly
upon the campsite. As used in this Subsection, the term "vehicle"
shall be understood to include an automobile, truck, motor vehicle,
bus, recreational vehicle, boat or other similar vehicle. RV
campsites cannot be reserved (unattended) by the placement of
chairs, lawn furniture, blankets, tablecloths or other similar
personal property upon the site.
5. Cleanliness. Campsites must be cleaned daily. The cleaning of fish
or the washing of clothes or dishes at water hydrants is prohibited.
6. Check-out time. RV and primitive campsites must be vacated not
later than 3:00 P.M. on the date the campsite rental period
concludes. [Ord. No. 7361 §1, 9-26-2011]
7. Payment of camping fees. Upon arrival and selecting a camping
site, all campers shall pay camping fees.
52.Editor’s Note: Former Section 212.225, Mozingo Fee Structure — Golf Fees and Park Fees,
adopted and amended R.O. 2008 §212.225; Ord. No. 6875 §1, 11-6-2006; Ord. No. 6888 §1,
12-11-2006; Ord. No. 6943 §§1 — 2, 10-22-2007, was repealed 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 7586
§2.
Section
212.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.240
AO:243
Section 212.240. Shelter House Reservations. [R.O. 2008 §212.240;
Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996; Ord. No. 7356 §1, 8-22-2011]
Section 212.250. Wastewater. [R.O. 2008 §212.250; Ord. No. 5448
§1, 7-29-1996]
No person shall dump wastewater within Mozingo Park.
Section 212.260. Fire Regulations. [R.O. 2008 §212.260; Ord. No.
5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Section 212.270. Fireworks. [R.O. 2008 §212.270; Ord. No. 5448 §1,
7-29-1996]
No person shall use, ignite or possess fireworks of any kind at the Mozingo
Park except when authorized by the City Council of the City of Maryville.
The City Council may authorize the use of fireworks as a special event.
A. Any person making shelter house reservations must be at least twentyone
(21) years of age.
B. The person making the reservation shall be held responsible for the
condition of the shelter house at the end of its use. The person
reserving the shelter house shall also be responsible for the actions of
those persons in his/her party.
C. Payment of reservation fees is due at the time the reservation is made.
If payment in full is not received within five (5) days of the reservation,
the reservation shall be considered void.
D. For cancellation of the reservation within fourteen (14) days of the
reservation date, the rental fee shall not be refunded. For cancellations
made fifteen (15) to thirty (30) days prior to the reservation date, fifty
percent (50%) of the reservation fee will be refunded; thirty-one (31)
days or more, the full amount shall be refunded.
A. Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or maintain any fire at
Mozingo Park except in ovens, stoves, fire rings or other fireplaces
designated for that purpose and placed by the City of Maryville. No
person shall leave a fire unattended, and all fires must be extinguished
after use.
B. Fire Danger. When necessary for public safety, and/or protection of
lands, structures or wildlife, the City Council or City Manager may
prohibit all fires on the Mozingo Park land by the posting of signs to that
effect. During said prohibition, no person shall ignite or maintain any
fire at Mozingo Park.
53.Editor’s Note: Former Section 212.235, Reservations for RV Camping Spaces, was repealed
9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 8007A. See Section 212.220.
Section
212.240
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.280
AO:244
Section 212.280. Watercraft Regulations. [R.O. 2008 §212.280; Ord.
No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996; Ord. No. 6031 §1, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 6472
§1, 6-10-2002]
A. Boating And Watercraft.
1. The use and operation of all boats, motors and watercraft on all
Mozingo Park lakes and waterways shall be in accordance with the
laws of the State of Missouri, the Missouri Watercraft Manual and
such rules and regulations as may be enacted by the Council of the
City of Maryville, Missouri.
Wherever there is a conflict between the requirements of any of the
foregoing, the more restrictive regulation shall apply.
2. It shall be unlawful for any individual to operate any boat or
watercraft on Mozingo Park lakes and waterways unless the boat or
watercraft is validly licensed and marked pursuant to Missouri law.
B. Age Limits.
1. The minimum age for operating a vessel in the State of Missouri is
fourteen (14) years of age. No person under age fourteen (14) years
of age shall operate any vessel unless such person is in the direct,
on-board, visual and audible supervision of a parent, guardian or
other person sixteen (16) years or older. No parent, guardian or
authorized person shall knowingly permit a child under the
minimum age to operate any vessel in violation of this law.
Parents and guardians are legally responsible for the underage
operator and their actions.
2. Effective September 1, 1997, no person shall operate a personal
watercraft unless age fourteen (14) or under the direct "on-board"
supervision of a parent, guardian or other person at least sixteen
(16) years of age.
C. Swimming. Swimming from a boat or watercraft shall be permitted
within the "no-wake zones" of the lake as marked on the map attached
to Ord. No. 6031 as Exhibit "A" and on file in the City offices. Swimming
from a boat or watercraft shall not be permitted at any other location on
Mozingo Lake.
1. All swimmers under the age of twelve (12) years must be
accompanied by the swimmer's parent or guardian or accompanied
by a person at least twenty-one (21) years of age.
2. All swimmers under the age of twelve (12) years must wear an
approved life jacket.
3. Swimming shall be within fifty (50) feet of the watercraft or boat.
Section
212.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.280
AO:245
Section 212.290. Size and Type. [R.O. 2008 §212.290; Ord. No. 5448
§1, 7-29-1996; Ord. No. 6473 §1, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 6744 §§1 — 2,
4-11-2005]
Section 212.300. Sailboats. [R.O. 2008 §212.300; Ord. No. 5448 §1,
7-29-1996]
Sailboats may be sailed within designated areas and in compliance with all
applicable regulations.
Section 212.310. Parasailing. [R.O. 2008 §212.310; Ord. No. 5448
§1, 7-29-1996]
No person shall operate any parasailing equipment or device on any portion
of the Mozingo Park except where authorized, and in accordance with the
permits and regulations promulgated by the City Council. When pulling a
parasail, the operator of the vessel shall have an additional observer on
board to monitor the parasailer.
Section 212.320. Personal Watercraft. [R.O. 2008 §212.320; Ord.
No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Wet bikes, jet boats, jet skis, jet mates, water scooters, surf jets, wave
jammers, wave runners, wet jets, surfjets and hydroskis will be allowed
on the Mozingo Park waterways, between sunrise and sunset on the lake's
4. No swimming off of a boat within one hundred (100) feet of the
fifteenth (15th) golf course green.
D. Direction And Speed. Watercraft channels and "Slow, No Wake Zones"
shall be complied with as designated on the Official Map on file in the
City offices.
A. The following shall apply to the size and types of watercraft permitted
at Mozingo Park:
1. Length of boats permitted. No person shall operate a watercraft in
excess of twenty-eight (28) feet in length.
2. Sound level. The maximum sound level of a watercraft on any
Mozingo Park lake shall not exceed eight-six (86) decibels on an "A"
weighted scale, when measured from a distance of fifty (50) or
more feet from the vessel. The owner must provide proof of the
above upon request by a Park Security Officer or Public Safety
Officer.
3. Speed limit. No person shall operate a boat, jet ski or other similar
item in excess of forty (40) miles per hour from thirty (30) minutes
before sunrise until thirty (30) minutes after sunset. No person
shall operate a boat, jet ski or other similar item in excess of twenty
(20) miles per hour from thirty (30) minutes past sunset until thirty
(30) minutes before sunrise.
Section
212.280
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.320
AO:246
main ski zone where the clearing of trees and hazards has taken place.
Personal watercraft shall follow all rules and regulations set forth for the
operation of sailboards concerning location, flotation devices and wet suits.
Occupancy shall not exceed the manufacturer's specifications.
Section 212.330. Sailboards. [R.O. 2008 §212.330; Ord. No. 5448 §1,
7-29-1996]
Section 212.340. Skiing Regulations. [R.O. 2008 §212.340; Ord. No.
5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
A. No person shall operate a sailboard, windsurfer or other similarly
designed craft on any Mozingo Park lake or waterway except in
designated areas and in accordance with this Section.
1. One occupant. Only one (1) person may occupy the sailboard
during its operation.
2. Flotation devices. The operator of any sailboard, windsurfer or
similarly designed craft must wear at all times while sailboarding, a
Type I, II or III personal flotation device approved by the United
State Coast Guard.
3. Wetsuit. From October first (1st) through May fifteenth (15th), the
operator and any passenger of any sailboard or personal watercraft
must wear a wetsuit designed to protect the trunk, arms and legs.
4. Windsurfing. Windsurfing shall be allowed on the Mozingo Park
waterways without restriction as to location, but shall follow all
rules and regulations for the operation of sailboards concerning
flotation devices and wet suits.
A. Waterskiing. The operating of any vessel being used to tow a person on
water skis or other appropriate device approved for use on Mozingo
Park lakes and waterways must have, in addition to himself/herself, at
least one (1) other person on board seated as to observe the progress of
the person being towed or the vessel must be equipped with an
approved ski mirror. All waterskiing and other approved activity shall
be conducted only from sunrise to sunset.
B. Direction Of Skiing. Both the operator of the towing vessel and the
person or persons being towed will maneuver counter-clockwise so that
the skis or other device of any person will not strike or collide with
another object or person.
C. Waterskiing Conduct. No person will manipulate water skis or other
device in a reckless or negligent manner endangering the life or
property of any other person. No person shall manipulate water skis or
other devices while intoxicated or under the influence of any alcohol,
narcotic drug, barbiturate, marijuana or other controlled substance.
Section
212.320
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.340
AO:247
Section 212.350. Airboats. [R.O. 2008 §212.350; Ord. No. 5448 §1,
7-29-1996]
No person shall operate an airboat or hovercraft at Mozingo Park.
Section 212.360. Scuba Diving. [R.O. 2008 §212.360; Ord. No. 5448
§1, 7-29-1996]
D. Flotation Device For Waterskiing. Any person involved in waterskiing or
other approved similar activity must wear a Type I, II or III approved
personal flotation device approved by the United States Coast Guard.
Ski belts and other inflatables do not qualify as approved personal
flotation devices.
E. Skier Down Flag. A flag indicating a "skier down/person in the water" is
required equipment for towing a skier. This flag is to be displayed any
time a person is in the water (including swimmers) and the engine of
the vessel is running. Displaying of the flag is required from 11:00 A.M.
to sunset, at which time it becomes illegal to ski.
1. Flag requirements. The color of the flag must be either red or
bright orange. The flag must be square in design and measure at
least twelve (12) inches on each side. When displayed, the flag
must be visible for three hundred sixty degrees (360°).
2. Operation near flag. All boat operators in the vicinity of a displayed
ski flag will be required to operate at idol speed if closer than fifty
(50) yards to watercraft displaying the flag.
A. The following Section shall apply to scuba diving at the Mozingo Park:
1. Permission to dive. Any person wishing to scuba dive at Mozingo
Park lakes and waterways must contact the office of the City
Manager at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to their dive and
inform the City Manager as to the time, location, purpose and
number of persons involved in the dive.
2. Area. No person shall scuba dive except in areas designated for
that purpose.
3. Release prior to dive. Parties involved in an approved diving
activity must sign a waiver releasing the City of Maryville and its
employees from all responsibility which results from the diving
activity. Said release shall be executed on a form approved by the
City of Maryville.
4. Diving flag. During all diving operations, an approved diving flag
must be displayed and shall meet the following:
a. Flag specifications. The diving flag shall be a minimum of
twelve (12) inches tall by sixteen (16) inches wide and red in
Section
212.340
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.360
AO:248
Section 212.370. Other Boating and Watercraft Regulations. [R.O.
2008 §212.370; Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Section 212.380. Regattas. [R.O. 2008 §212.380; Ord. No. 5448 §1,
7-29-1996]
All tournaments, regattas, races, parades or exhibitions held on the
Mozingo waterways must be authorized. Authorization for any of these
events can only be made by the Maryville City Council and either the
Missouri State Water Control or the Federal Government. All activities may
be subject to limitations. An application for such an event must be filed at
least fifteen (15) days prior to commencement.
Section 212.390. Personal Flotation Devices. [R.O. 2008 §212.390;
Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
color with a two (2) inch wide white diagonal stripe running
from the top left corner to the lower right corner.
b. Flag visibility. The diving flag must be visible for three hundred
sixty degrees (360°) and stand three (3) feet above the water.
5. Diving location. All diving must be done within a fifty (50) yard
radius of the flag. All boat operators must stay at least fifty (50)
yards away from the diver's flag.
6. Diving restrictions. Diving shall not impede or interfere with the
normal flow of traffic.
A. Loading Restrictions. Watercraft may not be loaded beyond the capacity
or number of persons recommended by the manufacturer. Loading
restrictions shall not be construed to permit the loading of boats in
excess of a maximum safe load for existing weather, operating
conditions or type and condition of the boat.
B. Flotation System. To license a rubber, plastic or other similar
constructed air chamber craft for operation on any Mozingo Park lake,
waterway or creek, such craft shall have at least three (3) separate air
chambers and solid bottoms and transoms.
A. Class 1 And Class 2 Watercraft. No person shall operate or in otherwise
ride as a passenger in any Class 1 or Class 2 watercraft unless such
vessel shall have on board at least one (1) wearable personal flotation
device of Type I, II or III, as approved by the United States Coast Guard,
in serviceable condition and readily accessible for each person on board
said watercraft and for each person being towed by said watercraft who
is not wearing such device, plus one (1) extra approved Type IV
throwable personal flotation device. Ski belts and inflatables do not
qualify as approved personal flotation devices.
B. Class A Watercraft. No person shall operate or otherwise ride as a
passenger in a Class A watercraft unless such boat shall have on board
Section
212.360
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.390
AO:249
Section 212.400. Launching Area. [R.O. 2008 §212.400; Ord. No.
5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
No person shall launch a boat, raft or other watercraft from any area except
the areas designated and maintained by the City of Maryville for such
purpose. All watercraft which are transported by trailer must be launched
from the designated boat ramp area.
Section 212.410. Public Courtesy Dock Time Limits. [R.O. 2008
§212.410; Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
No person shall exceed ten (10) minutes docking time for loading or
unloading passengers or materials within the public docks and ramp areas
within the park lands.
Section 212.420. Lighting. [R.O. 2008 §212.430; Ord. No. 5448 §1,
7-29-1996]
at least one (1) personal flotation device of Type I, II or III, as approved
by the United States Coast Guard, in serviceable condition and readily
accessible for each person on board said watercraft and for each person
being towed by said watercraft who is not wearing said device. Ski belts
and inflatables do not qualify as approved personal flotation devices.
C. Personal Flotation Devices — Children. No person shall operate or
otherwise ride as a passenger in a vessel, sailboat, canoe, kayak, or any
other similar watercraft, containing any person under the age of seven
(7) years, unless each such person under the age of seven (7) years is
wearing a United States Coast Guard approved personal flotation
device. Ski belts and inflatables do not qualify as approved personal
flotation devices.
A. No person shall operate any vessel, canoe or kayak or other watercraft
between sunset and sunrise, unless such watercraft shall exhibit
running lights in the following manner:
1. For the purpose of this Section, vessels shall be divided into four (4)
classes as follows:
a. Class A, less than sixteen (16) feet in length;
b. Class 1, at least sixteen (16) and less than twenty-six (26) feet
in length;
c. Class 2, at least twenty-six (26) and less than forty (40) feet in
length;
d. Class 3, forty (40) feet and over.
2. All vessels shall display from sunset to sunrise the following lights
when under way, and during such time no other lights, continuous
Section
212.390
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.420
AO:250
spotlights or docking lights, or other non-prescribed lights shall be
exhibited:
a. Vessels of classes A and 1:
(1) A bright white light aft to show all around the horizon;
(2) A combined light in the forepart of the vessel and lower
than the white light aft, showing green to starboard and
red to port, so fixed as to throw the light from right ahead
to two points (22½ degrees) abaft the beam on their
respective sides;
b. Vessels of classes 2 and 3:
(1) A bright white light in the forepart of the vessel as near the
stem as practicable, so constructed as to show the
unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of twenty points
(225 degrees) of the compass, so fixed as to throw the light
ten points (112½ degrees) on each side of the vessel;
namely, from right ahead to two points (22½ degrees)
abaft the beam on either side;
(2) A bright white light aft to show all around the horizon and
higher than the white light forward;
(3) On the starboard side a green light so constructed as to
show an unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of ten
points (112½ degrees) of the compass, so fixed as to throw
the light from right ahead to two points (22½ degrees)
abaft the beam on the starboard side; on the port side a
red light so constructed as to show an unbroken light over
an arc of the horizon of ten points (112½ degrees) of the
compass, so fixed as to throw the light from right ahead to
two points (22½ degrees) abaft the beam on the portside.
The side lights shall be fitted with inboard screens so set
as to prevent these lights from being seen across the bow;
c. Vessels of classes A and 1 when propelled by sail alone shall
exhibit the combined light prescribed by this section and a
twelve point (135 degree) white light aft. Vessels of classes 2
and 3, when so propelled, shall exhibit the colored side lights,
suitably screened, prescribed by this section and a twelve point
(135 degree) white light aft;
d. All vessels between the hours of sunset and sunrise that are
not under way, moored at permanent dockage or attached to an
immovable object on shore so that they do not extend more
than fifty feet from the shore shall display one three-hundredsixty-
degree white light visible three hundred sixty degrees
around the horizon;
Section
212.420
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.420
AO:251
Section 212.430. Fire Extinguishers. [R.O. 2008 §212.440; Ord. No.
5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Section 212.440. Sounding Devices. [R.O. 2008 §212.450; Ord. No.
5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
No person shall operate any vessel, sailboat, canoe, kayak or other
watercraft sixteen (16) feet in length or greater unless such watercraft shall
carry on board an operable mouth, hand or power operated sounding device
audible for at least one-half (½) mile.
Section 212.450. Operation of Watercraft. [R.O. 2008 §212.460;
Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
e. Every white light prescribed by this section shall be of such
character as to be visible at a distance of at least two (2) miles.
Every colored light prescribed by this section shall be of such
character as to be visible at a distance of at least one mile. The
word "visible" in this Subsection, when applied to lights, shall
mean visible on a dark night with clear atmosphere;
f. When propelled by sail and machinery every vessel shall carry
the lights required by this section for a motorboat propelled by
machinery only.
3. Non-motorized boats or watercraft operating after sunset must
carry a white light to display when another boat approaches their
vicinity. Watercraft use for sport fishing, powered by trolling motor
and within fifty (50) feet of the shore, it is not required to display
navigational lights unless another vessel approaches within the
immediate vicinity of the watercraft.
A. No person shall operate any vessel unless such vessel shall carry on
board, fire extinguishers approved by the United States Coast Guard for
marine use, as follows:
1. Every Class A and every Class I vessel carrying or using gasoline or
other flammable or toxic fluid shall carry on board one (1) B-1 type
fire extinguisher.
2. Every Class II vessel shall carry one (1) B-1 type fire extinguisher
or two (2) type B-2 fire extinguishers. Any Class II vessel equipped
with a fixed fire extinguishing system in the engine compartment,
such as a Halon system may substitute that system for one (1) type
B-1 fire extinguisher.
A. No person shall:
1. Navigate a watercraft within a designated prohibited area;
2. Operate a watercraft in any manner other than as prescribed or
permitted by regulatory markers;
Section
212.420
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.450
AO:252
Section 212.460. Riding Areas. [R.O. 2008 §212.470; Ord. No. 5448
§1, 7-29-1996]
Section 212.470. Traffic Movement. [R.O. 2008 §212.480; Ord. No.
5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
All watercraft shall stop their craft upon the signal of a Park Security Officer
or Public Safety Officer and shall obey all reasonable signal direction given
by any such Officer in directing the movement of traffic on any portion of
the Mozingo Park lake or waterway.
Section 212.480. Right-of-Way to Emergency Watercraft. [R.O. 2008
§212.490; Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
When any emergency watercraft gives an audible signal by siren or visible
signal, with red or blue emergency lights, the operator of any watercraft
shall immediately stop or position their watercraft in such a manner as to
give the right-of-way to the emergency vehicle.
3. Moor to, damage, tamper, remove or in any way interfere with any
aid to navigation or regulatory marker;
4. Operate any vessel or associated device (i.e., water skis, surfboard
or other waterborne device) in a reckless or negligent manner so as
to endanger life or property;
5. Operate any vessel or watercraft, or manipulate any water skis,
surfboard or other waterborne device while intoxicated or under
the influence of any narcotic drug, barbiturate or marijuana;
6. Operate any vessel or watercraft at a rate of speed so as to
endanger the property of others or the life or limb of themselves or
others; or
7. Operate any motorcraft, vessel or watercraft within one hundred
(100) feet of any dock, pier, occupied anchored boat or buoyed
restricted area at a speed faster than a "SLOW, NO-WAKE" speed.
A. Riding On Bow And Gunwales Prohibited. The operator of any vessel
shall not ride or sit or allow any person to ride or sit on the gunwales
(sides of the vessel), decking over bow or stern, top of any railing or
seat-back, or any area "outside" the passenger area, unless there are
adequate guards or railings to keep that person from falling overboard.
Guards or railings must be at least six (6) inches high (not to exceed
eighteen (18) inches in height) to be considered adequate.
B. Exemption. The vessel operator may allow a person to temporarily
occupy the decking over the bow or stern for the purpose of docking,
mooring or casting off the vessel. Also, vessels propelled only by "sail"
are exempt from the adequate railing regulation.
Section
212.450
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.490
AO:253
Section 212.490. Sewage Disposal. [R.O. 2008 §212.500; Ord. No.
5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
All marine toilets on any boat, operated upon waters of this City or the
State of Missouri, shall be so constructed and operated as to contain all
sewage aboard the boat and not to discharge any sewage into the waters
directly or indirectly. No boat shall be equipped to permit discharge from
or through any marine toilet, or in any other manner, any sewage at any
time into waters of the state, and all sewage when removed from any boat
shall immediately be placed in an approved septic tank, sanitary lagoon or
sewage treatment system. The provisions of Sections 306.250 to 306.290,
RSMo., shall not apply to boats engaged in interstate commerce on the
Missouri and Mississippi Rivers.
Section 212.500. Inspections. [R.O. 2008 §212.520; Ord. No. 5448
§1, 7-29-1996]
Section 212.510. Written Notice of Violation. [R.O. 2008 §212.530;
Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Park Security Officers or Public Safety Officers shall have authority to issue
written notice of violation of any permit holder who fails to comply with the
boating or watercraft regulations of this Chapter. Said officers shall report
the notice of said violation to the City Manager.
Section 212.520. Abandoned Property. [R.O. 2008 §212.540; Ord.
No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Any boat, craft or other property of value found abandoned, adrift or left
unattended in the Mozingo Park may be taken by the City of Maryville.
Section 212.530. Lien for Expenses. [R.O. 2008 §212.550; Ord. No.
5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
The City shall have a lien on such property for all expenses of taking, towing
and storing that property and for all damage caused by that property to the
property of the City or any other person.
Section 212.540. Procedure for Property Disposal. [R.O. 2008
§212.560; Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
If the owner of the property does not claim the property and redeem the
lien within six (6) months of seizure, the property may be disposed of in the
same manner as surplus City property.
A. Authority To Inspect. Any Law Enforcement Officer shall be permitted
to board any boat at the Mozingo Park lake or waterway at any time to
inspect for compliance with boating regulations.
B. Refusal To Permit Inspection. Refusal to permit an inspection pursuant
to this Section shall be a violation of this Chapter.
Section
212.490
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.550
AO:254
Section 212.550. Alcohol Provisions. [R.O. 2008 §212.570; Ord. No.
5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Section 212.560. Boating While Intoxicated. [R.O. 2008 §212.580;
Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996; Ord. No. 6474 §1, 6-10-2002]
No person shall operate any boat or watercraft or manipulate any waterski,
surf board or other waterborne device or vessel while under the influence
of alcohol and/or a controlled substance as defined by State law.
Section 212.570. Careless or Reckless Operation of a Watercraft.
[R.O. 2008 §212.590; Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vessel or watercraft
or manipulate any water skis, surfboard or other waterborne device in a
reckless or careless manner so as to endanger the life or property of any
person, including that of the operator. It is negligent to operate a vessel
within one hundred (100) feet of any dock, pier, buoy, restricted area or
occupied anchored boat in excess of "Slow No-Wake" speed. Operating
speeds for vessels must also be reasonable for the conditions that exist on
the water.
Section 212.580. Artifacts and Items of Antiquity. [R.O. 2008
§212.620; Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
All items of antiquity at the Mozingo Park are protected. No person shall
collect artifacts or items of antiquity from park land, except as approved by
the City Council.
Section 212.590. Removal of Park Patrons. [R.O. 2008 §212.630;
Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
A. Alcoholic Beverage. Alcohol may not be possessed or consumed in
Mozingo Park at the following areas: the swimming/beach area, parking
lots, trails, roadways, the Youth Camp and other designated areas.
B. Mozingo Golf Course. Alcohol at the Mozingo Golf Course or the
Mozingo clubhouse shall be limited to alcohol legally purchased from
said facility.
C. Open Container Provision. No person shall operate any boat, vessel, ski
or watercraft while in possession of an open alcohol container.
D. Removal Of Intoxicated Person. Any person in the state of intoxication
or under the influence of alcohol on Mozingo Park property may be
removed from the park property.
A. A Park Security Officer or Public Safety Officer shall have the authority
to remove any person from the Mozingo Park lakes and waterways for
the following:
1. Severe weather conditions;
Section
212.550
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.590
AO:255
Section 212.600. Expulsion From the Park. [R.O. 2008 §212.640;
Ord. No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
Any person in violation of any law, ordinance or the rules and regulations of
the City of Maryville, or in any other way endangering the safety or property
of others, may be required to immediately leave the park for the day.
Section 212.610. Actions Not to Abate. [R.O. 2008 §212.650; Ord.
No. 5448 §1, 7-29-1996]
This Chapter shall not be construed as abating any action nor pending
under or by virtue of prior existing regulations. Nor shall it be understood
to discontinue, abate, modify or alter any penalty accruing or to accrue, or
as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving
any right of the City of Maryville under any existing Section or provision
or regulation existing at the time of the adoption of this Chapter. Nor shall
this Chapter be construed to vacate or annul any rights obtained by any
person, firm or corporation by lawful action of the City of Maryville, except
as expressly provided for in this Chapter.
Section 212.620. Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §212.660; Ord. No. 5448 §1,
7-29-1996]
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this Chapter.
Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be judged guilty of an ordinance
violation and punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00) or be punished by incarceration for a period not to exceed ninety
(90) days, or by both such fine and incarceration. Each day's violation of, or
failure, refusal, or neglect to comply with any provision of this Chapter shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
2. Other dangerous conditions where personal safety or property is
endangered;
3. Violations of the park regulations as set forth in this Chapter.
Section
212.590
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.620
AO:256
ARTICLE II
Placement and Construction of Monuments and Memorials at
Mozingo Lake Park
Section 212.630. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §212.670; Ord. No. 5570
§1, 8-18-1997]
For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
MEMORIAL — A monument commemorating an event of historical
importance, a historic personage or group of persons or patriotic subjects.
MONUMENT — Any shrine, plaque, ornament, statue, marker, sign,
artwork, flag or other permanent structure to be placed at Mozingo Lake
Park for the purpose of public information or aesthetic enhancement.
Section 212.640. Public May Propose Construction of Monuments
and Memorials at Mozingo Lake Park. [R.O. 2008 §212.680; Ord. No.
5570 §2, 8-18-1997]
Section 212.650. Review Process. [R.O. 2008 §212.690; Ord. No.
5570 §3, 8-18-1997]
All proposals for the construction of monuments or memorials at Mozingo
Lake Park shall be reviewed by the City Manager and the Mozingo Lake
Park Superintendent. Following the review, the City Manager and Mozingo
Lake Park Superintendent shall forward a recommendation to the Council
for a final review and decision.
A. Any person, family, group or organization may propose the construction
of monuments or memorials at Mozingo Lake Park. All such proposals
shall be made to the Council of the City of Maryville, Missouri. All
proposals for monuments or memorials shall be submitted to the office
of the City Clerk and must include the following written information:
1. The name of the person(s) or organization sponsoring the proposal.
2. A photograph or drawing of the proposed structure.
3. The dimensions of the proposed structure.
4. A description of the materials to be used in construction.
5. A time table for beginning and completing the construction.
6. The precise wording of any written tributes or descriptions.
7. A photograph or drawing of any emblem, insignia or token which is
to appear on the proposed structure.
8. The name(s) and address of any contractors or subcontractors used
in the construction.
Section
212.630
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.660
AO:257
Section 212.660. Evaluation Standards. [R.O. 2008 §212.700; Ord.
No. 5570 §4, 8-18-1997]
A. All proposals for the construction of monuments or memorials at
Mozingo Lake Park shall conform to the following standards:
1. Materials and colors. All monuments or materials shall be
constructed of metal or rock, using colors and materials which do
not detract from the aesthetics of the park.
2. Size. All monuments shall be sized to avoid obstruction of view of
other park features. Excluding flagpoles, monuments in excess of
ten (10) feet in height shall be discouraged.
3. Safety features. All monuments and memorials shall be firmly
secured to the ground to prevent unauthorized movement or wind
damage. Monuments and memorials shall be free of sharp edges or
other features which may cause injury. The proposed structure
shall conform to the City's Building Codes and other product safety
Codes.
4. Maintenance features. Monuments and memorials requiring
extensive maintenance shall be discouraged unless funding
arrangements can be made.
5. Message content. Memorials and monuments containing words or
messages shall comply with the following criteria:
a. All words are to be in English and correctly spelled.
Conventional rules of grammar and punctuation shall be
observed.
b. Commercial messages or themes shall not be permitted.
However, nothing in this Article shall be construed as
prohibiting the mention of corporate sponsorship of a
memorial or monument.
c. Partisan political messages shall not be permitted.
d. Language, words, photographs, drawings, symbols, insignia or
tokens deemed by the Council to be obscene, indecent, vulgar
or offensive shall not be permitted.
e. Makers of a historical nature shall be reviewed by the
Nodaway County Historical Society or other appropriate
historical organization for accuracy. Messages containing
historical inaccuracies or making exaggerated claims shall not
be permitted.
6. Themes for monuments and memorials. A monument or memorial
proposed for placement at Mozingo Lake Park shall have as its
central theme one (1) of the following:
Section
212.660
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.660
AO:258
Section 212.670. Exceptions. [R.O. 2008 §212.710; Ord. No. 5570
§5, 8-18-1997]
Section 212.680. Deposit Refund Waiver. [R.O. 2008 §212.715; Ord.
No. 6785 §1, 9-26-2005]
In the event a customer is unable to use a facility at Mozingo Park because
of unanticipated circumstances, including inclement weather, medical
emergency, an act of God or other unique situation, the City Manager or
his/her designee may refund all or such portion of the advance reservation
fee paid by the customer as deemed appropriate in the sole discretion of
the City Manager or his/her designee. Upon authorizing such refund, the
reason for and the amount of the refund shall be appropriately documented
and maintained. The customer shall have the right to appeal the refund
determination to the City Council of the City of Maryville.
a. The creation or development of Mozingo Lake Park.
b. The founding or settlement of Northwest Missouri, Nodaway
County or Maryville.
c. Tributes to the heroic or historically significant deeds of
Nodaway County residents, living or dead.
d. National or State personages or events having significant
historical impact on Northwest Missouri, Nodaway County or
Maryville.
e. Tributes to Nodaway County personages having significant
impact on the history of the nation, the State or the County.
f. Tributes to the public service of Nodaway County
organizations or persons.
g. Patriotic or other tributes to the United States of America or
the State of Missouri.
h. Tributes to veterans of war or members of the armed services,
victims of war or sacrifices made during time of war.
A. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to apply to the placement of
any items at the Mozingo Golf Course, any signs placed by the City of
Maryville or any personal property placed by the City of Maryville or
with the approval of the City of Maryville such as picnic tables, picnic
shelters, etc.
1. Signs, tee markers, benches, flags and similar structures at the
Mozingo Lake Golf Course.
2. Directional or traffic signs placed by the City of Maryville.
3. Picnic tables, picnic shelters and related facilities.
Section
212.660
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.690
AO:259
Section 212.690. Decisions of the City Council to Be Final. [R.O.
2008 §212.720; Ord. No. 5570 §6, 8-18-1997]
The decisions to allow the placement of a monument or a memorial is
within the sole discretion of the Council of the City of Maryville, Missouri.
Nothing in this Article shall grant to an applicant or any individual, group or
entity any cause for action or entitlement to the placement of a monument,
memorial or other marker at Mozingo Lake Park.
Section
212.690
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
212.690
AO:260
Chapter 215
NUISANCES
Section
212.690
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.690
AO:261

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 215.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §215.010; Ord. No. 6601
§§1 — 2, 11-24-2003]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ENCLOSED STRUCTURE — An enclosed structure built according to City
Code, (i.e., garage or shed) in which the contents are not visible to
neighbors, passers-by, those on public sidewalks, streets or alleyways, or
from any adjacent public or private property.
HABITABILITY — Capable of being lived in; suitable for habitation.
JUNK — Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash,
rubber debris, waste, or junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or
parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or non-ferrous
material.
OCCUPANT — Any person who has a legal or equitable interest in a parcel
of real property, other than a fee interest, including a life tenant, lessee,
tenant at will, tenant at sufferance or adverse possessor, as well as a person
in possession or a person who has charge, care or control of the parcel of
real property as the agent or personal representative of the person holding
legal title of a fee interest. Possession, charge, care or control may include
living, sleeping, cooking or eating in the parcel of real property.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, City, County, other political subdivision, authority, State agency
or institution, or Federal agency or institution.
PROHIBITED VEHICLE — Any vehicle described as an abandoned vehicle,
elevated vehicle, junk vehicle or unlicensed vehicle.
RANK GROWTH OF VEGETATION — Thickets or any vegetation which may
emit noxious odors or any vegetation which is seven (7) inches or more in
height. Rank growth of vegetation shall not include trees in excess of six (6)
Has legal title to any parcel of real property, building or structure, or
part thereof, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof;
or
1.
Has charge, care or control of any parcel of real property, building or
structure, or part thereof, as agent or personal representative of the
person having legal title to the building or structure, or part thereof; or
2.
3. Has possession or right to possession under a contract for deed; or
4. Has legal title to a vehicle.
Section
215.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.010
AO:263
feet in height, cultivated or attended trees less than six (6) feet in height or
cultivated or attended plants, bushes or shrubbery.
REASONABLE RESIDENTIAL STORAGE — The open, outdoor storage of
usable building materials in small amounts will not be considered a
nuisance if the open storage is temporary (temporary being not beyond
thirty (30) days after the building/construction permit expires) and the
building materials are to be used for the benefit of the property on which
they are located.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials including,
but not limited to, solid and semisolid waste materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural, governmental and domestic activities,
but does not include hazardous waste as defined in Sections 260.360 to
260.432, RSMo., recovered materials, overburden, rock, tailings, matte,
slag or other waste material resulting from mining, milling or smelting.
TARPAULIN — A piece of opaque material (durable plastic) used for
protecting exposed objects or areas, which must be in good repair (no holes
or rips), of adequate size (in relationship to what is tarped) and secured.
TRAFFIC HAZARD — Any vegetation, plant, bush, shrubbery, tree or any
part thereof growing upon any private or public property so as to obstruct
reasonable and safe view of oncoming and intersecting traffic by motor
vehicle drivers on any street, alley or public drive.
UNSAFE — A state or condition of danger, harm or risk; unsecured from
threat of danger, harm or loss.
UNSANITARY — A state or condition that endangers personal or public
health.
WASTE TIRE — A tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended
purpose because of wear, damage or defect.
WEEDS — Grasses and unattended growths of other plants, bushes and
shrubbery which are seven (7) inches or more in height.
WOODLAND — A large, dense growth of trees, plants and underbrush.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden vegetation and
Christmas trees. The term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with
intact root balls.
Section 215.020. Purpose. [R.O. 2008 §215.020; Ord. No. 6601 §§1
— 2, 11-24-2003]
Unkempt, unsafe, unsanitary and otherwise improperly maintained
properties, structures, sidewalks and easements within the City materially
and adversely affect the use and habitability of nearby property and of
property within the City as a whole. Additionally, such conditions pose
hazards to the public health, safety and welfare. Properties that are
unkempt, unsafe, unsanitary and/or dangerous may materially and
adversely affect the economic well-being of the City. This Chapter, in
accordance with the procedures set out herein, establishes necessary and
Section
215.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
215.020
AO:264
proper procedures to prosecute owners and occupants for nuisances, to
provide for the abatement of such nuisances and other improperly
maintained structures and properties as they are described or found to
exist, to charge the costs of the abatement to the owners and/or occupants
of the property upon which the nuisance and or improper maintenance
exists, as well as the property itself, and to provide for procedures for
permanent prevention of nuisances. This Chapter is an exercise of the City's
Police power and shall be liberally construed.
Section 215.030. Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §215.030; Ord. No. 6601 §§1 —
2, 11-24-2003]
A. Any person, including any owner, occupant or other entity, who violates
any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to the following:
1. Prosecution. Upon conviction of violation of any provision or
requirement of this Chapter, the person shall be subject to
punishment by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
or be imprisoned in jail for not more than three (3) months or both
such fine and imprisonment. It shall be a separate offense for each
day the nuisance is allowed or continues to exist.
2. Abatement. Upon determination that a nuisance exists, the City
may abate the nuisance and assess the costs thereof in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
3. Injunction. In order to eliminate, remove or prevent a nuisance or
other violation of this Chapter, the City Attorney may obtain such
civil redress as may be appropriate under the circumstances,
including restraining orders and injunctions.
Section
215.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.030
AO:265

ARTICLE II
Nuisance Provisions
Section 215.040. Maintaining a Nuisance. [R.O. 2008 §215.100;
Ord. No. 6601 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003]
Section 215.050. Placing Items on Public Property. [R.O. 2008
§215.110; Ord. No. 6601 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003]
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to deposit, place, dump, pour or
drain onto any street, highway or any public property within the City limits
any filth, refuse, rubbish, sewage, trash or nuisance, or any substance that
emits any foul, noxious or disagreeable odor or that attracts insects, vermin
or other pests.
Section 215.060. Nuisance Defined and Exemptions. [R.O. 2008
§215.120; Ord. No. 6601 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003]
A. Responsibility. No owner, occupant or other person in possession,
charge or control within the City limits shall cause, maintain or permit a
nuisance as defined by the laws of the State or this Chapter. It shall be
the duty of each owner, occupant or person in possession, charge or
control of any property to maintain that property, together with one-half
(½) of the platted City right-of-way abutting thereon, or street or alley
abutting thereon, as not to allow the accumulation of debris, refuse,
rubbish, trash or nuisances as defined in or described by this Chapter.
Every owner, occupant or person in possession of any property within
the City shall be responsible for maintaining all property under his or
her control in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. Every
owner, occupant or person in possession of any property within the City
shall be responsible for maintaining all property under his or her
control in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter.
B. Prima Facie Evidence Of Nuisance. If the nuisance is on private
property, proof that a person occupies the property or that a person has
possession or the right to possession of the property shall constitute
prima facie evidence that such person has caused, maintained or
permitted the nuisance and such person shall be responsible for its
existence and for its abatement.
C. Entry Upon Property. The Director, Public Works, or his or her designee,
may enter upon private property for inspection or abatement purposes
in accordance with this Chapter. If any person refuses to allow entry
onto his/her private property, City staff may obtain a warrant from the
proper official and proceed in accordance therewith.
A. Any condition or item which causes a threat to the health, safety or
welfare of the public, or which prohibits routine maintenance of the
premises, or which meets any of the definitions of a nuisance in this
Chapter shall be declared a nuisance. The term "nuisance" shall
include, but is not limited to:
Section
215.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.060
AO:267
1. Burning: The burning, causing to burn or authorizing the burning
of any item including twigs, branches, shrubbery, rubbish or refuse
upon any street, sidewalk or public alleyway.
2. Debris, refuse, rubbish, trash: Accumulations of unused boards,
bricks, concrete or rocks, animal or vegetable products or matter,
appliances, ashes, barrels, bones, bottles, boxes, broken glass,
brush, cans, cartons, cinders, coal, crates, decayed fruits or
vegetables, dirt, dust, excrement, fence wire, filth, firewood not
piled or stacked neatly and systematically (must be in rear yard),
flammable materials, foliage and shrub clippings or cuttings,
garbage, gasoline, grass, household furniture, iron or other metals,
junk, kegs, leaves, logs, lumber not piled or stacked neatly and
systematically (must have nails removed and be in rear yard;
untreated lumber must be stacked), lumber scraps, manure, nails,
offal, oil, old wearing apparel, paint, paper, piled brush and fallen
tree limbs or debris, plaster, plastic (discarded containers or
wrappers), plumbing fixtures, putrid fish or meat entrails, rags,
rank growth of vegetation, roof shingles, rubber, sawdust, slag,
slop, soot, straw, sweepings, tacks, tarpaulin not in good repair,
tire(s) (mounted or unmounted), toilets, tubs, vehicle parts, weeds,
wire, wood or metal shavings, any type of solid or yard waste
(bagged or unbagged), or any condition or item that would prohibit
the routine maintenance of the property.
Exemption: The term "nuisance" shall not include composting
which is a controlled biological reduction of organic waste to
humus, as follows:
a. All compost piles shall be maintained using approved
composting procedures in compliance upon the following
terms:
(1) All compost shall be enclosed in a freestanding compost
bin. Each compost bin shall be no larger in volume than
seventy-five (75) cubic feet for properties ten thousand
(10,000) square feet and less in size, with an additional
seventy-five (75) cubic feet permitted for each additional
ten thousand (10,000) square feet. Compost bins shall be
no higher than five (5) feet.
(2) All compost piles shall be maintained so as to prevent the
attraction or harborage of rodents and pests. The presence
of rodents or other pests in or near a compost pile shall be
cause for the City to issue a complaint.
(3) All compost piles shall be maintained so as to prevent
unpleasant, rotten, egg-like, putrefactive, sweet, sour or
pungent odors.
(4) All compost piles shall be located in the rear yard of the
property. No compost pile shall be located less than two (2)
Section
215.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
215.060
AO:268
feet from the rear or side property line, or within twenty
(20) feet of any home, patio, pool or similar structure, or
on any adjacent property.
(5) No compost pile shall be located where it will impede the
natural free flow of stormwater drainage.
b. No compost pile shall contain any of the following:
(1) Animal carcasses;
(2) Fish, fowl, meat or other animal products;
(3) Food scraps;
(4) Fruits, vegetables or nuts;
(5) Items not normally composted;
(6) Lake weeds; and
(7) Manure.
c. Permitted ingredients in a compost pile may include:
(1) Commercial compost additives;
(2) Wood chips; and
(3) Yard waste.
d. Compost piles established in accordance with this Chapter
shall be for private use only and there shall be no commercial
delivery or providing of material that has been composted in a
residential area.
3. Disease or breeding of insects or vermin: Any existing condition or
item which harbors or fosters the spread of disease or the breeding
of insects or vermin.
4. Excessive exterior lighting: Directing, arranging or using exterior
lighting from any property or areas so that the light shines or
glares on another property, thereby adversely affecting the use and
enjoyment of those persons who own or use the property.
5. Furniture — outdoor: Any furniture, including sofas, divans,
recliners and similar objects which are not designed for outdoor
use but which are maintained or located on any porch, lawn,
parking lot, driveway or public right-of-way.
6. Noxious or offensive odors: Any condition or item causing a noxious
or offensive odor that is discomforting and interferes with the free
use of residential property. Exemption: Industrial generated odors
or odors generated from criminal enterprises, i.e.,
methamphetamine lab.
Section
215.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.060
AO:269
Section 215.070. Prohibited Vehicles Defined as a Nuisance. [R.O.
2008 §215.130; Ord. No. 6601 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 6908
§§1 — 2, 5-14-2007]
7. Pools of water: Unmaintained water pools and ponds that become
stagnate and may cause a location for breeding of insects.
8. Prohibited vehicles: All vehicles declared a nuisance by this
Chapter, including junk vehicles, elevated vehicles, unlicensed
vehicles and abandoned vehicles.
9. Waterway pollution: Placing, throwing or causing tree limbs, brush
or any trash (including bottles and cans) to enter into or be in any
natural waterway located in or owned by the City.
10. Weeds and rank growth of vegetation: Any weeds or rank growth of
vegetation or noxious weeds prohibited as a nuisance by this
Chapter.
11. Miscellaneous: Any act done or committed or suffered to be done or
committed by any person or any substance or thing kept,
maintained, placed or found in or on any public or private place
which is annoying or damaging or injurious or dangerous to the
public health or welfare or safety and every act or thing done,
permitted, maintained, allowed or continued on any property
public or private, by any person, which is liable to or does
endanger, annoy, damage or injure any person or any inhabitant of
the City or property of said person or inhabitant.
A. The following vehicles shall be prohibited and are declared a nuisance:
1. Abandoned vehicle: Any unattended motor vehicle, trailer, allterrain
vehicle or outdoor motor or any vessel removed or subject
to removal from a public or private property as provided in this
Chapter, whether or not operational, or any motor vehicle on the
right-of-way of any public road or State highway or on any private
property owned by another without the consent of the owner or
occupant.
2. Elevated vehicle: Any vehicle, licensed or unlicensed, which is
raised, but not supported under the axles, or is raised to a height
where the tires are more than two (2) inches off of the ground.
3. Junk vehicle: Any type of self-propelled device or part thereof
designed to be self-propelled, that is moved by power, other than
human power, is designed to travel along the ground, is located on
private property and is damaged, stripped or wrecked or has
missing wheels or tires, or flat tires, or broken or missing window
glass and located outside of an enclosed structure. Junk vehicles
shall include, but not be limited to, all-terrain vehicles,
automobiles, motorcycles, snowmobiles, tractors, trailers, trucks
and wagons.
Section
215.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
215.070
AO:270
Section 215.080. Weeds, Rank Growth of Vegetation and Noxious
Weeds Prohibited as Nuisance. [R.O. 2008 §215.140; Ord. No. 6601
§§1 — 2, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 6789 §§1 — 2, 10-10-2005]
4. Unlicensed vehicle: Any type of self-propelled device, or part
thereof, that is moved by power, other than human power, is
designed to travel along the ground, is located on private property,
located outside of an enclosed structure and does not have showing
a current State license plate, or is improperly registered or
licensed pursuant to any State or local laws or regulations.
Unlicensed vehicles shall include, but not be limited to,
automobiles, motorcycles, trailers and trucks. An unlicensed
vehicle shall not be allowed to exist on private property outside of
an enclosed structure.
5. The following shall be exempt from this Section:
a. Vehicle(s) or parts thereof that are in disrepair and are located
on the premises of a duly licensed automobile repair or sales
business for a period not to exceed three (3) months.
b. Vehicle(s) located on the premises of a duly licensed motor
vehicle junk business or junk yard maintained in accordance
with City Code and holding a valid Missouri license.
c. Vehicle(s) or parts thereof which are used as part of rescue
training exercises conducted by law enforcement, fire
departments or ambulance districts.
A. No owner, occupant or person in possession, charge or control of any
property shall allow or permit weeds contrary to the provisions of this
Section, rank growth or noxious weeds as defined in this Chapter to
exist or be maintained on that property or on one-half (½) of the platted
right-of-way abutting thereon or on the street or alley abutting thereon.
B. All weeds, grasses and non-agricultural plants which are seven (7)
inches or more in height or any other rank growth of vegetation that
may be injurious to health by releasing particulate matter into the
atmosphere or other means, or which are considered noxious by the
State of Missouri, obstructs vehicular or foot traffic, infringes upon the
enjoyment or use of adjacent properties or may be conducive to fires or
combustion are declared to be a nuisance.
C. The owner or occupant of any property of three (3) acres or more that is
either agricultural in character or a woodland shall ensure that all
weeds and rank growth of vegetation on said property are cut and/or
maintained so as not to obstruct or interfere with vehicular or foot
traffic upon any public roadway or sidewalk and so as not to interfere
with the line of sight of operators of motor vehicles upon any adjoining
street, alley or roadway.
Section
215.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.080
AO:271
D. Noxious weeds, as defined by this Chapter and by State law, are
declared a nuisance and shall be entirely removed from agricultural,
commercial and residential lots.
Section
215.080
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
215.080
AO:272
ARTICLE III
Abatement Provisions
Section 215.090. Determination, Responsibility and Notice. [R.O.
2008 §215.300; Ord. No. 6601 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003]
Section 215.100. Alternatives in Response to Notice. [R.O. 2008
§215.310; Ord. No. 6601 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003]
A. Whenever the Director, Public Works or his or her designee determines
that a nuisance exists as defined in this Chapter, in addition to any other
remedies provided by law, the procedure for abatement shall be as
follows:
1. Notice. Notice shall be required in order to abate the nuisance
pursuant to the provisions of Section but shall not be a prerequisite
for a violation of this Chapter. The Director, Public Works or his or
her designee shall first notify the person causing, maintaining or
permitting the nuisance that he/she must abate or remove such
nuisance within seven (7) calendar days. Such notice shall include a
description of the nuisance to be abated, the location of the
nuisance and the alternatives described in this Chapter.
Initial notification shall be made by delivering the notice or by
depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed
to the owner of the property and/or the person occupying the
property. If notification is not made by delivery or by mail, then it
may be provided by one (1) or more of the following methods:
a. Notification may be provided by posting upon such property a
notice containing an order to abate or remove the nuisance
within the time to be specified in this Chapter, or
b. If the above method of service of notice cannot be successfully
completed, then notice may be given by a publication of said
notice one (1) time in a daily newspaper published within the
City.
2. Failure to give notice. If the property has been posted with a notice
to abate the nuisance, failure to give notice in any other manner as
set forth in this Section shall not invalidate a lien against the land
for the costs associated with abating the nuisance.
3. Emergency abatement. The Director, Public Works, shall have the
power to summarily abate, in any reasonable manner, any nuisance
which constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the City.
A. Any person notified under this Chapter to abate a nuisance shall
exercise one (1) of the following alternatives within seven (7) days from
service of notice.
Section
215.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.100
AO:273
Section 215.110. Reconsideration Procedure. [R.O. 2008 §215.320;
Ord. No. 6601 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003]
Section 215.120. Abatement Procedures. [R.O. 2008 §215.330; Ord.
No. 6601 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003]
1. Abate the nuisance at the expense of the person so notified;
2. Furnish the Director, Public Works, with written consent for the
City to abate the nuisance with the costs of such abatement to be
assessed to the person consenting. In such circumstance, the
person notified to post a bond or deposit in an amount equal to
anticipated costs of the abatement as determined by the City; or
3. File a written request with the Director, Public Works, requesting a
reconsideration hearing before the City Manager or his or her
designee challenging the allegation that a nuisance exists.
A. Procedure. Whenever a reconsideration hearing is requested pursuant
to this Chapter, the City Manager shall give notice to all interested
parties, including the owner and occupant of the property, of the date,
time and place of a public hearing to be held to determine whether a
nuisance exists. All persons notified shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence and make arguments to the City Manager and be
represented by an attorney.
B. Findings. If the City Manager determines that a nuisance does exist, the
City Manager shall issue to the Director, Public Works, an order to
abate nuisance in any reasonable manner and assess the costs against
the property. The order shall contain written findings of fact and a copy
of the order shall be provided to all interested parties.
C. Appeal. When a reconsideration hearing is requested as provided
herein and the City Manager finds that a nuisance exists, an appeal may
be taken from that decision by filing for the appropriate relief in the
Circuit Court of Nodaway County, Missouri, pursuant to the procedure
established in Chapter 536, RSMo.
A. Confirmation Of Nuisance. If the person notified fails to exercise one (1)
of the alternatives provided in this Chapter, or if the reconsideration
hearing does not result in a reversal of the finding of a nuisance and the
person has exhausted or waived his/her appeal rights, then the
Director, Public Works, or his or her designee, shall proceed with the
abatement of the nuisance in any reasonable manner. The costs of the
abatement and the administrative processing of the nuisance against
the property shall be assessed as provided in this Chapter.
B. Storage, Redemption, Sale. After the determination that a nuisance
exists, items having any apparent monetary value, beyond salvage
value, removed during the nuisance abatement shall be transported to a
storage area or lot at the expense of the owner or person in custody
Section
215.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
215.120
AO:274
Section 215.130. Assessment of Abatement Costs. [R.O. 2008
§215.340; Ord. No. 6601 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003]
Section 215.140. Collection of Abatement Costs and Lien. [R.O.
2008 §215.350; Ord. No. 6601 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003]
thereof. The property shall then be stored for a period of at least thirty
(30) days and the person entitled to possession thereof may redeem
the property by payment to the City the actual cost of removal and
a reasonable storage and administrative processing fee. If any item
is unredeemed after the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the
Director, Public Works, or his or her designee, may sell it to the highest
bidder or, if it has no sale value, may otherwise dispose of it. Any money
received from the disposal of any item shall be applied to the costs
charged to the owner or person in charge thereof.
C. Towing. The Director, Public Works, or his or her designee, may tow any
motor vehicle or other property as authorized by this Code.
D. Notice Of Sale. Prior to the sale of any such property obtained in a
nuisance abatement, the Director, Public Works, or his or her designee,
shall cause to be posted in City Hall, at the place of storage and in at
least one (1) other public place in the City, a notice of sale stating:
1. That the City is selling abandoned property;
2. The color, make, year, motor number and serial number, if
available, and any other information necessary for an accurate
identification of the property;
3. The terms of the sale;
4. The date, time and place of the sale.
The notice shall be published at least once seven (7) days prior
to the sale in a newspaper published in the City.
A. If the abatement is performed by City employees, the cost of the
abatement shall be calculated according to the schedule of costs
promulgated by the Finance Director and kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk. This schedule is to be determined after an analysis by the
Finance Director to determine an accurate estimation of the costs
incurred by the City to abate nuisances subject to this Section.
B. If the abatement is performed by contractors hired by the City, the costs
charged for the abatement will be the actual amount paid to the
contractor for the abatement performed.
C. Any and all direct fees and costs, including, but not limited to, landfill
fees, shall be included in the abatement cost.
A. When the City expends any funds in the abatement of any nuisance, the
Finance Director, or his or her designee, shall notify, by certified mail,
Section
215.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.140
AO:275
the person against whose property the costs were incurred of said
costs. The Director, Public Works, shall certify the costs incurred in
abating the nuisance and administratively processing the nuisance to
the Finance Director, together with the description of the property.
B. The cost of administratively processing the abatement to the Director of
Finance shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per regular abatement
action, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for large special bids and six
hundred dollars ($600.00) for railroad bids.
C. The person notified shall have thirty (30) days from the mailing of said
notice within which to pay the costs of the abatement to the Director of
Finance. If the person so notified fails to pay the costs of the abatement
within thirty (30) days, the Director of Finance shall immediately, upon
the receipt of this information, enter an assessment in the appropriate
books of the City to be kept for that purpose; and upon the entry of this
assessment a lien will attach to the property. The City Clerk shall cause
a special tax bill therefor against the property be prepared and
collected by the Collector with other taxes assessed against the
property. Such tax bills if not paid when due shall bear interest at the
rate of eight percent (8%) per annum.
D. Disposition Of Abatement Costs. If the City receives any revenue as a
result of the abatement of any nuisance, that revenue shall be deposited
in and credited to the fund account of the department that initially
advanced the costs for the abatement or enforcement. If any revenue
received by the City in the abatement of a nuisance cannot first be
credited to such department's fund account, then the revenue received
shall be deposited in and credited to the General Fund.
Section
215.140
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
215.140
AO:276
Chapter 217
ABANDONED PROPERTY
Cross References — As to maximum charges for towing and storage,
§385.050; as to sale of abandoned property by city, §385.060; as to crime
inquiry and inspection reports required by state law, §385.040.
Section 217.010. Definitions.54
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set out
herein:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any unattended or unlicensed motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel removed or subject
to removal from public or private property as provided in this Chapter,
whether or not operational. For any vehicle towed from the scene of an
accident at the request of law enforcement and not retrieved by the
vehicle's owner within five (5) days of the accident, the agency requesting
the tow shall be required to write an abandoned property report or a
criminal inquiry and inspection report.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation or other legal entity.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire width of land between the boundary lines of a
public road or State highway, including any roadway.
ROADWAY — That portion of a public road or State highway ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
TOWING COMPANY — Any person or entity which tows, removes or stores
abandoned property.
Section 217.020. Abandoning Motor Vehicle — Last Owner of
Record Deemed the Owner of Abandoned Motor Vehicle, Procedures
— Penalty — Civil Liability.
A. A person commits the offense of abandoning a motor vehicle, vessel or
trailer if he/she abandons any motor vehicle, vessel or trailer on the
right-of-way of any public road or State highway or on or in any of the
waters in this State or on the banks of any stream, or on any land or
water owned, operated or leased by the State, any board, department,
agency or commission thereof, or any political subdivision thereof or on
any land or water owned, operated or leased by the Federal
Government or on any private real property owned by another without
his/her consent.
B. For purposes of this Section, the last owner of record of a motor vehicle,
vessel or trailer found abandoned and not shown to be transferred
pursuant to Sections 301.196 and 301.197, RSMo., shall be deemed
prima facie to have been the owner of such motor vehicle, vessel or
trailer at the time it was abandoned and to have been the person who
54.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §304.001, RSMo.
Section
215.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.020
AO:277
Section 217.030. Open Storage of Inoperable Vehicles or Public
Safety Hazards Prohibited.55
The open storage of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles or other vehicles
deemed by the City to constitute a public safety hazard is prohibited.
Nothing in this Section shall apply to a vehicle which is completely enclosed
within a locked building or locked fenced area and not visible from adjacent
public or private property, nor to any vehicle upon the property of a
business licensed as salvage, swap, junk dealer, towing or storage facility so
long as the business is operated in compliance with its business license and
the property is in compliance with applicable zoning ordinances.
abandoned the motor vehicle, vessel or trailer or caused or procured its
abandonment. The registered owner of the abandoned motor vehicle,
vessel or trailer shall not be subject to the penalties provided by this
Section if the motor vehicle, vessel or trailer was in the care, custody or
control of another person at the time of the violation. In such instance,
the owner shall submit such evidence in an affidavit permitted by the
court setting forth the name, address and other pertinent information
of the person who leased, rented or otherwise had care, custody or
control of the motor vehicle, vessel or trailer at the time of the alleged
violation. The affidavit submitted pursuant to this Subsection shall be
admissible in a court proceeding adjudicating the alleged violation and
shall raise a rebuttable presumption that the person identified in the
affidavit was in actual control of the motor vehicle, vessel or trailer. In
such case, the court has the authority to terminate the prosecution of
the summons issued to the owner and issue a summons to the person
identified in the affidavit as the operator. If the motor vehicle, vessel or
trailer is alleged to have been stolen, the owner of the motor vehicle,
vessel or trailer shall submit proof that a police report was filed in a
timely manner indicating that the vehicle or vessel was stolen at the
time of the alleged violation.
C. Abandoning a motor vehicle, vessel or trailer is an ordinance violation.
D. Any person convicted pursuant to this Section shall be civilly liable for
all reasonable towing, storage and administrative costs associated with
the abandonment of the motor vehicle, vessel or trailer. Any reasonable
towing, storage and administrative costs in excess of the value of the
abandoned motor vehicle, vessel or trailer that exist at the time the
motor vehicle or vessel is transferred pursuant to Section 304.156,
RSMo., shall remain the liability of the person convicted pursuant to
this Section so long as the towing company, as defined in Chapter 304,
RSMo., provided the title owner and lienholders, as ascertained by the
Department of Revenue records, a notice within the time frame and in
the form as described in Subsection (1) of Section 304.156, RSMo.
55.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §304.159, RSMo.
Section
217.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
217.040
AO:278
Section 217.040. Towing of Abandoned Property on Private Real
Property.56
A. Generally. The City, including the City Police Department, may tow
motor vehicles from real property which are deemed a public safety
hazard pursuant to Section 217.030 or are derelict, junk, scrapped,
disassembled or otherwise harmful to the public health. The City shall
perform such tow pursuant to the terms of Section 217.050. When a
City agency other than the Police Department authorizes a tow under
this Subsection, it shall report the tow to the Police Department within
two (2) hours with a crime inquiry and inspection report.
B. Towing Authorized By City Police Department. If a person abandons
property on any real property owned by another without the consent of
the owner or person in possession of the real property, at the request of
the person in possession of the real property, any City Police Officer
may authorize a towing company to remove such abandoned property
from the property in the following circumstances:
1. The abandoned property is left unattended for more than fortyeight
(48) hours; or
2. In the judgment of a Police Officer, the abandoned property
constitutes a safety hazard or unreasonably interferes with the use
of the real property by the person in possession.
C. Towing Authorized By Real Property Owner, Lessee Or Property Or
Security Manager.
1. The owner of real property or lessee in lawful possession of the real
property or the property or security manager of the real property
may authorize a towing company to remove abandoned property or
property parked in a restricted or assigned area without
authorization by a Law Enforcement Officer only when the owner,
lessee or property or security manager of the real property is
present. A property or security manager must be a full-time
employee of a business entity. An authorization to tow pursuant to
this Subsection may be made only under any of the following
circumstances:
a. Sign. There is displayed, in plain view at all entrances to the
property, a sign not less than seventeen (17) by twenty-two
(22) inches in size, with lettering not less than one (1) inch in
height, prohibiting public parking and indicating that
unauthorized abandoned property or property parked in a
restricted or assigned area will be removed at the owner's
expense, disclosing the maximum fee for all charges related to
towing and storage, and containing the telephone number of
the local traffic law enforcement agency where information can
56.State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.157.1 — 2, 304.157.4 — 9, 304.158.2
— 4, 304.158.8 — 9, RSMo. (2004).
Section
217.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.040
AO:279
be obtained or a twenty-four (24) hour staffed emergency
information telephone number by which the owner of the
abandoned property or property parked in a restricted or
assigned area may call to receive information regarding the
location of such owner's property.
b. Unattended on owner-occupied residential property. The
abandoned property is left unattended on owner-occupied
residential property with four (4) residential units or less and
the owner, lessee or agent of the real property in lawful
possession has notified the City Police Department, and ten
(10) hours have elapsed since that notification.
c. Unattended on other private real property. The abandoned
property is left unattended on private real property and the
owner, lessee or agent of the real property in lawful possession
of real property has notified the City Police Department, and
ninety-six (96) hours have elapsed since that notification.
2. Pursuant to this Section, any owner or lessee in lawful possession
of real property that requests a towing company to tow abandoned
property without authorization from a City Police Officer shall at
that time complete an abandoned property report which shall be
considered a legal declaration subject to criminal penalty pursuant
to Section 575.060, RSMo. The report shall be in the form
designed, printed and distributed by the Missouri Director of
Revenue and shall contain the following:
a. The year, model, make and abandoned property identification
number of the property, and the owner and any lienholders, if
known;
b. A description of any damage to the abandoned property noted
by owner, lessee or property or security manager in possession
of the real property;
c. The license plate or registration number and the State of
issuance, if available;
d. The physical location of the property and the reason for
requesting the property to be towed;
e. The date the report is completed;
f. The printed name, address and telephone number of the
owner, lessee or property or security manager in possession of
the real property;
g. The towing company's name and address;
h. The signature of the towing operator;
Section
217.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
217.040
AO:280
i. The signature of the owner, lessee or property or security
manager attesting to the facts that the property has been
abandoned for the time required by this Section and that all
statements on the report are true and correct to the best of the
person's knowledge and belief and that the person is subject to
the penalties for making false statements;
j. Space for the name of the law enforcement agency notified of
the towing of the abandoned property and for the signature of
the Law Enforcement Official receiving the report; and
k. Any additional information the Missouri Director of Revenue
deems appropriate.
3. Any towing company which tows abandoned property without
authorization from the City Police Department pursuant to
Subsection (B) of this Section shall deliver a copy of the abandoned
property report to the City Police Department. The copy may be
produced and sent by facsimile machine or other device which
produces a near exact likeness of the print and signatures required,
but only if the City Police Department has the technological
capability of receiving such copy and has registered the towing
company for such purpose. The report shall be delivered within two
(2) hours if the tow was made from a signed location pursuant to
Subsection (C)(1)(a) of this Section, otherwise the report shall be
delivered within twenty-four (24) hours.
4. The City Police Department, after receiving such abandoned
property report, shall record the date on which the abandoned
property report is filed with the Police Department and shall
promptly make an inquiry into the National Crime Information
Center (NCIC) and any statewide Missouri law enforcement
computer system to determine if the abandoned property has been
reported as stolen. The Police Department shall enter the
information pertaining to the towed property into the statewide law
enforcement computer system and a Police Officer shall sign the
abandoned property report and provide the towing company with a
signed copy.
5. The City Police Department, after receiving notification that
abandoned property has been towed by a towing company, shall
search the records of the Missouri Department of Revenue and
provide the towing company with the latest owner and lienholder
information on the abandoned property, and if the tower has online
access to the Department of Revenue's records, the tower shall
comply with the requirements of Section 304.155, RSMo. If the
abandoned property is not claimed within ten (10) working days,
the towing company shall send a copy of the abandoned property
report signed by a Law Enforcement Officer to the Department of
Revenue.
Section
217.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.040
AO:281
6. No owner, lessee or property or security manager of real property
shall knowingly authorize the removal of abandoned property in
violation of this Section.
7. Any owner of any private real property causing the removal of
abandoned property from that real property shall state the grounds
for the removal of the abandoned property if requested by the
registered owner of that abandoned property. Any towing company
that lawfully removes abandoned property from private property
with the written authorization of the property owner or the
property owner's agent who is present at the time of removal shall
not be held responsible in any situation relating to the validity of
the removal. Any towing company that removes abandoned
property at the direction of the landowner shall be responsible for:
a. Any damage caused by the towing company to the property in
the transit and subsequent storage of the property; and
b. The removal of property other than the property specified by
the owner of the private real property from which the
abandoned property was removed.
D. Damage To Property. The owner of abandoned property removed from
private real property may recover for any damage to the property
resulting from any act of any person causing the removal of, or
removing, the abandoned property.
E. Real Property Owner Liability. Any owner of any private real property
causing the removal of abandoned property parked on that property is
liable to the owner of the abandoned property for double the storage or
towing charges whenever there has been a failure to comply with the
requirements of this Chapter.
F. Written Authorization Required — Delegation Of Authority To Tow.
1. Except for the removal of abandoned property authorized by the
City Police Department pursuant to this Section, a towing company
shall not remove or commence the removal of abandoned property
from private real property without first obtaining written
authorization from the real property owner. All written
authorizations shall be maintained for at least one (1) year by the
towing company.
2. General authorization to remove or commence removal of
abandoned property at the towing company's discretion shall not
be delegated to a towing company or its affiliates except in the case
of abandoned property unlawfully parked within fifteen (15) feet of
a fire hydrant or in a fire lane designated by a Fire Department or
the State Fire Marshal.
G. Towing Company Liability. Any towing company, or any affiliate of a
towing company, which removes, or commences removal of, abandoned
Section
217.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
217.040
AO:282
Section 217.050. General Provisions and Procedures.57
property from private property without first obtaining written
authorization from the property owner or lessee, or any employee or
agent thereof, who is present at the time of removal or commencement
of the removal, except as permitted in Subsection (F) of this Section,
is liable to the owner of the property for four (4) times the amount of
the towing and storage charges, in addition to any applicable ordinance
violation penalty, for a violation of this Section.
A. Payment Of Charges. The owner of abandoned property removed as
provided in this Chapter shall be responsible for payment of all
reasonable charges for towing and storage of such abandoned property
as provided in Section 385.050.
B. Crime Inquiry And Inspection Report. As to Crime Inquiry and
Inspection Reports required by State Law, see Chapter 385 of this
Code, Section 385.040.
C. Reclaiming Property. The owner of such abandoned property, or the
holder of a valid security interest of record, may reclaim it from the
towing company upon proof of ownership or valid security interest of
record and payment of all reasonable charges for the towing and
storage of the abandoned property.
D. Lienholder Repossession. If a lienholder repossesses any motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel without the
knowledge or cooperation of the owner, then the repossessor shall
notify the City Police Department within two (2) hours of the
repossession and shall further provide the Police Department with any
additional information the Police Department deems appropriate. The
City Police Department shall make an inquiry with the National Crime
Information Center and the Missouri statewide law enforcement
computer system and shall enter the repossessed vehicle into the
statewide law enforcement computer system.
E. Notice To Owner/Tow Lien Claim. Any towing company which comes
into possession of abandoned property pursuant to this Chapter and
who claims a lien for recovering, towing or storing abandoned property
shall give notice to the title owner and to all persons claiming a lien
thereon, as disclosed by the records of the Missouri Department of
Revenue or of a corresponding agency in any other State. The towing
company shall notify the owner and any lienholder within ten (10)
business days of the date of mailing indicated on the notice sent by the
Missouri Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 304.156, RSMo.,
by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain the
following:
57.State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.155.5 — 6 (2004), 304.155.11 —
12(2004), 304.158.1, 304.158.5, 304.158.7, RSMo.
Section
217.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.050
AO:283
1. The name, address and telephone number of the storage facility;
2. The date, reason and place from which the abandoned property
was removed;
3. A statement that the amount of the accrued towing, storage and
administrative costs are the responsibility of the owner, and that
storage and/or administrative costs will continue to accrue as a
legal liability of the owner until the abandoned property is
redeemed;
4. A statement that the storage firm claims a possessory lien for all
such charges;
5. A statement that the owner or holder of a valid security interest of
record may retake possession of the abandoned property at any
time during business hours by proving ownership or rights to a
secured interest and paying all towing and storage charges;
6. A statement that, should the owner consider that the towing or
removal was improper or not legally justified, the owner has a right
to request a hearing as provided in this Section to contest the
propriety of such towing or removal;
7. A statement that if the abandoned property remains unclaimed for
thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the notice, title to the
abandoned property will be transferred to the person or firm in
possession of the abandoned property free of all prior liens; and
8. A statement that any charges in excess of the value of the
abandoned property at the time of such transfer shall remain a
liability of the owner.
F. Physical Search Of Property. In the event that the Missouri Department
of Revenue notifies the towing company that the records of the
Department of Revenue fail to disclose the name of the owner or any
lienholder of record, the towing company shall attempt to locate
documents or other evidence of ownership on or within the abandoned
property itself. The towing company must certify that a physical search
of the abandoned property disclosed no ownership documents were
found and a good faith effort has been made. For purposes of this
Section, "good faith effort" means that the following checks have been
performed by the company to establish the prior State of registration
and title:
1. Check of the abandoned property for any type of license plates,
license plate record, temporary permit, inspection sticker, decal or
other evidence which may indicate a State of possible registration
and title;
Section
217.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
217.050
AO:284
2. Check the law enforcement report for a license plate number or
registration number if the abandoned property was towed at the
request of a law enforcement agency;
3. Check the tow ticket/report of the tow truck operator to see if a
license plate was on the abandoned property at the beginning of
the tow, if a private tow; and
4. If there is no address of the owner on the impound report, check
the law enforcement report to see if an out-of-state address is
indicated on the driver license information.
G. Petition In Circuit Court. The owner of the abandoned property
removed pursuant to this Chapter or any person claiming a lien, other
than the towing company, within ten (10) days after the receipt of
notification from the towing company pursuant to Subsection (E) of this
Section may file a petition in the Associate Circuit Court in the County
where the abandoned property is stored to determine if the abandoned
property was wrongfully taken or withheld from the owner. The petition
shall name the towing company among the defendants. The petition
may also name the agency ordering the tow or the owner, lessee or
agent of the real property from which the abandoned property was
removed. The Missouri Director of Revenue shall not be a party to such
petition but a copy of the petition shall be served on the Director of
Revenue.
H. Notice To Owner. Notice as to the removal of any abandoned property
pursuant to this Chapter shall be made in writing within five (5)
working days to the registered owner and any lienholder of the fact of
the removal, the grounds for the removal, and the place to which the
property has been removed by either:
1. The public agency authorizing the removal; or
2. The towing company, where authorization was made by an owner
or lessee of real property.
If the abandoned property is stored in any storage facility, a
copy of the notice shall be given to the operator of the facility.
The notice provided for in this Section shall include the amount
of mileage if available shown on the abandoned property at the
time of removal.
I. Tow Truck Requirements. Any towing company which tows abandoned
property for hire shall have the towing company's name, City and State
clearly printed in letters at least three (3) inches in height on the sides
of the truck, wrecker or other vehicle used in the towing.
J. Storage Facilities. Persons operating or in charge of any storage facility
where the abandoned property is stored pursuant to this Chapter shall
accept cash for payment of towing and storage by a registered owner or
the owner's agent claiming the abandoned property.
Section
217.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.050
AO:285
Chapter 220
SOLID WASTE, RECYCLABLES AND COMPOST MATERIALS
K. Disposition Of Towed Property. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 301.227, RSMo., any towing company who has complied with
the notification provisions in Section 304.156, RSMo., including notice
that any property remaining unredeemed after thirty (30) days may be
sold as scrap property may then dispose of such property as provided in
this Subsection. Such sale shall only occur if at least thirty (30) days
have passed since the date of such notification, the abandoned property
remains unredeemed with no satisfactory arrangements made with the
towing company for continued storage, and the owner or holder of a
security agreement has not requested a hearing as provided in Section
304.156, RSMo. The towing company may dispose of such abandoned
property by selling the property on a bill of sale as prescribed by the
Director of Revenue to a scrap metal operator or licensed salvage
dealer for destruction purposes only. The towing company shall forward
a copy of the bill of sale provided by the scrap metal operator or
licensed salvage dealer to the Director of Revenue within two (2) weeks
of the date of such sale. The towing company shall keep a record of
each such vehicle sold for destruction for three (3) years that shall be
available for inspection by law enforcement and authorized Department
of Revenue officials. The record shall contain the year, make,
identification number of the property, date of sale, and name of the
purchasing scrap metal operator or licensed salvage dealer and copies
of all notifications issued by the towing company as required in this
Chapter. Scrap metal operators or licensed salvage dealers shall keep a
record of the purchase of such property as provided in Section 301.227,
RSMo. Scrap metal operators and licensed salvage dealers may obtain a
junk certificate as provided in Section 301.227, RSMo., on vehicles
purchased on a bill of sale pursuant to the Section.
Section
217.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
217.050
AO:286
ARTICLE I
General
Section 220.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §225.010; Ord. No. 6511
§1, 12-2-2002]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
COMMERCIAL HAULER — Any person, company or corporation who uses
or causes to be used a vehicle for the purpose of engaging in the business
of collecting and transporting solid waste or recyclables for profit.
COMPOST MATERIAL — Those items which are accepted by the City of
Maryville, Missouri, at the compost center. Compost is a dark crumbly
earthy smelling form of decomposing organic matter. Compost includes
yard waste such as grass clippings, leaves of any type, yard and garden
vegetation, also called humus.
INDUSTRIAL PROCESS WASTE — Shall be defined in the Code of State
Regulations for the State of Missouri and the current regulations for
operation of facilities under the direction, supervision or regulation of the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources.
MARYVILLE PROCESSING FACILITY or PROCESSING FACILITY —
Includes all facilities located at the site of the Maryville transfer station
and the Maryville compost center and shall be understood to include the
transfer station, processing facility, compost center or other facility under
the direction of the City of Maryville.
NORMAL SOLID WASTE — Shall be defined in the Code of State
Regulations for the State of Missouri and the current regulations for
operation of facilities under the direction, supervision or regulation of the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources.
RECYCLABLES — Includes those items which are received at a recycling
center or other similar locations which have been approved for the receipt
of such items by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources or other
similar approving agency.
SOLID WASTE — Includes those items acceptable for disposal at the
Maryville transfer station/processing facility. It shall not include compost
material, industrial process waste, waste requiring special handling,
excluded solid waste or recyclables destined for delivery at a location other
than the Maryville processing facility.
SPECIAL SOLID WASTE — Shall be defined in the Code of State Regulations
for the State of Missouri and the current regulations for operation of
facilities under the direction, supervision or regulation of the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources.
Section
220.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.010
AO:287

ARTICLE II
Storage
Section 220.020. Use of Containers Required. [R.O. 2008 §225.020;
Ord. No. 6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
As defined in this Chapter, the owner or occupant of any residence, dwelling
unit or any institution, commercial establishment or industrial facility
producing solid waste or recyclables shall provide sufficient and adequate
containers for the storage of said materials. Containers for such solid waste
and recyclables shall be maintained in good repair and the surrounding area
shall be kept in a neat, clean and sanitary condition at all times and said
containers shall be placed and removed in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter.
Section 220.030. Containers for Solid Waste. [R.O. 2008 §225.030;
Ord. No. 6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
A. Solid waste shall be stored in suitable containers in accordance with
the following requirements:
1. Residential dwelling units. For the purpose of this Section, the term
"residential dwelling unit" shall include all single-family dwellings
and duplexes located within the City limits of Maryville, but shall
not include any dwelling unit configured larger than a duplex, and
shall not include any fraternity house or commercial apartment
complex.
a. Solid waste from a residential dwelling unit may be placed in
plastic bags designed for the purpose of containing such solid
waste and may be placed at curbside or beside the alley on
solid waste collection days. All bags must be securely tied or
fastened and shall be maintained in a manner designed to
prevent the scattering of any of the items contained therein.
b. Solid waste may be placed in a container with a normal
capacity of not less than five (5) gallons and not to exceed forty
(40) gallons.
c. The combined weight of any individual container and its
contents shall not exceed seventy-five (75) pounds.
d. Dumpsters, barrels or fifty-five (55) gallon barrels shall not be
used as containers for solid waste.
e. At the discretion of the commercial hauler, on collection days
cardboard may be neatly stacked loose at curbside.
f. All solid waste containers other than plastic bags shall:
(1) Be leakproof, waterproof and fitted with a fly-tight lid;
(2) Be properly covered at all times;
Section
220.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.030
AO:289
(3) Have handles, bails or other suitable lifting features;
(4) Be of a type originally manufactured for the purpose for
which it is used;
(5) Be of lightweight and sturdy construction, such as
galvanized metal or rubber, fiberglass or plastic which will
not become brittle in cold weather.
2. Multi-residential dwelling units. For the purposes of this Section,
the term "multi-residential dwelling unit" shall be understood to
include all 3-plex or 4-plex dwelling units located within the City
limits of Maryville, but shall not include any residential dwelling
unit, nor shall it include any fraternity house or commercial
apartment complex larger than a 4-plex.
a. Unless placed in a dumpster as described herein, all solid
waste from a multi-residential dwelling unit must be placed in
a container with a normal capacity of not less than five (5)
gallons and not to exceed forty (40) gallons.
b. Plastic bags containing solid waste must be placed in a
container or dumpster.
c. Barrels or fifty-five (55) gallon drums shall not be used as
containers for solid waste.
d. With the exception of dumpsters, the combined weight of any
individual container and its contents shall not exceed seventyfive
(75) pounds.
e. Dumpsters designed to contain solid waste may be used for the
collection of solid waste. Dumpsters shall be located on the
residential property so as not to be visible from adjacent public
roadways.
f. At the discretion of the commercial hauler, on collection days
cardboard may be neatly stacked loose at the curbside.
g. All solid waste containers other than dumpsters or plastic bags
shall:
(1) Be leakproof, waterproof and fitted with a fly-tight lid;
(2) Be properly covered at all times;
(3) Have handles, bails or other suitable lifting features;
(4) Be originally manufactured for the purpose for which it is
used;
(5) Be of lightweight and sturdy construction, such as
galvanized metal or rubber, fiberglass or plastic which will
not become brittle in cold weather.
Section
220.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
220.030
AO:290
Section 220.040. Storage Location. [R.O. 2008 §225.040; Ord. No.
6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
3. Commercial area. For the purpose of this Section, "commercial
area" shall be understood to include all other land-use areas within
the City limits of Maryville not defined as either a residential unit
or as a multi-residence dwelling unit. The term "commercial area"
shall include all residential structures configured larger than
4-plexes and shall include all fraternity houses, commercial
apartment complexes larger than a 4-plex, as well as all
institutional, commercial and industrial establishments.
a. Unless placed in a dumpster as described herein, all solid
waste from a commercial area must be placed in a container
with a normal capacity of not less than five (5) gallons and not
to exceed forty (40) gallons.
b. Plastic bags containing solid waste must be placed in a
container or dumpster.
c. Barrels or fifty-five (55) gallon drums may not be used as
containers for solid waste.
d. With the exception of dumpsters, the combined weight of any
individual container and its contents shall not exceed seventyfive
(75) pounds.
e. Dumpsters may be used for the collection of solid waste if the
dumpster was designed for the purpose of containing solid
waste.
f. All containers other than dumpsters or plastic bags shall:
(1) Be leakproof, waterproof and fitted with a fly-tight lid;
(2) Be properly covered at all times.
(3) Have handles, bails or other suitable lifting features.
(4) Be originally manufactured for the purpose for which it is
used;
(5) Be of lightweight and sturdy construction, such as
galvanized metal or rubber, fiberglass or plastic which will
not become brittle in cold weather.
A. Except for dumpsters, drums or fifty-five (55) gallon barrels, all solid
waste containers at any location within the City, including plastic bags,
shall comply with the following provisions:
1. Containers of solid waste shall not be placed at the curbside or
beside the alley more than twenty-four (24) hours prior to
collection.
Section
220.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.040
AO:291
Section 220.050. Burning Solid Waste — Prohibited. [R.O. 2008
§225.050; Ord. No. 6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
It shall be unlawful to burn or attempt to burn any solid waste, including
solid waste located within a container.
2. Plastic bags containing solid waste shall not be placed at the
curbside or beside the alley prior to the day of collection.
3. Within twenty-four (24) hours after collection of solid waste, all
solid waste containers shall be removed from the curbside or from
beside the alley.
4. Except when placed for pickup pursuant to Subsection (1) of this
Section, solid waste containers located on the property shall not be
visible from adjacent public roadways.
5. It shall be unlawful to place any solid waste container, including
plastic bags, upon or in any public street, public roadway or
alleyway.
Section
220.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
220.050
AO:292
ARTICLE III
Transportation
Section 220.060. Compliance Required. [R.O. 2008 §225.100; Ord.
No. 6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
It shall be unlawful to transport or operate a vehicle for the transportation
of solid waste, recyclables or compost material contrary to the provisions of
this Article.
Section 220.070. Transportation Vehicle Standards. [R.O. 2008
§225.110; Ord. No. 6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
A. All vehicles used for the transportation of solid waste, recyclables or
compost material shall be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary
condition and shall be constructed, maintained and operated in order to
prevent spillage, blowing or scattering of solid waste, recyclables or
compost material therefrom.
B. No vehicle will be permitted to use the solid waste facilities if the
material to be deposited is not covered. A cover must be securely
placed over the solid waste, recyclables or compost material to prevent
spillage, blowing or scattering during transportation. A cover must be
securely placed over the solid waste or compost material to prevent
spillage, blowing or scattering during transportation.
C. No vehicle may be used by a commercial hauler for the purpose of
transporting solid waste unless said vehicle was specifically designed
for the transportation of solid waste or has been modified to meet all
requirements of applicable State and Federal law and other ordinances
and regulations. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, all
pickups and trailers used by a commercial hauler to unload solid waste
shall be equipped with an operational hoist, which hoist shall be used
for the unloading of solid waste within the City of Maryville facility.
D. Commercial haulers attempting to use vehicles not specifically
designed for the collection and transportation of solid waste or any
vehicle which does not comply with all of the requirements of law and
the ordinances of the City of Maryville will not be allowed to deposit
waste at the solid waste disposal area.
Section
220.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.070
AO:293

ARTICLE IV
Disposal
Section 220.080. Disposal of Solid Waste. [R.O. 2008 §225.200; Ord.
No. 6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
All solid waste and recyclables generated or collected within the City shall
be delivered for disposal purposes to a waste disposal area or recycling
center for which an operating permit has been issued by the State in which
the solid waste disposal area is located.
Section 220.090. Normal Solid Waste. [R.O. 2008 §225.210; Ord.
No. 6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
Section 220.100. Compost Material. [R.O. 2008 §225.220; Ord. No.
6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
A. "Normal solid waste" shall be understood to mean all solid waste which
may be received at the Maryville processing facility but shall not
include excludable solid waste, compost material, industrial process
waste or solid waste requiring special handling.
B. The City shall accept normal solid waste for disposal at its processing
facility subject to the applicable fees and requirements.
C. Items determined to be industrial process waste, excluded waste or
solid waste requiring special handling, shall not be accepted by the
processing facility unless acceptance is in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter and the regulations of the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources.
A. The City may maintain a compost center for the purpose of accepting
certain compost material. Those items which are acceptable shall
include items authorized by the applicable State and Federal
regulations including the following:
1. Non-contaminated soil.
2. Garden waste.
3. Lawn clippings.
4. Plant residues.
5. Straw.
6. Hay.
B. The following items shall not be accepted for deposit at the compost
center.
1. Tree branches.
2. Plastic bags.
Section
220.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.100
AO:295
Section 220.110. Industrial Process Waste. [R.O. 2008 §225.230;
Ord. No. 6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
Section 220.120. Special Solid Waste. [R.O. 2008 §225.240; Ord. No.
6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
3. Wood.
4. Metal.
5. Plastic (any type).
6. Tires.
7. Trash.
8. Contaminated soil.
9. Cardboard.
10. Paper.
11. Any other materials deemed unacceptable by the solid waste area
attendant, City Manager or his/her designated representative.
C. Compost materials may be delivered to the compost center in any
container for deposit in the designated compost area. The individual
delivering the material shall be responsible for emptying any bags or
containers of compost material at the designated site at the Maryville
processing facility and for depositing the compost as loose material at
the designated site.
A. Industrial process waste as defined by 10 CSR 80 shall not be accepted
at the Maryville processing facility area unless the City Manager or his/
her authorized representative approves the receipt of the same in
accordance with the provisions of this Section.
B. If the industrial process waste is additionally determined to be special
solid waste, such waste shall be accepted only in compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter for special solid waste.
C. If the industrial process waste is additionally determined to be excluded
solid waste, said waste shall be accepted only in compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter for excluded solid waste.
D. If the industrial process waste is additionally determined to be normal
solid waste, said waste shall be accepted for disposal pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter for normal solid waste.
A. Special solid waste shall be solid waste which requires special
handling, special placement or compaction (e.g., tree stumps, logs,
branches, large timbers, wire, domestic animals other than household
pets, etc.) and shall be accepted at the Maryville processing facility only
under the following conditions:
Section
220.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
220.120
AO:296
Section 220.130. Excluded Solid Waste. [R.O. 2008 §225.250; Ord.
No. 6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
1. The City Manager or his/her authorized representative may impose
pre-delivery processing requirements, such as separation,
compaction or containerization for said waste.
2. Said waste shall be subject to quantity and time of delivery
restrictions as established by the City Manager or his/her
authorized representative.
3. Said waste shall be unloaded only as directed by the processing
facility area.
A. Solid wastes which are excluded by State or Federal law or by City
ordinance will not be accepted at the Maryville processing facility and
shall include the following:
1. Regulated hazardous waste.
2. Radioactive materials and explosives.
3. Regulated infectious waste.
4. Bulk liquids.
5. Semi-solids.
6. Unexpended pesticide containers.
7. Raw animal manure.
8. Septic tank pumpings.
9. Incinerator and air pollution control residues.
10. Industrial process waste and sludge.
11. White goods (e.g., refrigerators, washers, dryers).
12. Lead acid batteries.
13. Non-treated infectious waste.
14. Non-treated bio-hazardous waste.
15. Yard waste and leaves.
16. Non-ferrous and ferrous metals.
B. Motor oil and tires may be received at the Maryville processing facility
in accordance with all applicable State and Federal regulations, upon
payment of the applicable use fees.
Section
220.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.140
AO:297
Section 220.140. Waiver of Ownership. [R.O. 2008 §225.260; Ord.
No. 6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
Section 220.150. User Fees. [R.O. 2008 §225.270; Ord. No. 6511 §1,
12-2-2002; Ord. No. 6589 §1, 9-15-2003; Ord. No. 6860 §§1 — 2,
9-14-2006; Ord. No. 6954 §1, 11-26-2007; Ord. No. 7123 §1,
6-22-2009]
A. All items deposited at the Maryville processing facility, including the
transfer station and the compost center, shall become the sole private
property of the City of Maryville. Any individual, corporation, company
or other entity disposing of items at the Maryville processing facility or
the compost center waives any and all claims to said property upon
delivery.
B. Upon receipt, the City has the exclusive right to dispose of, salvage or
sell materials received at the Maryville processing facility area or
compost center and to do so in any manner deemed appropriate by the
City of Maryville. Any revenue received from the sale of said items shall
be deposited to the Solid Waste Fund of the City of Maryville, Missouri.
C. The City shall not be liable for items of value mistakenly or erroneously
delivered to the Maryville processing facility or compost center. Anyone
delivering or causing to be delivered items to either the Maryville
processing facility or compost center shall be deemed to have accepted
and agreed to these terms.
A. Solid Waste — Normal. All normal solid waste not including compost
material or other items specifically enumerated in the other provisions
of this Chapter shall be subject to a deposit fee of forty-eight dollars
($48.00) per ton which shall include the current State of Missouri fee.
There shall be a minimum per-load fee of twelve dollars ($12.00) for any
vehicle depositing less than five hundred (500) pounds. The minimum
per-load fee shall be prorated for any vehicle depositing more than five
hundred (500) pounds at a rate of forty-eight dollars ($48.00) per ton.
[Ord. No. 7411 §§1 — 2, 4-23-2012; Ord. No. 7547 §§1 — 2,
8-12-201358
B. Solid Waste — Special Handling. All solid waste requiring special
handling shall be subject to a fee established by the City Manager or
his/her authorized representative. Said fee shall be established based
upon the type of solid waste being received and the manpower and cost
associated with and incurred by the City of Maryville, Missouri, for said
deposit.
C. Industrial Process Waste. All industrial process waste, as previously
defined and described in this Chapter, shall be subject to a fee
established by the City Manager or his/her authorized representative.
Said fee shall be established based upon the type of solid waste being
58.Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance provided an effective date of 9-1-2013.
Section
220.140
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
220.150
AO:298
Section 220.160. Authority of Attendants. [R.O. 2008 §225.280; Ord.
No. 6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
The City Manager or his/her authorized representative and the employees
of the City on duty at the Maryville processing facility shall have the
authority to issue reasonable verbal or written instruction to persons
utilizing the Maryville processing facility for the purpose of safety and in
order to maintain satisfactory compliance with the requirements, rules and
regulations as contained herein and of the State of Missouri.
Section 220.170. Regulations of Site Operation. [R.O. 2008
§225.290; Ord. No. 6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
received and the manpower cost associated with and incurred by the
City of Maryville for said deposit.
D. Waste Tires. The City will only accept sixteen (16) inch tires or smaller.
Tires on rims are not accepted. Sixteen (16) inch tires or smaller — five
dollars ($5.00) each.
E. Waste Oil. There shall be a fee for the deposit of oil at the rate of twenty
cents ($0.20) for each gallon or any part thereof.
F. Wood And Brush. For any wood or brush deposited, there shall be a fee
of thirty-three dollars ($33.00) per ton. There shall be a minimum fee of
seven dollars ($7.00) for four hundred thirty (430) pounds or less
deposited per day. For the purpose of the minimum fee, multiple loads
throughout one (1) day may be accumulated and the hauler will be
charged the minimum fee so long as the total amount of wood or brush
deposited per day does not exceed four hundred thirty (430) pounds.
G. Compost Materials. Materials accepted for composting will only be
accepted at the compost center. There shall be no fee for depositing
compost material at the compost center.
A. The operation of the Maryville processing facility shall be governed by
the following regulations:
1. Access to site. Access to the area by the public shall be only at
established marked entrances and shall be only during the hours of
operation. It shall be unlawful to gain or attempt to gain access to
the area at any place other than a marked entrance or at any time
other than during regular operating hours.
2. Vehicle operation. Vehicles shall be operated in accordance with
posted signs and verbal instruction from the area attendant.
Drivers shall be required to follow and stay on marked roads and
trails. No person shall drive at a speed greater than ten (10) miles
per hour. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a vehicle
unattended at the working face or along any traffic route. All
vehicles used for the transportation of solid waste shall be operated
and maintained in accordance with Section 220.070.
Section
220.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.170
AO:299
3. Unloading vehicles. Persons shall be required to unload their own
vehicles. Solid waste and compost shall be unloaded from the
transporting vehicle to the ground in a manner that will place the
solid waste or compost material within the approved area directly
on the working face and not cause it to scatter. It shall be unlawful
to unload a vehicle at any place within the disposal areas except as
directed by signs or the facility attendant. No person shall unload
solid waste or compost from a vehicle if said solid waste or compost
are easily removed by wind in a manner that permits said items to
become airborne. Persons shall unload vehicles containing material
that can become airborne specifically in accordance with the
attendant's instructions.
4. Disturbing containers. It shall be unlawful for any person unloading
solid waste enclosed in a container to open or otherwise interfere
with said container in a manner that permits the contents thereof
to scatter.
5. Inspection of waste. Any person who delivers solid waste or
compost material shall permit the attendant to inspect said waste
or compost in the vehicle by removing covers or moving the waste
or compost or unloading a portion thereof to permit inspection.
6. Segregation of waste. Any person delivering solid waste or compost
material which is not acceptable when mixed with other waste shall
be required to segregate the solid waste or prior to depositing them
at the disposal area. Said segregation of solid waste or compost
material shall take place off site from the Maryville processing
facility.
7. Volume limitations. The City has the right to limit the volume of any
solid waste or compost material that will be accepted from any one
(1) source at any one time or to restrict delivery within a given
period of time from the same source when necessary to maintain
satisfactory compliance with State of Missouri regulations or when
required due to financial considerations, limitations of staff,
equipment or available working face space.
8. Adverse weather conditions. When weather conditions adverse to
the operation of the Maryville processing facility exist, certain
restrictions may be imposed by the City Manager or his/her
authorized representative on the use of the Maryville processing
facility area in order to avoid unsatisfactory conditions. Said
restrictions may include:
a. Prohibition of dumping loose material.
b. Restricting processing facility site use to only solid waste
collectors.
c. Other similar measures necessary to maintain satisfactory site
conditions.
Section
220.170
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
220.170
AO:300
Section 220.180. Dumps and Solid Waste Disposal Areas —
Establishment. [R.O. 2008 §225.295; Ord. No. 6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
9. Damaging facilities. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage,
deface, destroy or otherwise alter any facility, equipment or other
property of the City used as a part of the site development plan or
operation of the Maryville processing center.
10. Fires. No person shall set a fire or cause a fire to burn at the
Maryville processing facility area except a City employee when
authorized by the City Manager or his/her authorized
representative.
11. Scavenging or salvaging. No private individual, company or
corporation shall engage in scavenging or salvaging operations at
the Maryville processing facility area. Nothing in this provision
shall prohibit a City employee from carrying out operations as
directed by the City Manager or his/her authorized representative
pursuant to ownership rights by the City of Maryville.
12. Trespassing. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the
transfer station/processing facility area or compost center except
as directed by the area attendant or posted by signs.
13. Safety. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any unsafe
practice contrary to the requirements of this Section, or the
instructions of the area attendant or to carry out any actions at the
Maryville processing facility area that may endanger the life, limb
or property of another.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, operate or permit the
operation or maintenance of an open dump or other place at which solid
waste are deposited, except a solid waste disposal area or demolition
solid waste disposal area which is operated under a permit from the
State of Missouri and meets the following additional minimum
requirements:
1. Solid waste disposal area. In addition to complying with Chapter
260, RSMo., any person desiring to operate a solid waste disposal
area within the corporate limits of the City must make application
to the City Manager or his/her authorized representative for the
operation of same and said solid waste disposal area shall meet the
following minimum requirements:
a. Be located in an area which is zoned "M-2" Heavy
Manufacturing Zone.
b. Be screened so as to ensure that the area is not visible from
any street right-of-way or residence within one thousand
(1,000) feet of the solid waste disposal area.
Section
220.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.180
AO:301
Section 220.190. Recycling Collection or Processing Facilities. [R.O.
2008 §225.296; Ord. No. 6706 §1, 11-8-2004]
c. Be at least two hundred (200) feet distance from any public
street, alley or thoroughfare.
2. Demolition solid waste disposal area. In addition to complying with
Chapter 260, RSMo., any person desiring to operate a demolition
solid waste disposal area within the corporate limits of the City
must make application to the City Manager or his/her authorized
representative for the operation of the same, and said demolition
solid waste disposal area shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
a. Be located in an area which is zoned "M-2" Heavy
Manufacturing Zone.
b. Be screened from view from any street right-of-way.
c. Be at least two hundred (200) feet distance from any public
street, alley or thoroughfare.
d. Shall not contain concrete, logs or rock exceeding twelve (12)
inches in any dimension. Such demolition debris shall be mixed
with soil in a proportion not to exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) debris by volume.
B. The application fee for a solid waste disposal area or demolition solid
waste disposal area permit shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00)
payable in advance plus any costs incurred by the City to evaluate plans
for the solid waste disposal area.
A. Facilities or businesses within the City which collect or process
recyclables as defined by State law shall meet the following guidelines
for the operation thereof. Such facilities shall be located only in an
"M-1" zone and shall meet all requirements and regulations applicable
to such zone.
B. All recycling collection or processing facilities shall meet or exceed the
following minimum standards:
1. Screening. The operation shall be conducted wholly within a noncombustible
building or within an area surrounded on all sides by a
fence or wall at least eight (8) feet in height. The fence or wall shall
be of uniform height, uniform texture and color and shall be
maintained to insure maximum safety to the public, obscure the
material from normal view of the public and preserve the general
welfare of the neighborhood. The fence or wall shall be installed in
a way that retains all scrap, junk or other materials within the yard.
No scrap, junk or other salvaged materials may exceed the height
of this enclosing fence or wall.
Section
220.180
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
220.190
AO:302
2. Parking. One (1) space for each five hundred (500) square foot floor
area with a minimum of six (6) spaces required.
3. Entrances/traffic circulation. The operation shall provide entrances
on streets with ingress and egress designed to minimize traffic
congestion. There shall be enough room on-site to accommodate
peak traffic volume and company vehicles.
4. Lighting. Lights used to illuminate the premises shall be so
directed and shielded to minimize glare to motorists on public
streets and residents of residential property.
5. Storage bins. Storage bins or trailers may be stored on-site as an
ancillary use, providing the storage bin or trailer is durable,
covered and complies with any setbacks required for any structure
on site. The bin or trailer shall be screened from view off-site as
part of the operation.
6. Loading/unloading. No solid waste, recyclables, junk or other
materials shall be loaded, unloaded or otherwise placed either
temporarily or permanently outside an enclosed building, fence or
visually screened area or within the public right-of-way, except the
use of storage bins placed on the outside an enclosed building for
recycling. The operation shall be attended on the days of operation
to maintain the property in a clean, litter free condition in
accordance with the requirements of the City Code.
7. Paving. All roads, driveways, parking lots and loading/unloading
areas shall be graded and paved with an approved concrete or
asphalt/concrete surface.
8. Stormwater management. Unless otherwise required pursuant to
another provision of the Code, a stormwater management plan may
be required at the discretion of the City.
9. Other regulations. All operations shall be licensed if required,
maintain all proper permits as required from the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources or other licensing authority and
shall meet all City, County, State and Federal requirements
pertaining to facilities, equipment and other features.
Section
220.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.190
AO:303

ARTICLE V
Penalty
Section 220.200. Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §225.300; Ord. No. 6511 §1,
12-2-2002]
Violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine not
to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned in jail for not more
than three (3) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
person violates this Chapter.
Section 220.210. Administrative Liability. [R.O. 2008 §225.310; Ord.
No. 6511 §1, 12-2-2002]
No officer, agent, board, commission or employee of the City shall render
himself/herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons
or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge
of his/her duties under this Chapter. Any suit brought against any officer,
agent, board, commission or employee of the City as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties under this Chapter
shall be defended by the City Attorney until final determination of the
proceedings therein.
Section
220.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.210
AO:305
Chapter 225
FIRE CODE
Section 225.010. International Fire Code. [R.O. 2008 §230.010; Ord.
No. 6442 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7015 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No.
7642 §1, 7-14-2014]
Section 225.020. International Fire Code — Insertions. [R.O. 2008
§230.020; Ord. No. 6442 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7015 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7642 §1, 7-14-2014]
A. In order to regulate and govern the safeguarding of life and property
from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and
use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from
conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings
and premises, and to provide for the issuance of permits for hazardous
uses or operations, except for such portions as herein modified, added,
deleted or amended within this Chapter, the International Fire Code,
2012 Edition, is hereby adopted and shall be incorporated as if fully set
forth herein and shall be hereafter known as the Fire Code of the City of
Maryville, Missouri, including the following appendices:
1. Appendix B — Fire Flow Requirements for Building;
2. Appendix C — Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution;
3. Appendix D — Fire Apparatus Access Roads;
4. Appendix E — Hazardous Categories;
5. Appendix F — Hazard Ranking;
6. Appendix G — Cryogenic Fluids — Weight and Volume Equivalents.
A. The International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, as adopted as the Fire Code
of the City of Maryville is hereby subject to the following insertions:
1. Section 101.1. The term "City of Maryville" shall be inserted.
2. Section 111.4. The insertions in that Section shall read ". . .A fine
not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00)."
3. Wherever a reference is made to "jurisdiction" within the
International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, it shall be understood to
mean the City of Maryville, Missouri.
4. Section 307 "Open Burning and Recreational Fires" shall be
applied.
Section
220.210
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
225.030
AO:306
Section 225.030. International Fire Code — Area Limitations. [R.O.
2008 §230.030; Ord. No. 6442 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7015 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7642 §2, 7-14-2014]
Section 225.040. International Fire Code — Deletions. [R.O. 2008
§230.040; Ord. No. 6442 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7015 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7642 §3, 7-14-2014]
A. The area limits referred to in certain Sections of the International Fire
Code, 2012 Edition, are hereby established as follows:
1. In Section 5704.2 of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition,
storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is
prohibited in the following zones: AG, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, C-0, C-1,
C-2, C-3, and M-1.
2. In Section 5704 of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition,
storage of Class I and Class II liquids in aboveground tanks outside
of buildings is prohibited in the following zones: AG, R-1, R-2, R-3,
C-0, C-1 and C-2.
3. In Section 5704 of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition,
storage of Class I and Class II liquids in aboveground tanks is
prohibited in the following zones: Ag, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, C-0, C-1
and C-2.
4. In Section 6104.1 of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, the
storage of liquified petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of
heavily populated or congested areas and shall be prohibited in the
following zones except as allowed in Section 225.050(B) of the
Maryville Municipal Code: AG, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, C-0, C-1, C-2, C-3,
and M-1.
5. Section 307, Open Burning and Recreational Fires, 2012
International Fire Code, to include Section 225.065, Open Burning
Regulations, as set forth in the City of Maryville Municipal Code.
A. The following portions as set forth in the International Fire Code, 2012
Edition, shall be deleted in their entirety:
1. Section 105-Permits.
Exceptions: A construction permit shall be required as set forth in
Chapter 1 of the 2012 International Fire Code. Permit fees shall
be established as set forth in the Municipal Code of the City of
Maryville, Section 500.090, Building Permit Fees. Permits shall be
required for the following:
a. 105.7.1 Automatic fire-extinguishing systems;
b. 105.7.6 Fire alarm and detection systems and related
equipment;
Section
225.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.040
AO:307
Section 225.050. International Fire Code — Modifications. [R.O.
2008 §230.050; Ord. No. 6442 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 6642 §§1 —
2, 4-12-2004; Ord. No. 7015 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7642 §4,
7-14-2014]
Section 225.060. Appeals. [R.O. 2008 §230.060; Ord. No. 6442 §1,
12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7015 §1, 5-12-2008]
Any person aggrieved by a decision or action of the Code Enforcement
Officer or designee of the Fire Division or other official of the City of
Maryville under this Chapter may appeal such decision or action to the
Board of Code Appeals. Such appeal shall be in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 530.070, 530.080, 530.090 and 530.110 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Maryville and with Chapter 110 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Maryville, all of which are adopted herein by
reference as if set forth fully herein.
c. 105.7.7 Fire pumps and related equipment.
2. Section 108-Board of Appeals.
3. Section 109.3-Violation penalties.
4. Appendix A-Board of Appeals.
A. Chapter 56, Explosives and Fireworks, of the International Fire Code,
2012 Edition, is hereby amended to include Chapter 230, Fireworks, of
the Municipal Code of the City of Maryville, which is adopted and made
a part of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, by reference set
forth in Missouri Department of Public Safety, Chapter 3: Fireworks,
11CRS40-3.010. In the event there is a conflict between a provision
contained within Chapter 33, Explosives and Fireworks, and a provision
contained within Chapter 230, Fireworks, the provision of Chapter 230,
Fireworks, shall prevail.
B. Section 6104 of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, shall be
modified by deleting Subsection 3804.2 and implementing the following
in its place:
6104.2 Maximum Capacity Within Established Limits. Within the limits
established by law and the adopting ordinance restricting the storage
of liquified petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or
congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one (1) installation shall
not exceed a water capacity of one hundred twenty-five (125) gallons
(473L), except that in areas where natural gas service is not available
at the property line at the time occupancy is commenced, the aggregate
capacity of any one (1) installation shall not exceed a water capacity of
five hundred (500) gallons (18921).
Section
225.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
225.065
AO:308
Section 225.065. Open Burning Regulations. [R.O. 2008 §230.065;
Ord. No. 6632 §1, 3-8-2004; Ord. No. 7015 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No.
7096 §1, 3-23-2009]
A. Unlawful Open Burning. It shall be unlawful to engage in the following
acts of open burning.
1. It shall be unlawful to burn or attempt to burn any item other than
leaves, small twigs and tree branches which shall not include full
trees or stumps;
2. It shall be unlawful to burn any solid waste, industrial process
waste, normal solid waste, or special solid waste, as those terms
are defined in Section 220.010;
3. It shall be unlawful to burn any yard waste if the burn pile is
greater than sixteen (16) feet in diameter or is greater than four (4)
feet in height;
4. It shall be unlawful to burn or attempt to burn any item in steel
barrels;
5. It shall be unlawful to burn or attempt to burn any item on the
public streets, sidewalks, alleyways or in public rights-of-way;
6. It shall be unlawful to burn or attempt to burn any item during the
period of any burn ban implemented by the City or other
governmental entity;
7. It shall be unlawful to burn or attempt to burn any item if such
burning causes emissions (smoke or air contaminants) which are
offensive to residents, occupants or individuals in the area, which
shall be determined based upon complaints received in the
immediate one block area and the general flow of smoke and odors.
Under these instances as determined by the Maryville Public Safety
Department, the open burning shall be immediately extinguished
by the individual responsible for the open burning and shall be
deemed an unlawful burning;
8. It shall be unlawful to burn or attempt to burn any item if such
burning is hazardous to other individuals, structures or property as
determined by City representatives;
9. It shall be unlawful to burn or attempt to burn any item in violation
or contrary to any provisions of this Section.
B. Lawful Open Burning.
1. Open burning shall be lawful:
a. When done between April 1 and April 14, July 17 and July 31,
October 24 and November 6 from dawn until dusk or as
Section
225.065
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.065
AO:309
modified or extended by City Council based primarily on
weather conditions; and
b. When the burn pile is no less than fifty (50) feet from any
structure or other combustible material and not greater than
sixteen (16) feet in diameter and/or not greater than four (4)
feet in height.
2. Open burning upon permit authorization issued by the Director of
Public Safety in accordance with the applicable ordinances,
including Section 540.040 of the Maryville Municipal Code, in
order to incinerate areas larger than otherwise authorized herein
and/or special events such as bonfires and demolition;
3. Intentional setting of fires to combat or limit existing fires when
reasonably necessary in the judgment of the responsible
government official;
4. Fires contained within commercially built outdoor fireplaces
designed to prevent the spread of flames or embers are permitted
on privately owned property of a one- or two-family dwelling for
pleasure, cooking, warmth, or similar purposes. Outdoor fireplaces
may not be used for burning trash, yard waste (other than small
tree branches, cut/broken to fit in the fireplace), rubbish or similar
material;
5. Small open flames for heating tar or welding, as well as using
acetylene torches, safety flares and the like;
6. Burning conducted in accordance with a permit granted by the
Environmental Protection Agency, the State of Missouri or other
government agency.
C. Safety Regulations. In order to be lawful, all open burning authorized
under this Section must comply with the following safety regulations:
1. All open burning shall have as its primary source of extinguishing
equipment a water hose of not less than five-eighths (?) inch in
diameter connected to the City water supply. Said water supply
shall be readily available at all burn sites and be not less than
twenty (20) feet from the burn site at all times. All water hoses shall
be equipped with nozzles and the hose shall be maintained charged
during the period of burning.
2. In lieu of the primary source described above, a minimum of one (1)
portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 4A rating or other
approved on-site fire extinguishing equipment such as soil, sand,
water barrel or water truck shall be for immediate utilization. Said
fire extinguishing equipment shall be not less than twenty (20) feet
from the burn site at all times and shall be charged and
immediately available to extinguish the fire.
Section
225.065
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
225.065
AO:310
Section 225.070. General Penalty.
Whenever in the Fire Code adopted herein or any provision of this Chapter
or any ordinance of the City any act is prohibited or is made or declared
to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or such ordinance
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to
be unlawful, the violation of any such provision by any person is hereby
declared to be an ordinance violation; and, upon conviction, unless some
other penalty is prescribed in this Code or such ordinance, such person
may be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00)
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding three (3) months, or both such
fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction. In
any case wherein the penalty for an offense is fixed by any Statute, the
Council shall affix the same penalty by ordinance for the punishment of such
offense.
Chapter 230
FIREWORKS
3. The individual responsible for the open burning shall be at least
sixteen (16) years of age and in constant attendance of the open
burning from the commencement of the fire until the fire is
completely extinguished and has been drenched or saturated with
water.
D. Burning Limitations.
1. The Director of Public Safety or his/her designee may issue a burn
ban within the City limits at any time based on existing
circumstances including weather, ground moisture and wind
conditions after notifying the City Manager. This burn ban shall be
publicized throughout the duration of the ban in a manner designed
to provide information to the general public. No burning shall be
authorized during such burn ban, notwithstanding any other
provisions of this Section.
2. If any otherwise lawful burning is determined by the Maryville
Public Safety Department or other City Official to be hazardous in
nature, said open burning shall be immediately extinguished by the
individual responsible for the open burning and shall be deemed an
unlawful burning. The term hazardous shall be determined and
documented by the official, but shall include dangers of secondary
burning to individuals or property, as well as other hazardous
situations including explosions and air contamination.
3. In the event any burning is instituted in violation of this Section,
the Maryville Public Safety Department is authorized to require
said open burning to immediately cease.
Section
225.065
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.010
AO:311
Section 230.010. Legislative Intent. [R.O. 2008 §235.010; Ord. No.
4890 §1, 7-9-1990]
It is hereby declared to be the intent of City Council, in the exercise of its
police powers to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to regulate
the use, sale and public display of fireworks.
Section 230.020. Administration. [R.O. 2008 §235.020; Ord. No.
4890 §1, 7-9-1990]
This Chapter shall be administered by the City Manager or his/her
authorized representative who shall take such action as may be reasonable
and necessary to secure compliance therewith.
Section 230.030. Inspector. [R.O. 2008 §235.030; Ord. No. 4890 §1,
7-9-1990]
The City Manager or his/her authorized representative shall inspect
structures for the sale of fireworks and sites for public display of fireworks
within the jurisdiction of the City to determine if said structure or site
meets the requirements of the Chapter and to enforce the provisions of this
Chapter.
Section 230.040. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §235.040; Ord. No. 4890
§1, 7-9-1990]
The following words shall have the meanings set out below when used in
this Chapter:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Explosive devices designed primarily to
produce visible or audible effects by combustion and includes aerial devices
and ground devices, all of which are classified as fireworks, UNO336,
1.4G by regulation of the United States Department of Transportation, as
amended from time to time, and which were formerly classified as class
C common fireworks by regulation of the United States Department of
Transportation.
FIREWORKS — Any composition or device for producing a visible, audible,
or both visible and audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation
and that meets the definition of consumer, proximate, or display fireworks
as set forth by 49 CFR Part 171 to end, United States Department of
Transportation hazardous materials regulations, and American
Pyrotechnics Association 87-1 standards.
FIREWORKS STAND — Any structure which is freestanding, solely intended
only for the sale of "Common fireworks" and offers for sale to the public
only those fireworks which are lawful to offer for sale to the general public
within the State of Missouri.
Section
230.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
230.050
AO:312
Section 230.050. Permit Required. [R.O. 2008 §235.050; Ord. No.
4890 §1, 7-9-1990]
No person shall offer for sale or public display any fireworks or common
fireworks without first securing a permit therefor from the City Clerk.
Section 230.060. Application for Permit for the Sale of Fireworks.
[R.O. 2008 §235.060; Ord. No. 4890 §1, 7-9-1990]
Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to secure a permit for the sale of
fireworks shall make written application to the City Clerk on forms provided
therefor, stating the name, address, state sales tax number, telephone
number of the person requesting the permit and the address where the
fireworks stand is to be located, together with such additional information
concerning the site of the stand as may be reasonably required.
Section 230.070. Application for Permit for Public Display of
Fireworks. [R.O. 2008 §235.070; Ord. No. 4890 §1, 7-9-1990]
A. Application for permit to operate a display of fireworks in conformance
with the terms of the National Fire Protection Association, Standard for
Public Display of Fireworks, NFPA 1123, current edition, and of the
general laws of the City of Maryville and the State of Missouri shall be
made in writing on forms provided by the office of the City Clerk.
B. Such application shall set forth:
1. The name of the organization sponsoring the display together with
the names of persons actually in charge of the firing of the display.
2. Evidence of financial responsibility.
3. The date and time of date at which the display is to be held.
4. A description setting forth the age, experience, and physical
characteristics of persons who are to do the actual discharging of
the fireworks.
5. The number and kinds of fireworks to be discharged.
6. The manner and place of storage of such fireworks prior to display.
7. A diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held
showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the
location of all buildings, highways and other lines of transportation,
the lines behind which the audience will be restrained, and the
location of all nearby trees, telegraph or telephone lines or other
overhead obstructions.
C. Upon receipt of such application at least fifteen (15) days in advance of
the date set for this display, the City Manager or his/her authorized
representative shall make or cause to be made, an investigation of the
site of the proposed display for the purpose of determining whether the
Section
230.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.070
AO:313
Section 230.080. Issuance of Permit — Fee. [R.O. 2008 §235.080;
Ord. No. 4890 §1, 7-9-1990]
provisions of these regulations are complied with in the case of the
particular display. He/she shall confer with the Director of Public Safety
about the application and whether issuance of a permit would be
consistent with public safety. Being satisfied that the display is properly
lawful, the City Manager or his/her authorized representative shall
endorse the application, stating that the display is in conformance with
all parts of the law and these regulations. Failure to receive approval on
said application shall be sufficient cause for the office of the City Clerk
to deny the permit.
D. The applicant, following endorsement by the City Manager or his/her
authorized representative, shall submit said application to the office of
the City Clerk who shall then, upon receipt of financial responsibility as
required by ordinance, collect the permit fee as set by resolution and
adopted by the City Council, and issue a non-transferable permit
authorizing the said public fireworks display.
A. The City Clerk shall issue to any person who is in conformity with
Section 230.060, "Application for Permit for the Sale of Fireworks" or
Section 230.070, "Application for Permit for Public Display of
Fireworks", upon payment of the permit fee. Those applying for permits
for the public display of fireworks or public sale of fireworks may be
issued a permit contingent upon proof of financial responsibility in the
following amounts:
1. In any case the insurance required by this Section shall insure the
person, persons or organization holding a public display of
fireworks against loss from the liability imposed by law for injury
to, or death of any person, or damage to any property arising out of
such a public display of fireworks to the amount of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00), exclusive of interest and costs, on
account of injury to, or death of any one (1) person, and subject to
the same limit as respects injury to or death of one (1) person, of
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), exclusive of interest
and costs, on account of the any one (1) public display of fireworks
resulting in injury to or death of more than one (1) person, and of
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for property damage
to property of others resulting from the public display of fireworks
as outlined by this Section.
2. In any case, the insurance required under this Section shall insure
the person(s) selling fireworks or displaying fireworks against loss
from liability imposed by law for injury to, or death of any person,
or damage to any property growing out of the sale or public display
of fireworks to the amount or limit of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00), exclusive of interest and costs, on account of injury
to, or death of any one (1) person, and subject to the same limit as
respects injury to or death of one (1) person, of five hundred
Section
230.070
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
230.080
AO:314
Section 230.090. Inspection of Site of Sale or Site for Public
Display of Fireworks. [R.O. 2008 §235.090; Ord. No. 4890 §1,
7-9-1990]
Upon completion of the set up of a stand for the public sale of fireworks, the
permittee shall notify the City Manager or his/her authorized representative
who shall cause to be made an inspection of the site within twenty-four (24)
hours of such notice, or as soon thereafter as practicable. The inspection of
a site for the public display of fireworks shall be completed as outlined in
Section 230.070.
Section 230.100. Regulations for Sites Offering Public Sale of
Fireworks. [R.O. 2008 §235.100; Ord. No. 4890 §1, 7-9-1990]
thousand dollars ($500,000.00), exclusive of interest and costs,
on account of the sale of or public display of fireworks resulting
in injury to or death of more than one (1) person, and of three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for damage to property of
others resulting from the sale or public display of fireworks on any
one (1) structure.
A. The following regulations shall be considered as minimum
requirements and shall be upheld in all cases involving any site within
the cities which offer fireworks for sale to the public.
1. No fireworks shall be offered for sale or sold to the public except
from 8:00 A.M., June twentieth (20th) through 11:00 P.M. July
fourth (4th), provided however, that there shall not be offered for
sale or sold at any time within the City limits any aerial device with
the common trade name of "bottle rocket" or "sky rocket" and
defined as any device containing a wooden stick for guidance and
stability, rising into the air upon ignition, and producing a burst of
color or noise or both at the height of its flight.
2. All firework stands offering fireworks for sale to the public shall be
free standing and shall offer for sale at such site or within such
structure those fireworks as are lawful for sale to the general
public by Missouri State law.
3. Any fireworks stand shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet
from any inhabited structure or within fifty (50) feet from any
public walk, street or thoroughfare nor shall any such stand be
located within five hundred (500) feet from any hospital, school,
bulk storage of flammable liquids or flammable gases.
4. No fireworks stand shall contain any more than five hundred (500)
pounds of pyrotechnic material at any one time.
5. All fireworks stands shall be kept clean; orderly; free of
accumulation of dust or rubbish; dry and free of grit, paper, empty
used packages and debris, brooms and other cleaning utensils shall
Section
230.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.100
AO:315
Section 230.110. Use of Fireworks Within City Limits. [R.O. 2008
§235.110; Ord. No. 4890 §1, 7-9-1990]
Section 230.120. Violations and Penalties. [R.O. 2008 §235.120;
Ord. No. 4890 §1, 7-9-1990; Ord. No. 5429 §1, 6-25-1996]
Any person, whether individually or as a member or employee of a
partnership or as an officer, agent or employee of a corporation, who
directs or knowingly permits any violation of any of the provisions of this
not have spark-producing metal parts. Sweepings from the
structure shall be disposed of properly.
6. The area surrounding the stand shall be kept clean of brush, dried
vegetation, leaves and similar combustibles for a distance of at
least twenty-five (25) feet.
7. Smoking, matches, open flames, spark producing devices and
firearms shall not be permitted inside or within twenty-five (25)
feet of any fireworks stand.
8. Smoking shall not be permitted inside of or within twenty-five (25)
feet of any fireworks stand. Signs reading "Fireworks - No
Smoking", in letters at least two (2) inches high shall be
conspicuously posted.
9. All artificial lighting at a fireworks stand shall be electrically
powered. A master electrical disconnect shall be provided at the
point where the electrical service enters the stand; this master
disconnect shall be arranged such that all electrical power to the
structure is simultaneously interrupted when the disconnect is in
the "off" position.
10. All openings to any fireworks stand shall be equipped with a means
of locking.
Exception: If locking of the structure is not possible (i.e., the
structure being a tent), the structure shall be attended
continuously to comply with the intent of this Section.
11. All doors shall open outward and be free from any obstruction.
A. No person shall use or cause to be used any other common fireworks at
any time except during the hours from 8:00 A.M. to 11:00 P.M. on the
date of July fourth (4th); no person shall at any time use any aerial
device with the common trade name of "bottle rocket" or "sky rocket"
and defined as any device which contains a wooden stick for guidance
and stability and rises into the air upon ignition. A burst of color or
noise or both is produced at the height of flight.
B. Any other use of fireworks or common fireworks except such as outlined
by this Chapter shall be a direct violation of this Chapter.
Section
230.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
230.120
AO:316
Chapter, or who aids or assists therein, or who shall violate any prohibition
or mandate of this Chapter, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, and
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in jail for not more than three
(3) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day during or upon which a person violates
any provision of this Chapter.
Chapter 235
SMOKING IN WORKPLACES AND PUBLIC PLACES
Section 235.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 7233 §§1 — 2, 8-9-2010]
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Article, shall be
construed as defined in this Section:
BAR — An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the
serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages,
including but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and
cabarets, and shall not include any outdoor area associated with sale or
delivery of food or alcoholic beverages which is located as an extension of
or adjacent to the enclosed area of the bar.
BUSINESS — Any enclosed area of a commercial establishment, including
but not limited to, retail stores, banks, office buildings, offices, restaurants
and bars.
EMPLOYEE — A person who is employed by an employer in consideration
for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers
his or her services for a non-profit entity.
EMPLOYER — A person, business, partnership, association, corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity that employs
the services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA — All space between floor and ceiling that is more
than eighty percent (80%) contained on all sides by permanent and nonmovable
walls that extend from the floor to the ceiling, and/or windows and
doorways.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY — An office or institution providing care or
treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other
medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not
limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including
weight control clinics, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, homes for
the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, dentists, and
all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all
waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards
within health care facilities.
Section
230.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.010
AO:317
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT — An area under the control of a public or
private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of
employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices,
employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms,
classrooms, employee cafeterias, and hallways. A private residence shall be
deemed to be a place of employment only if it is used as a child care, adult
day care, or health care facility.
PLAYGROUND — Any play structure designed in whole or in part to be used
by children or others under eighteen (18) years of age or any similar facility
located on public or private school grounds.
PRIVATE CLUB — An organization, whether incorporated or not, which
is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used
exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a
recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic
purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic
beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the
organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or
similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization
has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The
organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of Federal
income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. §501.
PUBLIC PLACE — An enclosed area to which the public is invited or in
which the public is permitted, including but not limited to, banks, bars,
educational facilities, gaming facilities, health care facilities, hotels and
motels, laundromats, public transportation vehicles and facilities, reception
areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments,
retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas,
theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a public place unless
it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility.
RESTAURANT — An eating establishment, including, but not limited to,
coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school
cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or
employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is
prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant"
shall include a bar area within the restaurant.
SERVICE LINE — An indoor or outdoor line in which one (1) or more
persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the
service involves the exchange of money, including but not limited to ATM
lines, concert lines, food vendor lines, movie ticket lines, and sporting event
lines.
SHOPPING MALL — An enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to
connect retail or professional establishments.
SMOKE or SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted
or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe or other combustible tobacco product in any
manner or in any form.
Section
235.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
235.010
AO:318
SPORTS ARENA — Sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas,
boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and
other similar places where members of the general public assemble to
engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness
sports or other events.
Section 235.020. Application of Article to Municipal Facilities.
[Ord. No. 7233 §§1 — 2, 8-9-2010]
All enclosed areas owned, leased, or operated by the City of Maryville or
Maryville Parks and Recreation shall be subject to the provisions of this
Article.
Section 235.030. Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed Public Places.
[Ord. No. 7233 §§1 — 2, 8-9-2010]
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas of public places within
the City of Maryville, including, but not limited to, the following places:
1. Galleries, libraries, and museums.
2. Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in
businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public,
including, but not limited to, banks, laundromats, professional
offices, and retail service establishments.
3. Bars.
4. Bingo facilities.
5. Child care and adult day care facilities.
6. Convention facilities.
7. Educational facilities, both public and private.
8. Elevators.
9. Gaming facilities.
10. Health care facilities.
11. Hotels and motels.
12. Lobbies, hallways, and other common enclosed areas in apartment
buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities,
nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities.
13. Polling places.
14. Ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transportation
facilities, including bus, train, and airport facilities.
15. Restaurants.
Section
235.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.030
AO:319
Section 235.040. Prohibition of Smoking in Places of Employment.
[Ord. No. 7233 §§1 — 2, 8-9-2010]
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of
employment without exception. This includes common work areas,
auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices,
elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs,
restrooms, and all other enclosed areas.
Section 235.050. Prohibition of Smoking in Private Clubs. [Ord. No.
7233 §§1 — 2, 8-9-2010]
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas owned, leased,
maintained, operated or directed by any private club.
Section 235.060. Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed Residential
Areas. [Ord. No. 7233 §§1 — 2, 8-9-2010]
Section 235.070. Prohibition of Smoking in Outdoor Areas. [Ord.
No. 7233 §§1 — 2, 8-9-2010]
16. Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other commonuse
enclosed areas.
17. Retail stores.
18. Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including
school buildings, under the control of an agency, board,
commission, committee or council of the City of Maryville or a
political subdivision of the State, to the extent the place is subject
to the jurisdiction of the City.
19. Service lines.
20. Shopping malls.
21. Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas.
22. Theaters and other facilities primarily used for exhibiting motion
pictures, stage dramas, lectures, musical recitals, or other similar
performances.
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in the following enclosed residential areas:
1. All private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes.
2. All hotel and motel rooms.
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in the following outdoor places:
1. In and within ten (10) feet of all primary public entrances, open
windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking
Section
235.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
235.070
AO:320
Section 235.080. Where Smoking not Regulated. [Ord. No. 7233 §§1
— 2, 8-9-2010]
Section 235.090. Declaration of Establishment as Non-Smoking.
[Ord. No. 7233 §§1 — 2, 8-9-2010]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, an owner, operator,
manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor
area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a
non-smoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign
conforming to the requirements of this Article is posted.
Section 235.100. Compliance Requirements. [Ord. No. 7233 §§1 —
2, 8-9-2010]
is prohibited, so as to insure that tobacco smoke does not enter
those areas.
2. In all outdoor arenas, stadiums, amphitheaters and concession
stands at the same, and within ten (10) feet of bleachers and
grandstands used or occupied by spectators at sporting and other
public events.
3. In and within ten (10) feet of all outdoor public transportation
stations, platforms, and shelters.
4. In all outdoor service lines.
5. Playgrounds.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article to the contrary, the
following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 235.030
and 235.040:
1. Private residences, except when used as a child care, adult day
care, or health care facility, or as provided in Section 235.060 or
areas within the residence which are used for business purposes
and to which the general public is provided access, in which
instances the provisions of this Article prohibiting smoking shall
apply.
2. Outdoor areas of places of employment except those covered by the
provisions of this Article. If an outdoor area or park has areas
which are designed as eating or recreation areas, and also has
other areas which are designed as open areas, only those portions
of the outdoor area which are described or defined within this
Article shall be subject to the provisions of this Article.
A. An owner, commercial lessee, principal manager or other person in
control of any establishment subject to the provisions of this Article
shall:
Section
235.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.100
AO:321
Section 235.110. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 7233 §§1 — 2, 8-9-2010]
Section 235.120. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 7233 §§1 — 2,
8-9-2010]
Section 235.130. Other Applicable Laws. [Ord. No. 7233 §§1 — 2,
8-9-2010]
This Article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where
it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
Section 235.140. Severability. [Ord. No. 7233 §§1 — 2, 8-9-2010]
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this Article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid,
that invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this Article which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions of this Article are declared to be severable.
1. Ask a person who is smoking to refrain from smoking and to
extinguish all smoking materials.
2. Demand that the person leave the premises if the person refuses to
comply with the provisions of this Article.
3. Refuse to serve a person who is in violation of this Article.
4. Take all other lawful steps to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this Article.
A. This Article shall be enforced by the Maryville Public Safety
Department.
B. Notice of the provisions of this Article shall be given to all applicants for
any alcohol license from the City of Maryville.
C. In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this Article,
any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or
other person in control of a facility or a place of employment to comply
with the provisions of this Article may apply for injunctive relief to
enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction at such
complainant's cost.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or up to ninety
(90) days in jail, or combination of fine and imprisonment.
B. Each day on which a violation of this Article occurs shall be considered
a separate and distinct violation.
Section
235.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
235.150
AO:322
Section 235.150. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 7233 §§1 — 2, 8-9-2010]
This Article shall be effective October 1, 2010.
Chapter 240
FAIR HOUSING
Section
235.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.150
AO:323

ARTICLE I
Discriminatory Practices
Section 240.010. Unlawful Housing Practices.
A. It shall be an unlawful housing practice:
1. To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, to deny or otherwise
make unavailable a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status.
2. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial
status.
3. To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published
any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, sex, disability or familial status, or an intention to make
any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
4. To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status that any dwelling is
not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in
fact so available.
5. To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any
dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular
race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or
familial status.
6. To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a
disability of:
a. That buyer or renter;
b. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
c. Any person associated with that buyer or renter.
7. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a
disability of:
a. That person;
Section
240.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
240.010
AO:325
b. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
c. Any person associated with that person.
B. For purposes of Sections 240.010, 240.020 and 240.030, discrimination
includes:
1. A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with the disability,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in
the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do
so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing
to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed
before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
2. A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary
to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling.
3. In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily
dwellings for first (1st) occupancy after March 13, 1991, a
failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner
that:
a. The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by persons with a disability.
b. All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by persons with a disability in wheelchairs.
c. All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
(1) An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
(2) Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
(3) Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and
(4) Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
C. As used in Subdivision (3) of Subsection (B) of this Section, the term
"covered multi-family dwelling" means:
1. Buildings consisting of four (4) or more units if such buildings have
one (1) or more elevators; and
Section
240.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
240.010
AO:326
Section 240.020. Discrimination in Commercial Real Estate Loans.
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose
business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real
estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance because of race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status
to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, construction,
improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against
him/her in fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or
conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status of
such person or of any person associated with him/her in connection with
such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective
owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwellings in relation to which
such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
Section 240.030. Discrimination in Selling or Renting by Real
Estate Agencies Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers'
organization or other service organization or facility relating to the business
of selling or renting dwellings on account of race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status.
Section 240.040. Discrimination in Public Accommodations
Prohibited — Exceptions.
2. Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more
units.
D. Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American
National Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility
and usability for people with physical disabilities, commonly cited as
"ANSI A117.1", suffices to satisfy the requirements of Subsection
(B)(3)(a) of this Section.
A. All persons within the City of Maryville are free and equal and shall be
entitled to the full and equal use and enjoyment within this State of any
place of public accommodation, as hereinafter defined, without
discrimination or segregation on the grounds of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, ancestry or disability.
B. It is an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person, directly or
indirectly, to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person or to
attempt to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person any of the
accommodations, advantages, facilities, services or privileges made
available in any place of public accommodation, as defined in Section
213.010, RSMo., and this Section, or to segregate or discriminate
Section
240.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
240.040
AO:327
Section 240.050. Additional Unlawful Discriminatory Practices.
Section 240.060. Exemptions.
against any such person in the use thereof on the grounds of race, color,
religion, national origin, sex, ancestry or disability.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a private club, a place of
accommodation owned by or operated on behalf of a religious
corporation, association or society or other establishment which is not
in fact open to the public, unless the facilities of such establishments
are made available to the customers or patrons of a place of public
accommodation as defined in Section 213.010, RSMo., and this Section.
A. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice:
1. To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the commission of acts
prohibited under this Chapter or to attempt to do so;
2. To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any other person
because such person has opposed any practice prohibited by this
Chapter or because such person has filed a complaint, testified,
assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation,
proceeding or hearing conducted pursuant to this Chapter;
3. For the City to discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, ancestry, age, as it relates to employment,
disability or familial status as it relates to housing; or
4. To discriminate in any manner against any other person because of
such person's association with any person protected by this
Chapter.
A. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to invalidate or limit any law
of the State or of the City that requires dwellings to be designed and
constructed in a manner that affords persons with disabilities greater
access than is required by this Chapter.
B. Nothing in Sections 240.010, 240.020 and 240.030:
1. Requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose
tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of
other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
2. Limits the applicability of any reasonable local restriction
regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy
a dwelling, nor does any provision of said Sections regarding
familial status apply with respect to housing for older persons.
3. Shall prohibit conduct against a person because such person has
been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal
Section
240.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
240.060
AO:328
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined by
Section 195.010, RSMo.
C. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society or any non-profit institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or
occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving
preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall
anything in this Chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the
public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its
members or from giving preference to its members.
D. Nothing in this Chapter, other than the prohibitions against
discriminatory advertising in Subsection (A)(3) of Section 240.010,
shall apply to:
1. The sale or rental of any single-family house by a private individual
owner, provided the following conditions are met:
a. The private individual owner does not own or have any interest
in more than three (3) single-family houses at any one time;
and
b. The house is sold or rented without the use of a real estate
broker, agent or salesperson or the facilities of any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings and without
publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement. If the
owner selling the house does not reside in it at the time of the
sale or was not the most recent resident of the house prior to
such sale, the exemption in this Section applies to only one (1)
such sale in any twenty-four (24) month period.
2. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one (1) of such living quarters as his/her residence.
Section
240.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
240.060
AO:329
Chapter 300
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 300.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §300.010; Ord. No. 4893
§1, 7-18-1990]
The following words and phrases, when used in this Title, mean:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — The definition for Abandoned Property shall be
the same as that set out in Section 217.010 of this Code.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle manufactured and used
exclusively for off-highway use which is fifty (50) inches or less in width,
with an unladen dry weight of six hundred (600) pounds or less, traveling
on three (3), four (4) or more low pressure tires, with a seat designed to be
straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
ALLEY or ALLEYWAY — Any street with a roadway of less than twenty (20)
feet in width.
BUSINESS DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway when within any six hundred (600) feet along the highway there
are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes including, but not
limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, and public buildings which
occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one (1) side or three
hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the highway.
CENTRAL BUSINESS (OR TRAFFIC) DISTRICT — All streets and portions
of streets within the area described by City ordinance as such.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle designed or regularly
used for carrying freight and merchandise, or more than eight (8)
passengers but not including vanpools or shuttle buses.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY — Every highway, street or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons
have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway.
CROSSWALK —
CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the
edges of the traversable roadway.
1.
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
2.
Section
240.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
300.010
AO:330
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Is a vehicle of any of the following types:
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight (or
passengers).
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
A vehicle operated by the State Highway Patrol, the State Water Patrol,
the Missouri Capitol Police, a Conservation Agent or a State Park
Ranger, those vehicles operated by enforcement personnel of the State
Highways and Transportation Commission, Police or Fire Department,
Sheriff, Constable or Deputy Sheriff, Federal Law Enforcement Officer
authorized to carry firearms and to make arrests for violations of the
laws of the United States, Traffic Officer or Coroner or by a privately
owned emergency vehicle company;
1.
A vehicle operated as an ambulance or operated commercially for the
purpose of transporting emergency medical supplies or organs;
2.
Any vehicle qualifying as an emergency vehicle pursuant to Section
310.070 of this Title;
3.
Any wrecker, or tow truck or a vehicle owned and operated by a
public utility or public service corporation while performing emergency
service;
4.
Any vehicle transporting equipment designed to extricate human
beings from the wreckage of a motor vehicle;
5.
Any vehicle designated to perform emergency functions for a civil
defense or emergency management agency established pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 44, RSMo.;
6.
Any vehicle operated by an authorized employee of the Department of
Corrections who, as part of the employee's official duties, is responding
to a riot, disturbance, hostage incident, escape or other critical
situation where there is the threat of serious physical injury or death,
responding to mutual aid call from another criminal justice agency, or
in accompanying an ambulance which is transporting an offender to a
medical facility;
7.
Any vehicle designated to perform hazardous substance emergency
functions established pursuant to the provisions of Sections 260.500 to
260.550, RSMo.
8.
Section
300.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
300.010
AO:331
INTERSECTION —
LANED ROADWAY — A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively
upon tracks, except farm tractors and motorized bicycles.
MOTORCYCLE — Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use
of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in
contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Any two-wheeled or three-wheeled device having
an automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more
than fifty (50) cubic centimeters which produces less than three (3) gross
brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum
speed of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on level ground.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named herein,
they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current
use in the City.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES — All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this Title placed or erected by authority of
a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.
PARALLEL TO THE CURBING — When used in this Title shall mean that a
vehicle so parked shall be parked with the right-hand side of said vehicle
parallel to the curbing and both the front and rear wheel on said right-hand
side not more than eighteen (18) inches from the curbing or street line.
PARK or PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
PARKWAY — When used in this Title shall mean and include that portion of
the public streets between the curbing, or traveled portion of the highway
where there is no curbing, and the outside boundary line of the street rightof-
way.
The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict; or
1.
Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by
an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways
thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways
of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
2.
Section
300.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
300.010
AO:332
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE — A place adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.
POLICE OFFICER — Every officer of the Municipal Department of Public
Safety or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make
arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner but not by other persons.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business district when the property on such
highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is in the main
improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
RESTRICTED ZONE — Includes any street or portion thereof where there
is any time limit upon parking therein.
RIGHT-HAND SIDE — When used in this Title shall mean that side of any
vehicle or street to the right of the driver of such vehicle facing the front of
such vehicle.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right of one (1) vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching
under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise
to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway",
as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all
such roadways collectively.
SAFETY ZONE — The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for use of
pedestrians.
STAND or STANDING — The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving
or discharging passengers.
STOP — When required, complete cessation from movement.
STOP or STOPPING — When prohibited, any halting even momentarily of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
Section
300.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
300.010
AO:333
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the uses of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel. "State highway", a highway maintained by
the State of Missouri as a part of the State highway system.
THROUGH HIGHWAY — Every highway or portion thereof on which
vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to
which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to
yield right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to
either a stop sign or a yield sign when such signs are erected as provided in
this Title.
TRACTOR, TRUCK TRACTOR or TRUCK-TRACTOR — A self-propelled motor
vehicle designed for drawing other vehicles, but not for the carriage of
any load when operating independently. When attached to a semitrailer, it
supports a part of the weight thereof.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes
of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed.
TRAILER — Any vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
property or passengers on its own structure and for being drawn by a
self-propelled vehicle, except those running exclusively on tracks, including
a semi-trailer or vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in
conjunction with a self-propelled vehicle that a considerable part of its own
weight rests upon and is carried by the towing vehicle. The term "trailer"
shall not include cotton trailers as defined in Subdivision (8) of Section
301.010, RSMo., and shall not include manufactured homes as defined in
Section 700.010, RSMo.
URBANIZED AREA — An area with a population of fifty thousand (50,000)
or more designated by the Bureau of the Census within boundaries to
be fixed by the State Highways and Transportation Commission and local
officials in cooperation with each other and approved by the Secretary of
Transportation. The boundary of an urbanized area shall, at a minimum,
encompass the entire urbanized area as designed by the Bureau of the
Census.
UTILITY VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle manufactured and used
exclusively for off-highway use which is sixty-three (63) inches or less in
width, with an unladen dry weight of one thousand eight hundred fifty
(1,850) pounds or less, traveling on four (4) or six (6) wheels, to be used
primarily for landscaping, lawn care, or maintenance purposes.
VEHICLE — Any mechanical device on wheels designed primarily for use or
used on highways, except motorized bicycles, vehicles propelled or drawn
Section
300.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
300.010
AO:334
by horses or human power, or vehicles used exclusively on fixed rails or
tracks, cotton trailers, or motorized wheelchairs operated by handicapped
persons.
Chapter 305
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Section 305.010. Records of Traffic Violations.
Section 305.020. Department of Public Safety to Investigate
Accidents.
It shall be the duty of the Department of Public Safety to investigate
traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons
charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.
Section 305.030. Traffic Accident Reports.
The Department of Public Safety shall maintain a suitable system of filing
traffic accident reports. Such reports shall be available for the use and
information of the City Manager.
Section 305.040. Department of Public Safety to Submit Annual
Traffic Safety Report.
A. The Department of Public Safety shall keep a record of all violations of
the traffic ordinances of the City or of the State vehicle laws of which
any person has been charged, together with a record of the final
disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so
maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Said
record shall accumulate during at least a five (5) year period and from
that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the
most recent five (5) year period.
B. All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be
serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be
kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.
C. All such records and reports shall be public records.
A. The Department of Public Safety shall annually prepare a traffic report
which shall be filed with the Mayor. Such report shall contain
information on traffic matters in the City as follows:
1. The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the
number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident
data.
2. The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent
data on the safety activities of the Police.
Section
300.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
305.040
AO:335
Section 305.050. City Traffic Engineer.
Section 305.060. Emergency and Experimental Regulations.
Chapter 310
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS
Section 310.010. Authority of Police and Fire Department Officials.
3. The plans and recommendations of the Department of Public Safety
for future traffic safety activities.
A. The office of City Traffic Engineer is established. The City Manager or
his/her authorized representative shall serve as City Traffic Engineer in
addition to his/her other functions and shall exercise the powers and
duties with respect to traffic as provided in this Title.
B. The City Manager shall determine the installation and proper timing
and maintenance of traffic control devices, conduct engineering
analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures, conduct
engineering investigation of traffic conditions, plan the operation of
traffic on the streets and highways of the City, and cooperate with other
City Officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by
ordinances of the City.
A. The Chief of Police by and with the approval of the City Manager is
hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the
provisions of the traffic ordinances of the City and to make and enforce
temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain
in effect for more than ninety (90) days.
B. The City Manager may test traffic control devices under actual
conditions of traffic.
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Department of Public Safety or
such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all traffic
laws of the City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to traffic in
the City.
B. Officers of the Department of Public Safety or such officers as are
assigned by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic
by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that,
in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Department of Public Safety may
direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions
of the traffic laws.
Section
305.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
310.010
AO:336
Section 310.015. Authority to Promulgate Regulations, Etc. [R.O.
2008 §305.010; Ord. No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
C. Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of an incident, may
direct or assist the Police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
A. The City Manager or his/her authorized representative is hereby
authorized:
1. To designate and establish speed, safety and hazard zones of such
kind, character and number, and at such places, as deemed
warranted and necessary, and which will be of the greatest benefit
to the general public.
2. To erect warning and informational signs or markings at a distance
from certain locations which are deemed by them to be dangerous
and hazardous, and such other informational signs deemed
beneficial to the general public or as a warning to the general
public.
3. To designate and mark lanes for traffic and no passing zones, as
they are deemed warranted and beneficial to the general public,
consistent with State laws and this Chapter.
4. To erect or place signs and markings establishing cross-overs or
crosswalks or prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles on any highway where in their opinion such
stopping, standing and parking of any vehicle or obstruction would
unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon. Every
person shall legally observe such signs and markings as authorized
hereunder or by State law.
5. To designate, establish and prescribe rules and regulations for the
operating thereof, bus stops, loading and unloading zones and
taxicab stands, and in such places and in such manner as they shall
determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the
public, and every such bus stop, loading and unloading zone and
taxicab stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. Every
person shall legally observe the rules so authorized hereunder.
6. To prescribe rules and regulations for the vending, display or sales
of merchandise and other wares or products upon any portion of
the highways, streets and alleys in this City, and when signs and
markings are placed depicting "No Vending" or words to that effect,
every person shall legally observe such signs, markings, rules,
regulation or regulations.
7. To designate, post and mark one-way roadways, rotary traffic
islands and City squares for one-way traffic to the right.
Section
310.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
310.015
AO:337
Section 310.020. Obedience to Police and Fire Department Officials.
No person shall knowingly fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a Police Officer or Fire Department official.
Section 310.030. Persons Propelling Pushcarts or Riding Animals
to Obey Traffic Regulations.
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this Title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this Title which by their very nature can have no application.
Section 310.040. Use of Coasters, Roller Skates and Similar Devices
Restricted.
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing
a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
pedestrians. This Section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as
a play street as authorized by ordinance of the City.
Section 310.050. Public Employees to Obey Traffic Regulations.
The provisions of this Title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by
or used in the service of the United States Government, this State, County
or City and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the
provisions of this Title, except as otherwise permitted in this Title.
Section 310.060. Emergency Vehicles — Use of Lights and Sirens —
Right-of-Way — Stationary Vehicles, Procedure — Penalty.
8. To designate State and Federal marked highways in this City as
throughways or through streets and highways, and all traffic shall
come to a complete stop before entering or crossing such, when
properly sign-posted and marked.
A. Upon the immediate approach of an emergency vehicle giving audible
signal by siren or while having at least one (1) lighted lamp exhibiting
red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance
of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle or a flashing blue
light authorized by Section 310.070 of this Chapter, the driver of every
other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to
a position parallel to, and as far as possible to the right of, the traveled
portion of the highway and thereupon stop and remain in such position
until such emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a police or traffic officer.
B. Upon approaching a stationary emergency vehicle displaying lighted
red or red and blue lights, the driver of every motor vehicle shall:
Section
310.015
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
310.060
AO:338
Section 310.070. Sirens and Flashing Lights Emergency Use —
Persons Authorized — Violation — Penalty.
Motor vehicles and equipment, not otherwise defined in this Title as an
authorized emergency vehicle, which are operated by any member of an
organized Fire Department, ambulance association or rescue squad,
whether paid or volunteer, may be operated on streets and highways in this
1. Proceed with caution and yield the right-of-way, if possible with due
regard to safety and traffic conditions, by making a lane change
into a lane not adjacent to that of the stationary vehicle, if on a
roadway having at least four (4) lanes with not less than two (2)
lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching vehicle;
or
2. Proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the vehicle,
maintaining a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes
would be unsafe or impossible.
C. Responsibilities Of Driver Of Emergency Vehicle.
1. The driver of any "emergency vehicle" defined in Section 300.010
of this Code shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red
lights or blue lights on except when such vehicle is responding to
an emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected law
violator, or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire.
2. The driver of an emergency vehicle may:
a. Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of Sections 304.014
to 304.025, RSMo., and the provisions of this Code;
b. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
c. Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the driver does
not endanger life or property;
d. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
3. The exemptions granted to an emergency vehicle pursuant to
Subsection (C)(2) of this Section shall apply only when the driver of
any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell,
siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when
the vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying
a red light or blue light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of
such vehicle.
D. No person shall purchase an emergency light as described in this
Section without furnishing the seller of such light an affidavit stating
that the light will be used exclusively for emergency vehicle purposes.
Section
310.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
310.070
AO:339
City as an emergency vehicle under the provisions of Section 310.060 of this
Chapter, while responding to a fire call or ambulance call or at the scene of
a fire call or ambulance call and while using or sounding a warning siren
and using or displaying thereon fixed, flashing or rotating blue lights, but
sirens and blue lights shall be used only in bona fide emergencies. Permits
for the operation of such vehicles equipped with sirens or blue lights shall
be in writing and shall be issued and may be revoked by the Chief of
an organized Fire Department, organized ambulance association or rescue
squad and no person shall use or display a siren or rotating blue lights on a
motor vehicle, fire, ambulance or rescue equipment without a valid permit
authorizing the use. Permit to use a siren or lights as heretofore set out does
not relieve the operator of the vehicle so equipped with complying with all
other traffic laws and regulations. Violation of this Section constitutes an
ordinance violation.
Section 310.080. Immediate Notice of Accident Within City.
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the City resulting in
injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent
extent of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more to one (1) person shall give
or cause to be given notice of such accident to the Department of Public
Safety as soon as reasonably possible.
Section 310.090. Written Report of Accident.
The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total property damage
to an apparent extent of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more to one (1)
person shall, within five (5) days after such accident, forward a written
report of such accident to the Department of Public Safety. The provisions of
this Section shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated
at the scene by a Police Officer while such driver was present thereat.
Section 310.100. When Driver Unable to Report.
Section 310.110. Leaving the Scene of a Motor Vehicle Accident.
A. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving
immediate notice of an accident as required in Section 310.080 and
there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident
capable of doing so, such occupant shall give or cause to be given the
notice not given by the driver.
B. Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report
of an accident as required in Section 310.090 and such driver is not the
owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such
accident shall, within five (5) days after the accident, make such report
not made by the driver.
A. A person commits the offense of leaving the scene of a motor vehicle
accident when, being the operator or driver of a vehicle on the
Section
310.070
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
310.110
AO:340
Chapter 315
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section 315.010. Authority to Install Traffic Control Devices.
The City Manager shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals
and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of the
City to make effective the provisions of said ordinances and may place
and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he/she may deem
necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the City or
under State law or to guide or warn traffic.
Section 315.020. Manual and Specifications for Traffic Control
Devices.
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual
and specifications approved by the State Highways and Transportation
Commission or resolution adopted by the City Council of the City. All signs
or signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as
practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the City. All traffic
control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Title shall be official traffic control devices.
Section 315.030. Obedience to Traffic Control Devices.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions
of this Title, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or Police Officer, subject
to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in
this Title.
highways, streets or roads of the City or on any publicly or privately
owned parking lot or parking facility within the City generally open
for use by the public and knowing that an injury has been caused
to a person or damage has been caused to property due to his/her
culpability or to accident, he/she leaves the place of the injury, damage
or accident without stopping and giving his/her name, residence,
including City and street number, motor vehicle number and driver's
license number, if any, to the injured party or to a Police Officer, or if
no Police Officer is in the vicinity, then to the nearest Police station or
judicial officer.
B. For the purposes of this Section, all Peace Officers shall have
jurisdiction, when invited by an injured person, to enter the premises of
any such privately owned parking lot or parking facility for the purpose
of investigating an accident and performing all necessary duties
regarding such accident.
Section
310.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
315.040
AO:341
Section 315.040. When Official Traffic Control Devices Required for
Enforcement Purposes.
No provision of this Title for which official traffic control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and
place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever
a particular Section does not state that official traffic control devices are
required, such Section shall be effective even though no devices are erected
or in place.
Section 315.050. Official Traffic Control Devices — Presumption of
Legality.
Section 315.060. Traffic Control Signal Legend — Right Turn on
Red Light — When.
A. Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position
approximately conforming to the requirements of this Title, such
devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
B. Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of
this Title and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements
pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the
requirements of this Title, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
A. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or colored lighted arrows, successively one (1)
at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall
be used except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend,
and said lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows:
1. Green indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
b. Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow or such other movement as is permitted by other
indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall
Section
315.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
315.060
AO:342
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an
adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as
provided in Section 315.070, pedestrians facing any green
signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may
proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
2. Steady yellow indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby
warned that the related green movement is being terminated
or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately
thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection.
b. Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise
directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in Section
315.070, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to
cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no
pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
3. Steady red indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection
and shall remain standing until a green indication is shown
except as provided in paragraph (b) of this Subsection.
b. The driver of a vehicle which is stopped as close as practicable
at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection
in obedience to a red signal may cautiously enter the
intersection to make a right turn but shall yield the right-ofway
to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by
the signal at the intersection, except that the State Highways
and Transportation Commission with reference to an
intersection involving a State highway, and local authorities
with reference to an intersection involving other highways
under their jurisdiction, may prohibit any such right turn
against a red signal at any intersection where safety conditions
so require, said prohibition shall be effective when a sign is
erected at such intersection giving notice thereof.
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as
provided in Section 315.070, pedestrians facing a steady red
signal alone shall not enter the roadway.
Section
315.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
315.060
AO:343
Section 315.070. Pedestrian Control Signals.
Section 315.080. Flashing Signals.
Section 315.090. Lane Direction Control Signals.
When lane direction control signals are placed over the individual lanes of
a street or highway, vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a
green signal is shown but shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a
red signal is shown.
Section 315.100. Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or
Markings.
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
4. In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of
this Section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which
by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be
made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the
stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking,
the stop shall be made at the signal.
A. Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words
"Walk" or "Don't Walk" or appropriate symbols are in place, such signals
shall indicate as follows:
1. "WALK": Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the rightof-
way by the drivers of all vehicles.
2. "WAIT" or "DON'T WALK": No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has
partially completed his/her crossing on the walk signal shall
proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is
showing.
A. Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic
sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
1. Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.
2. Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
Section
315.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
315.100
AO:344
imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device, or which attempts
to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes
with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device.
Section 315.110. Interference With Official Traffic Control Devices.
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any
inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any other part thereof.
Section 315.120. Authority to Establish Play Streets.
The City Manager shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof
a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway
indicating and helping to protect the same.
Section 315.130. Play Streets.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof
as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
Section 315.140. City Manager to Designate Crosswalks and
Establish Safety Zones.
Section 315.150. Traffic Lanes.
Chapter 320
A. The City Manager is hereby authorized:
1. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where
in his/her opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing
the roadway and at such other places as he/she may deem
necessary.
2. To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he/she may deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians.
A. The City Manager is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the
roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is
necessary.
B. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another
vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
Section
315.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
315.150
AO:345
SPEED REGULATIONS
Section 320.010. State Speed Laws Applicable.
The State traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable
upon all streets within the City, except that the City may by ordinance
declare and determine upon the basis of engineering and traffic
investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon
specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared
when signs are in place giving notice thereof.
Section 320.020. Regulation of Speed by Traffic Signals.
The City Manager is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as
to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds
slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district
or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
Section 320.030. Speed Limits. [R.O. 2008 §315.040; Ord. No. 4893
§1, 7-18-1990; Ord. No. 5241 §1, 10-17-1994; Ord. No. 5293 §1,
4-10-1995; Ord. No. 5460 §1, 9-23-1996; Ord. No. 6120 §1,
9-28-1998; Ord. No. 6163 §1, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 6194 §1, 5-10-1999;
Ord. No. 6275 §1, 4-24-2000; Ord. No. 6293 §1, 5-22-2000; Ord. No.
6526 §1 — 2, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 7799 §1, 10-12-2015]
A. No vehicle shall be operated at a rate of speed in excess of the posted
speed signs.
B. The speed regulations upon those highways and streets or parts of
highways and streets where there are no posted speed limit signs, shall
be twenty-five (25) miles per hour. The speed limitations upon these
streets with a right-of-way of less than twenty (20) feet in width,
commonly known as "alleys," shall be ten (10) miles per hour.
C. The following shall be specifically designated speed limits contrary to
Subsection (B):
1. First Street.
From east City limits to 102 River 55 miles per hour
From 102 River to east 1700 block 45 miles per hour
From east 1700 block to Depot Street 35 miles per hour
From Depot Street to Davis Street 30 miles per hour
From center line of Country Club Road
eastward to one hundred fifty (150) feet
west of Faustiana Place
45 miles per hour
Section
315.150
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
320.030
AO:346
From one hundred fifty (150) feet west of
Faustiana Place eastward to center line of
Ray Avenue
35 miles per hour
From the center line of Ray Avenue
eastward to center line of Mulberry Street
30 miles per hour
2. Third Street.
From Depot Street to Davis Street 35 miles per hour
From Davis Street to Vine Street 25 miles per hour
3. Seventh Street.
From Depot Street to Davis Street 30 miles per hour
4. Sixteenth Street.
From west City limits to Main Street 35 miles per hour
5. Buchanan Street.
From Lincoln Street to Jenkins Street 30 miles per hour
6. College Avenue.
From Country Club Road to Grand Street 30 miles per hour
7. Country Club Road.
From First Street to north City limits 30 miles per hour
8. Depot Street.
From north City limits to Third Street 35 miles per hour
From Third Street to Halsey Street 30 miles per hour
9. Edwards Street.
From Saunders Street to Vine Street 30 miles per hour
10. Main Street.
From United States 71 at the south end of
Main Street to Route V
40 miles per hour
From Route V to South Avenue 35 miles per hour
From South Avenue to Jenkins Street 30 miles per hour
Section
320.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
320.030
AO:347
From north City limits to the point the
extension of the southern boundary of the
tract of real estate recorded and described
in Book 359, Page 48, in the Recorder's
Office of Nodaway County, Missouri, would
intersect Main Street
55 miles per hour
From the point the extension of the
southern boundary of the tract of real
estate recorded and described in Book
359, Page 48, in the Recorder's Office of
Nodaway County, Missouri, would
intersect Main Street to Sixteenth Street
45 miles per hour
From Sixteenth Street to Sixth Street 35 miles per hour
11. Munn Avenue.
From Route V to First Street 30 miles per hour
12. Route V.
West City limits to Main Street 40 miles per hour
West City limits east to Business Route 71 40 miles per hour
13. South Avenue.
From west City limits to Main Street 35 miles per hour
From Main Street east to Lieber Street 25 miles per hour
From Lieber Street east to United States
Highway 71
35 miles per hour
14. Business Route 71.
From Route V south to United States
Highway 71
40 miles per hour
15. Second Street.
East Second Street, 300 block, 400 block
and 500 block
20 miles per hour
16. United States 71 Bypass.
From the south City limits to the north City
limits
55 miles per hour
D. The City Manager or his/her duly authorized representative is hereby
authorized to have erected speed limit signs in such places as said City
Manager or his/her duly authorized representative shall deem
necessary.
E. Violations of this Section shall be an ordinance violation.
Section
320.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
320.040
AO:348
Section 320.040. Slow Speed — Regulations.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. Peace
Officers may enforce the provisions of this Section by directions to drivers,
and in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and
refusal to comply with direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the
continued slow operation by a driver is an ordinance violation.
Section 320.050. Special Speed Limits on Roadways.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon those portions of the
roadways which are set forth and described in Section 320.030 at a rate of
speed in excess of that speed limit set for such portions of the roadways by
said Section.
Chapter 325
TURNING MOVEMENTS
Section 325.010. Required Position and Method of Turning at
Intersection.
A. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
1. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge
of the roadway, except where multiple turn lanes have been
established.
2. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that
portion of the right-half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable,
the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the
left of the center of the intersection.
3. Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction on one (1) or more of
the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme
left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of
travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as
practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving
Section
320.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
325.010
AO:349
Section 325.020. Authority to Place and Obedience to Turning
Markers.
Section 325.030. Authority to Place Restricted Turn Signs.
The City Manager is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at
which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn and shall
place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours,
in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may
be removed when such turns are permitted.
Section 325.040. Obedience to No-Turn Signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or Uturn
is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any
such sign.
Section 325.050. "U" Turns. [R.O. 2008 §320.020; Ord. No. 4893 §1,
7-18-1990]
No person driving any vehicle shall make a complete reverse turn,
commonly called a "U" turn, except that such a turn is permitted at the
termination of a dead-end street.
in such direction upon the roadway being entered, except where
multiple turn lanes have been established.
4. Designated two-way left turn lanes. Where a special lane for
making left turns by drivers proceeding in opposite directions have
been indicated by official traffic control devices:
a. A left turn shall not be made from any other lane;
b. A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when preparing
for or making a left turn from or into the roadway or when
preparing for or making a U-turn when otherwise permitted by
law; and
c. A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane for a distance more
than five hundred (500) feet.
A. The City Manager is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs
within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled
by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed
by law or ordinance.
B. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
such indications.
Section
325.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
325.050
AO:350
Chapter 330
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Section 330.010. Authority to Sign One-Way Streets and Alleys.
Whenever any ordinance of the City designates any one-way street or alley,
the City Manager shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof,
and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place.
Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at
every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is
prohibited.
Section 330.020. One-Way Streets and Alleys.
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described and
designated by ordinance, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated
direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and
maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction
is prohibited.
Section 330.030. Authority to Restrict Direction of Movement on
Streets During Certain Periods.
Chapter 335
STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS
Section 335.010. Through Streets Designated.
Those streets and parts of streets described by ordinances of the City are
declared to be through streets for the purposes of Sections 335.010 to
335.090.
A. The City Manager is hereby authorized to determine and designate
streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular
traffic shall proceed in one (1) direction during one (1) period and the
opposite direction during another period of the day and shall place and
maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give
notice thereof. The City Manager may erect signs temporarily
designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction,
regardless of the centerline of the roadway.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of
such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance
with this Section.
Section
325.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
335.020
AO:351
Section 335.020. Signs Required at Through Streets.
Whenever any ordinance of the City designates and describes a through
street, it shall be the duty of the City Manager to place and maintain a
stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at
any intersection a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such
through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all
times by traffic control signals; provided however, that at the intersection
of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through street
and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at
the approaches of either of said streets as may be determined by the City
Manager upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study.
Section 335.030. Other Intersections Where Stop or Yield Required.
The City Manager is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through
streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more
entrances to any such intersection in which event he/she shall cause to be
erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required, or whether
vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such
intersection as prescribed in Subsection (A) of Section 335.040 in which
event he/she shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where
obedience thereto is required.
Section 335.040. Stop and Yield Signs.
Section 335.050. Vehicle Entering Stop Intersection.
Except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer or traffic control signal,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop
sign shall stop as required by Subsection (B) of Section 335.040 and after
having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered
the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely
on said highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when
such driver is moving across or within the intersection.
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to
stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked
stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway.
B. Except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer or traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection
indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest
the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
Section
335.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
335.060
AO:352
Section 335.060. Vehicle Entering Yield Intersection.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such
sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall
yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on
another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection; provided
however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the
intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision
shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his/her failure to yield right-of-way.
Section 335.070. Emerging From Alley, Driveway or Building.
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as
may be necessary to avoid collision and upon entering the roadway shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
Section 335.080. Stop When Traffic Obstructed.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he/she is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed.
Section 335.090. Stop Signs. [R.O. 2008 §325.070(C); Ord. No. 4893
§1, 7-18-1990; Ord. No. 5417 §1, 5-28-1996; Ord. No. 6553 §1,
6-9-2003]
Chapter 340
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
A. At the following intersection all four (4) roadways at the intersection
shall be controlled by a stop sign:
1. First and Buchanan Streets.
2. Third and Buchanan Streets.
3. Fourth and Buchanan Streets.
4. Fifth and Buchanan Streets.
5. Third and Market Streets.
6. Fourth and Market Streets.
7. Seventh and Walnut Streets.
Section
335.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.010
AO:353
Section 340.010. Following Emergency Vehicle Prohibited.
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any emergency vehicle traveling in response to an emergency call closer
than five hundred (500) feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the
block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
Section 340.020. Crossing Fire Hose.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department
when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire
or alarm of fire without the consent of the Fire Department official in
command.
Section 340.030. Funeral Processions.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall mean:
FUNERAL DIRECTOR — A person licensed as a funeral director
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 333, RSMo.
FUNERAL LEAD VEHICLE or LEAD VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle
equipped with at least one (1) lighted circulating lamp exhibiting an
amber or purple light or lens or alternating flashing headlamps visible
under normal atmospheric conditions for a distance of five hundred
(500) feet from the front of the vehicle. A hearse or coach properly
equipped may be a lead vehicle.
ORGANIZED FUNERAL PROCESSION — Two (2) or more vehicles
accompanying the remains of a deceased person from a funeral
establishment, church, synagogue or other place where a funeral
service has taken place to a cemetery, crematory or other place of
final disposition or a funeral establishment, church, synagogue or other
place where additional funeral services will be performed if directed by
a licensed funeral director from a licensed establishment.
B. Driving Rules.
1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Section, pedestrians and
operators of all other vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle which is a part of an organized funeral procession.
2. Notwithstanding any traffic control device or right-of-way provision
prescribed by State or local law, when the funeral lead vehicle in an
organized funeral procession lawfully enters an intersection, all
vehicles in the procession shall follow the lead vehicle through the
intersection. The operator of each vehicle in the procession shall
exercise the highest degree of care toward any other vehicle or
pedestrian on the roadway.
3. An organized funeral procession shall have the right-of-way at all
intersections regardless of any traffic control device at such
intersections, except that operators of vehicles in an organized
Section
340.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
340.030
AO:354
Section 340.040. Driving in Procession.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand
edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practicable and safe.
Section 340.050. When Permits Required for Parades and
Processions.
No funeral, procession or parade containing two hundred (200) or more
persons or fifty (50) or more vehicles except the forces of the United States
Army or Navy, the military forces of this State, and the forces of the Police
funeral procession shall yield the right-of-way to any approaching
emergency vehicle pursuant to the provisions of law or when
directed to do so by a Law Enforcement Officer.
4. All vehicles in an organized funeral procession shall follow the
preceding vehicle in the procession as closely as is practical and
safe under the conditions.
5. No person shall operate any vehicle as part of an organized funeral
procession without the flashing emergency lights of such vehicle
being lighted.
6. Any person who is not an operator of a vehicle in an organized
funeral procession shall not:
a. Drive between the vehicles comprising an organized funeral
procession while such vehicles are in motion and have the
flashing emergency lights lighted pursuant to Subsection
(B)(5) above, except when required to do so by a Law
Enforcement Officer or when such person is operating an
emergency vehicle giving an audible or visual signal;
b. Join a funeral procession for the purpose of securing the rightof-
way; or
c. Attempt to pass any vehicle in an organized funeral procession,
except where a passing lane has been specifically provided.
7. When an organized funeral procession is proceeding through a red
signal light as permitted herein, a vehicle not in the organized
funeral procession shall not enter the intersection unless such
vehicle may do so without crossing the path of the funeral
procession.
8. No ordinance, regulation or any other provision of law shall
prohibit the use of a motorcycle utilizing flashing amber lights to
escort an organized funeral procession on the highway.
C. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Section shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Section
340.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.050
AO:355
and Fire Departments shall occupy, march or proceed along any street
except in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such
other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.
Section 340.055. Emergencies, Parades, Etc. [R.O. 2008 §330.040;
Ord. No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
On the occasion of any emergency, celebration, parade, extraordinary
crowds or traffic, the City Manager or his/her authorized representative
may suspend or change the traffic parking rules contained in this Chapter,
or any part of them temporarily, for such time and in such manner as he/she
may deem best for the safety and convenience of the public, and he/she may
order such streets or parts thereof, as he/she may deem best, to be roped
off or closed to traffic or parking.
Section 340.060. Vehicle Shall Not Be Driven on a Sidewalk —
Prohibition on Obstruction of Bicycle Lanes — Drivers to Yield to
Bicycles in Designated Bicycle Lanes.
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except
on a permanent or temporary driveway. A designated bicycle lane shall not
be obstructed by a parked or standing motor vehicle or other stationary
object. A motor vehicle may be driven in a designated bicycle lane only for
the purpose of a lawful maneuver to cross the lane or to provide for safe
travel. In making an otherwise lawful maneuver that requires traveling in
or crossing a designated bicycle lane, the driver of a motor vehicle shall
yield to any bicycle in the lane. As used in this Section, the term "designated
bicycle lane" shall mean a portion of the roadway or highway that has been
designated by the Governing Body having jurisdiction over such roadway or
highway by striping with signing or striping with pavement markings for the
preferential or exclusive use of bicycles.
Section 340.070. Limitations on Backing.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can
be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
Section 340.080. Opening and Closing Vehicle Doors.
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall
any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
Section 340.090. Riding on Motorcycles — Additional Passenger —
Requirements.
A. A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent
and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any
other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless
Section
340.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
340.090
AO:356
Section 340.100. Riding Bicycle on Sidewalks — Limitations —
Motorized Bicycles Prohibited.
Section 340.110. All-Terrain Vehicles — Prohibited — Exceptions —
Operation Under an Exception — Prohibited Uses — Penalty.
such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which
event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if
designed for two (2) persons or upon another seat firmly attached to
the rear or side of the operator.
B. The operator of a motorized bicycle shall ride only astride the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto and shall not permit more
than one (1) person to ride thereon at the same time, unless the
motorized bicycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person. Any
motorized bicycle designed to carry more than one (1) person must be
equipped with a passenger seat and footrests for the use of a passenger.
A. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
B. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
C. No person shall ride a motorized bicycle upon a sidewalk.
A. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle, as defined in Section
300.010, upon the streets and highways of this City, except as follows:
1. All-terrain vehicles owned and operated by a governmental entity
for official use; or
2. All-terrain vehicles operated for agricultural purposes or industrial
on-premises purposes between the official sunrise and sunset on
the day of operation.
B. No person shall operate an off-road vehicle, as defined in Section
304.001, RSMo., within any stream or river in this City, except that offroad
vehicles may be operated within waterways which flow within the
boundaries of land which an off-road vehicle operator owns, or for
agricultural purposes within the boundaries of land which an off-road
vehicle operator owns or has permission to be upon, or for the purpose
of fording such stream or river of this State at such road crossings as
are customary or part of the highway system. All Law Enforcement
Officials or Peace Officers of this State and its political subdivisions
shall enforce the provisions of this Subsection within the geographic
area of their jurisdiction.
C. A person operating an all-terrain vehicle on a street or highway
pursuant to an exception covered in this Section shall have a valid
license issued by a State authorizing such person to operate a motor
Section
340.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.110
AO:357
Section 340.115. Utility Vehicles, Operation on Highway and in
Streams or Rivers Prohibited — Exceptions — Passengers Prohibited
— Violations, Penalty.
vehicle but shall not be required to have passed an examination for the
operation of a motorcycle, and the vehicle shall be operated at speeds
of less than thirty (30) miles per hour. When operated on a street or
highway, an all-terrain vehicle shall have a bicycle safety flag, which
extends not less than seven (7) feet above the ground, attached to the
rear of the vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape
with an area of not less than thirty (30) square inches and shall be
dayglow in color.
D. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle:
1. In any careless way so as to endanger the person or property of
another;
2. While under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance;
or
3. Without a securely fastened safety helmet on the head of an
individual who operates an all-terrain vehicle or who is being towed
or otherwise propelled by an all-terrain vehicle, unless the
individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
E. No operator of an all-terrain vehicle shall carry a passenger, except for
agricultural purposes.
A. No person shall operate a utility vehicle, as defined in Section 300.010
of this Title, upon the highways of this City or State, except as follows:
1. Utility vehicles owned and operated by a governmental entity for
official use;
2. Utility vehicles operated for agricultural purposes or industrial onpremises
purposes between the official sunrise and sunset on the
day of operation, unless equipped with proper lighting;
3. Utility vehicles operated by handicapped persons for short
distances occasionally only on the State's secondary roads when
operated between the hours of sunrise and sunset;
4. The City may issue special permits for utility vehicles to be used on
highways within the City limits by licensed drivers. Fees of fifteen
dollars ($15.00) may be collected and retained by the City for such
permits.
B. No person shall operate a utility vehicle within any stream or river in
this City or State, except that utility vehicles may be operated within
waterways which flow within the boundaries of land which a utility
vehicle operator owns, or for agricultural purposes within the
boundaries of land which a utility vehicle operator owns or has
Section
340.110
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
340.115
AO:358
Section 340.120. Riding Bicycles, Sleds, Roller Skates by Attaching
to Another Vehicle, Prohibited — Pulling a Rider Behind Vehicle
Prohibited.
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorized bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself/herself to any vehicle
upon a roadway. Neither shall the driver of a vehicle knowingly pull a rider
behind a vehicle.
Section 340.130. Controlled Access.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
Section 340.140. Cutting Through to Avoid Intersections.
No person shall drive any motor vehicle from a public street, highway
or roadway onto any private roadway, driveway, parking lot or business
establishment for the purpose of avoiding an intersection.
permission to be upon, or for the purpose of fording such stream or
river of this City or State at such road crossings as are customary or
part of the highway system. All Law Enforcement Officials shall enforce
the provisions of this Subsection within the geographic area of their
jurisdiction.
C. A person operating a utility vehicle on a highway pursuant to an
exception covered in this Section shall have a valid operator's or
chauffeur's license, except that a handicapped person operating such
vehicle under Subparagraph (3) of Subsection (A) of this Section shall
not be required to have passed an examination for the operation of a
motorcycle, and the vehicle shall be operated at speeds of less than
forty-five (45) miles per hour.
D. No persons shall operate a utility vehicle:
1. In any careless way so as to endanger the person or property of
another; or
2. While under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance.
E. No operator of a utility vehicle shall carry a passenger, except for
agricultural purposes. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply
to any utility vehicle in which the seat of such vehicle is designed to
carry more than one (1) person.
F. A violation of this Section shall be an ordinance violation.
Section
340.115
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.145
AO:359
Section 340.145. Entering Private Driveways. [R.O. 2008 §330.170;
Ord. No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
No driver shall enter the driveway of any service station or other private
driveway merely for the purpose of turning his/her vehicle around.
Section 340.150. Driving Through Safety Zone Prohibited.
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone.
Section 340.160. Manner of Operation of Motor Vehicles — Careful
and Prudent.
Every person operating a motor vehicle on the highways of this City shall
drive the vehicle in a careful and prudent manner and at a rate of speed so
as not to endanger the property of another or the life or limb of any person
and shall exercise the highest degree of care.
Section 340.165. Drag Racing. [R.O. 2008 §330.110; Ord. No. 4893
§1, 7-18-1990]
Section 340.170. Driving to the Right.
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the City so as to engage in
the act of drag racing.
B. For the purpose of this Section, the term "drag racing" means the act of
two (2) or more individuals competing or racing on any street, highway
or other place open to the public in the City in a situation in which one
of the motor vehicles is beside or to the rear of a motor vehicle operated
by a competing driver and the one (1) driver attempts to prevent the
competing driver from passing or overtaking him.
A. Upon all public roads or highways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right-half of the roadway, except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction pursuant to the rules governing such movement;
2. When placing a vehicle in position for and when such vehicle is
lawfully making a left turn in compliance with the provisions of this
Title;
3. When the right-half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair; or
4. Upon a roadway designated by local ordinance as a one-way street
and marked or signed for one-way traffic.
B. It is unlawful to drive any vehicle upon any highway or road which has
been divided into two (2) or more roadways by means of a physical
barrier or by means of a dividing section or delineated by curbs, lines or
other markings on the roadway except to the right of such barrier or
Section
340.145
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
340.170
AO:360
dividing section or to make any left turn or semi-circular or U-turn
on any such divided highway, except at an intersection or interchange
or at any signed location designated by the State Highways and
Transportation Commission or the Department of Transportation. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to emergency vehicles, law
enforcement vehicles or to vehicles owned by the Commission or the
Department.
C. Whenever any roadway has been divided into three (3) or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all other
consistent herewith shall apply:
1. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver
has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
2. Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle shall
not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and
passing another vehicle where the roadway ahead is clearly visible
and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in
preparation for a left turn, or where such center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation.
3. Upon all highways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal
speed of traffic thereon shall be driven in the right-hand lane for
traffic or as close as practicable to the right-hand edge or curb,
except as otherwise provided in Sections 304.014 to 304.026,
RSMo.
4. Official signs may be erected by the State Highways and
Transportation Commission or the Highway Patrol may place
temporary signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated
lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same
direction and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every
such sign.
5. Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right and, except when a roadway has been
divided into traffic lanes, each driver shall give to the other at least
one-half (½) of the main traveled portion of the roadway whenever
possible.
D. All vehicles in motion upon a highway having two (2) or more lanes of
traffic proceeding in the same direction shall be driven in the righthand
lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or when
preparing to make a proper left turn or when otherwise directed by
traffic markings, signs or signals.
E. All trucks registered for a gross weight of more than forty-eight
thousand (48,000) pounds shall not be driven in the far left-hand lane
upon all interstate highways, freeways, or expressways within
Section
340.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.170
AO:361
Section 340.180. Passing Regulations.
urbanized areas of the State having three (3) or more lanes of traffic
proceeding in the same direction. This restriction shall not apply when:
1. It is necessary for the operator of the truck to follow traffic control
devices that direct use of a lane other than the right lane; or
2. The right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair.
F. As used in Subsection (E) of this Section, "truck" means any vehicle,
machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer, or any combination thereof,
propelled or drawn by mechanical power and designed for or used in
the transportation of property upon the highways. The term "truck" also
includes a commercial motor vehicle as defined in Section 300.010 of
this Title.
A. The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to the limitations and
exceptions hereinafter stated:
1. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and
shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely
clear of the overtaken vehicle; and
2. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of
the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of such
driver's vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
B. The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
1. When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
2. Upon a City street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width
for two (2) or more lanes of vehicles in each direction; or
3. Upon a one-way street.
The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass another
vehicle upon the right only under the foregoing conditions
when such movement may be made in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the paved or
main traveled portion of the roadway. The provisions of this
Subsection shall not relieve the driver of a slow-moving vehicle
from the duty to drive as closely as practicable to the righthand
edge of the roadway.
C. Except when a roadway has been divided into three (3) traffic lanes, no
vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the centerline of a highway or
Section
340.170
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
340.180
AO:362
Section 340.190. Hand and Mechanical Signals.
public road in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free
of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such
overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with
the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction or any vehicle overtaken.
D. No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
1. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve of the
highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance
as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach
from the opposite direction.
2. When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred
(100) feet of any bridge, viaduct, tunnel or when approaching
within one hundred (100) feet of or at any intersection.
A. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of or turn a vehicle
from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after the giving of an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein.
1. An operator or driver when stopping, or when checking the speed
of the operator's vehicle if the movement of other vehicles may
reasonably be affected by such checking of speed, shall extend
such operator's arm at an angle below horizontal so that the same
may be seen in the rear of the vehicle.
2. An operator or driver intending to turn the vehicle to the right shall
extend such operator's arm at an angle above horizontal so that the
same may be seen in front of and in the rear of the vehicle and shall
slow down and approach the intersecting highway as near as
practicable to the right side of the highway along which such
operator is proceeding before turning.
3. An operator or driver intending to turn the vehicle to the left shall
extend such operator's arm in a horizontal position so that the
same may be seen in the rear of the vehicle and shall slow down
and approach the intersecting highway so that the left side of the
vehicle shall be as near as practicable to the centerline of the
highway along which the operator is proceeding before turning.
4. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the
hand and arm or by a signal light or signal device in good
mechanical condition of a type approved by the State Highway
Patrol; however, when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a
hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear
of such vehicle, then such signals shall be given by such light or
Section
340.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.190
AO:363
Section 340.200. Stopping for School Bus.
device. A vehicle shall be considered as so constructed or loaded
that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front
and rear when the distance from the center of the top of the
steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load
exceeds twenty-four (24) inches, or when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body
or load thereon exceeds fourteen (14) feet, which limit of fourteen
(14) feet shall apply to single vehicles or combinations of vehicles.
The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to any trailer
which does not interfere with a clear view of the hand signals of the
operator or of the signaling device upon the vehicle pulling such
trailer; provided further, that the provisions of this Section as far
as mechanical devices on vehicles so constructed that a hand and
arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such
vehicle as above provided shall only be applicable to new vehicles
registered within this State after the first (1st) day of January,
1954.
A. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway upon meeting or overtaking
from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway
for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children and
whose driver has in the manner prescribed by law given the signal to
stop shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and shall not
proceed until such school bus resumes motion or until signaled by its
driver to proceed.
B. Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon
the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words
"School Bus" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height. Each bus
shall have lettered on the rear in plain and distinct type the following:
"State Law: Stop While Bus is Loading and Unloading". Each school bus
subject to the provisions of Sections 304.050 to 304.070, RSMo., shall
be equipped with a mechanical and electrical signaling device approved
by the State Board of Education which will display a signal plainly
visible from the front and rear and indicating intention to stop.
C. Every school bus operated to transport students in the public school
system which has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten
thousand (10,000) pounds, which has the engine mounted entirely in
front of the windshield and the entrance door behind the front wheels,
and which is used for the transportation of school children shall be
equipped with a crossing control arm. The crossing control arm, when
activated, shall extend a minimum of five (5) feet six (6) inches from the
face of the front bumper. The crossing control arm shall be attached on
the right side of the front bumper and shall be activated by the same
controls which activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices
described in Subsection (B) of this Section. This Subsection may be
cited as "Jessica's Law" in commemoration of Jessica Leicht and all
Section
340.190
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
340.200
AO:364
Section 340.210. Right-of-Way at Intersection — Signs at
Intersections.59
other Missouri school children who have been injured or killed during
the operation of a school bus.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the driver of a school bus
in the process of loading or unloading students upon a street or
highway shall activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices,
in the manner prescribed by the State Board of Education, to
communicate to drivers of other vehicles that students are loading or
unloading. A public school district has the authority pursuant to Section
304.050, RSMo., to adopt a policy which provides that the driver of a
school bus in the process of loading or unloading students upon a
divided highway of four (4) or more lanes may pull off of the main
roadway and load or unload students without activating the mechanical
and electrical signaling devices in a manner which gives the signal for
other drivers to stop and may use the amber signaling devices to alert
motorists that the school bus is slowing to a stop; provided that the
passengers are not required to cross any traffic lanes and also provided
that the emergency flashing signal lights are activated in a manner
which indicates that drivers should proceed with caution and, in such
case, the driver of a vehicle may proceed past the school bus with due
caution. No driver of a school bus shall take on or discharge passengers
at any location upon a highway consisting of four (4) or more lanes of
traffic, whether or not divided by a median or barrier, in such manner as
to require the passengers to cross more than two (2) lanes of traffic; nor
shall any passengers be taken on or discharged while the vehicle is
upon the road or highway proper unless the vehicle so stopped is
plainly visible for at least five hundred (500) feet in each direction to
drivers of other vehicles in the case of a highway with no shoulder and a
speed limit greater than sixty (60) miles per hour and at least three
hundred (300) feet in each direction to drivers of other vehicles upon
other highways, and on all highways, only for such time as is actually
necessary to take on and discharge passengers.
E. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need
not stop upon meeting or overtaking a school bus which is on a different
roadway, which is proceeding in the opposite direction on a highway
containing four (4) or more lanes of traffic, or which is stopped in a
loading zone constituting a part of, or adjacent to, a limited or
controlled access highway at a point where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross the roadway.
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the rightof-
way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway, provided however, there is no form of traffic control at such
intersection.
59.State Law Reference — This Section has additional penalties based on certain
circumstances, §304.351, RSMo.
Section
340.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.210
AO:365
Section 340.220. Distance at Which Vehicle Must Follow.
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than
is reasonably safe and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the roadway. Vehicles being
driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a
caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so
operated, except in a funeral procession or in a duly authorized parade, so
as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of
vehicles as to enable any other vehicle to overtake or pass such vehicles
in safety. This Section shall in no manner affect Section 304.044, RSMo.,
relating to distance between trucks traveling on the highway.
Section 340.230. Excessive Acceleration. [R.O. 2008 §330.120; Ord.
No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the City at a rate of acceleration
greater than is reasonably necessary to safely enter flow of traffic or obtain
the maximum speed limit. Tire friction marks or squealing of tires shall be
evidence of such excessive acceleration.
B. When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall
yield the right-of-way to the driver of the vehicle on the right. This
Subsection shall not apply to vehicles approaching each other from
opposite directions when the driver of one (1) of such vehicles is
attempting to or is making a left turn.
C. The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the
left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as
to constitute an immediate hazard.
D. The driver of a vehicle intending to make a left turn into an alley, private
road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction when the making of such left turn would
create a traffic hazard.
E. The City may, on any section of road where construction or major
maintenance operations are being effected, fix a speed limit in such
areas by posting of appropriate signs, and the operation of a motor
vehicle in excess of such speed limit in the area so posted shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of careless and imprudent driving and a
violation of Section 340.160.
Section
340.210
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
340.230
AO:366
Chapter 342
ALCOHOL-RELATED TRAFFIC OFFENSES
Cross Reference — As to reimbursement of certain costs related to arrest
under this chapter, §115.293 of this code.
Section 342.010. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
DRIVE, DRIVING, OPERATES or OPERATING — Physically driving or
operating a motor vehicle.
INTOXICATED CONDITION — A person is in an "intoxicated condition"
when he/she is under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance or
drug, or any combination thereof.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER or ARRESTING OFFICER — Includes the
definition of Law Enforcement Officer in Subdivision (17) of Section
556.061, RSMo., and military Policemen conducting traffic enforcement
operations on a Federal military installation under military jurisdiction in
the State of Missouri.
Section 342.020. Driving While Intoxicated.
A person commits the offense of "driving while intoxicated" if he/she
operates a motor vehicle while in an intoxicated or drugged condition.
No person convicted of or pleading guilty to the offense of driving while
intoxicated shall be granted a suspended imposition of sentence for such
offense, unless such person shall be placed on probation for a minimum of
two (2) years.
Section 342.030. Driving With Excessive Blood Alcohol Content.
Section 342.040. Chemical Test for Alcohol Content — Consent
Implied — Administered — When — How — Videotaping of Chemical
or Field Sobriety Test Admissible Evidence.
A. A person commits the offense of "driving with excessive blood alcohol
content" if such person operates a motor vehicle in this City with eighthundredths
of one percent (.08%) or more by weight of alcohol in such
person's blood.
B. As used in this Section, "percent by weight of alcohol" in the blood shall
be based upon grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of
blood or two hundred ten (210) liters of breath and may be shown by
chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath, saliva or urine. For the
purposes of determining the alcoholic content of a person's blood under
this Section, the test shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 577.020 to 577.041, RSMo.
Section
340.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
342.040
AO:367
A. This Section and Section 577.021, RSMo., shall be known as the Alan
Woods Law.
B. Any person who operates a motor vehicle upon the public highways of
this City shall be deemed to have given consent to, subject to the
provisions of Sections 577.020 to 577.041, RSMo., a chemical test or
tests of the person's breath, blood, saliva or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol or drug content of the person's blood pursuant
to the following circumstances:
1. If the person is arrested for any offense arising out of acts which
the arresting officer had reasonable grounds to believe were
committed while the person was driving a motor vehicle while in an
intoxicated or drugged condition;
2. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been stopped
by a Law Enforcement Officer, and the Law Enforcement Officer
has reasonable grounds to believe that such person was driving a
motor vehicle with a blood alcohol content of two-hundredths of
one percent (.02%) or more by weight;
3. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been stopped
by a Law Enforcement Officer, and the Law Enforcement Officer
has reasonable grounds to believe that such person has committed
a violation of the traffic laws of the State or any political subdivision
of the State, and such officer has reasonable grounds to believe,
after making such stop, that such person has a blood alcohol
content of two-hundredths of one percent (.02%) or greater;
4. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been stopped
at a sobriety checkpoint or roadblock, and the Law Enforcement
Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that such person has a
blood alcohol content of two-hundredths of one percent (.02%) or
greater;
5. If the person, while operating a motor vehicle, has been involved in
a motor vehicle collision which resulted in a fatality or a readily
apparent serious physical injury as defined in Section 565.002,
RSMo., and has been arrested as evidenced by the issuance of a
uniform traffic ticket for the violation of any State law or County or
municipal ordinance with the exception of equipment violations
contained in Chapter 307, RSMo., or similar provisions contained
in County or municipal ordinances; or
6. If the person, while operating a motor vehicle, has been involved in
a motor vehicle collision which resulted in a fatality or serious
physical injury as defined in Section 565.002, RSMo.
The test shall be administered at the direction of the Law
Enforcement Officer whenever the person has been arrested or
stopped for any reason.
Section
342.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
342.040
AO:368
C. The implied consent to submit to the chemical tests listed in Subsection
(B) of this Section shall be limited to not more than two (2) such tests
arising from the same arrest, incident or charge.
D. Chemical analysis of the person's breath, blood, saliva or urine to be
considered valid pursuant to the provisions of Sections 577.020 to
577.041, RSMo., shall be performed according to methods approved by
the State Department of Health by licensed medical personnel or by a
person possessing a valid permit issued by the State Department of
Health for this purpose.
E. The person tested may have a physician, or a qualified technician,
chemist, registered nurse or other qualified person at the choosing and
expense of the person to be tested, administer a test in addition to any
administered at the direction of a Law Enforcement Officer. The failure
or inability to obtain an additional test by a person shall not preclude
the admission of evidence relating to the test taken at the direction of a
Law Enforcement Officer.
F. Upon the request of the person who is tested, full information
concerning the test shall be made available to such person. Full
information is limited to the following:
1. The type of test administered and the procedures followed;
2. The time of the collection of the blood or breath sample or urine
analyzed;
3. The numerical results of the test indicating the alcohol content of
the blood and breath and urine;
4. The type and status of any permit which was held by the person
who performed the test;
5. If the test was administered by means of a breath testing
instrument, the date of performance of the most recent required
maintenance of such instrument.
Full information does not include manuals, schematics or
software of the instrument used to test the person or any
other material that is not in the actual possession of the State.
Additionally, full information does not include information in
the possession of the manufacturer of the test instrument.
G. Any person given a chemical test of the person's breath pursuant to
Subsection (B) of this Section or a field sobriety test may be videotaped
during any such test at the direction of the Law Enforcement Officer.
Any such video recording made during the chemical test pursuant to
this Subsection or a field sobriety test shall be admissible as evidence
for a violation of any municipal ordinance or any license revocation or
suspension proceeding pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 302,
RSMo.
Section
342.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
342.050
AO:369
Section 342.050. Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages in Moving
Motor Vehicle — Prohibited When.
Chapter 345
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Section 345.010. Pedestrians Subject to Traffic Control Devices.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared
in Sections 315.060 and 315.070 of this Title, but at all other places
pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions
stated in this Chapter.
Section 345.020. Pedestrians' Right-of-Way in Crosswalks.
Section 345.030. Pedestrians to Use Right-Half of Crosswalks.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right-half of
crosswalks.
A. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage while operating a
moving motor vehicle upon the highways.
B. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Section is
guilty of an infraction.
C. Any infraction under this Section shall not reflect on any records with
the Department of Revenue.
A. When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a
crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
B. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
C. Subsection (A) shall not apply under the conditions stated in Subsection
(B) of Section 345.050.
D. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear
shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
Section
342.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
345.040
AO:370
Section 345.040. Crossing at Right Angles.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a crosswalk.
Section 345.050. When Pedestrian Shall Yield.
Section 345.060. Prohibited Crossing.
Section 345.070. Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways.
Section 345.080. Drivers to Exercise Highest Degree of Care.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Title, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise the highest degree of care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn
A. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
B. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the rightof-
way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
C. The foregoing rules in this Section have no application under the
conditions stated in Section 345.060 when pedestrians are prohibited
from crossing at certain designated places.
A. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a
crosswalk.
B. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any
business district.
C. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any
street designated by ordinance.
D. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic control devices and, when authorized to
cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
A. Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to
walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
B. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the
opposite direction.
Section
345.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
345.080
AO:371
when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any
child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
Section 345.090. Distance to Be Maintained When Overtaking a
Bicycle.
The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle proceeding in the same
direction on the roadway, as defined in Section 300.010, shall leave a safe
distance when passing the bicycle, and shall maintain clearance until safely
past the overtaken bicycle.
Chapter 350
METHOD OF PARKING
Section 350.010. Standing or Parking Close to Curb.
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped
or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within
eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb.
Section 350.020. Signs or Markings Indicating Angle Parking.
Section 350.030. Obedience to Angle Parking Signs or Markers.
On those streets which have been signed or marked by the City Manager
for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at
the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or
markings.
Section 350.040. Permits for Loading or Unloading at an Angle to
the Curb.
A. The City Manager shall determine upon what streets angle parking
shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets but such angle
parking shall not be indicated upon any Federal-aid or State highway
within the City unless the State Highways and Transportation
Commission has determined by resolution or order entered in its
minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking
without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
B. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where
passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the
left side of the street.
A. The City Manager is authorized to issue special permits to permit the
backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such
permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real
Section
345.080
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
350.040
AO:372
Section 350.050. Lamps on Parked Vehicles.
Section 350.060. Vehicle Parking — Procedure. [R.O. 2008
§340.040; Ord. No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
No person shall park or store any vehicle at any place on any public street
or alley for a period exceeding seventy-two (72) hours, or so park or store
such vehicle and then remove the same within said time and again replace
such vehicle for the purpose of so parking the same temporarily for personal
use.
Chapter 355
PARKING PROHIBITIONS
property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person
the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein.
B. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of
the special terms or conditions of any such permit.
A. Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during
the hours between a half (½) hour after sunset and a half (½) hour
before sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any
person or object within a distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such
street or highway, no lights need be displayed upon such parked
vehicle.
B. Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours
between a half (½) hour after sunset and a half (½) hour before sunrise
and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a
distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such highway, such vehicle so
parked or stopped shall be equipped with one (1) or more lamps
meeting the following requirements: At least one (1) lamp shall display
a white or amber light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet
to the front of the vehicle, and the same lamp or at least one (1) other
lamp shall display a red light visible from a distance of five hundred
(500) feet to the rear of the vehicle, and the location of said lamp or
lamps shall always be such that at least one (1) lamp or combination of
lamps meeting the requirements of this Section is installed as near as
practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closer to passing traffic.
The foregoing provisions shall not apply to a motor-driven cycle.
C. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed.
Section
350.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
355.010
AO:373
Section 355.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §345.010; Ord. No. 5499
§1, 2-24-1997]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall be understood to have the
following meanings:
CITY — The City of Maryville, Missouri.
FRONT YARD — An open space extending the full width of the zoning
lot, between the main building and the front lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed by buildings or structures in excess of thirty (30) inches in
height, the depth of which shall be measured as the least distance between
the front lot line and the front of such main building.
MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle not operated
exclusively upon tracks, and not including motorized bicycles, vehicles
propelled or drawn by horses or human powers or motorized wheelchairs
operated by handicapped person.
PHYSICALLY DISABLED — Shall be defined as set forth in Section 301.142,
RSMo.
SIDE YARD — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard, between the main building and the side lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed by buildings or structures in excess of thirty (30) inches in
height, except as provided herein, the depth of which shall be measured
at the least distance between the side lot line and the side of such main
building.
Section 355.015. Parking Prohibited — General. [R.O. 2008
§345.020; Ord. No. 5499 §1, 2-24-1997]
A. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with the lawful direction of a Public Safety Officer or a
traffic control device, it shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or
possessor of a vehicle to stop, stand or park said vehicle unattended
within the City limits of Maryville, except in authorized parking areas.
B. Authorized parking areas shall include the following:
1. Authorized parking areas on City streets and roadways;
2. Authorized parking areas on parking lots;
3. Private driveways on which parking is authorized by City
ordinance;
4. Other areas authorized by City ordinance.
C. The following shall be understood to be areas at which or manners in
which no individual or person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle:
1. On a sidewalk;
2. Within five (5) feet of the line of a public or private driveway;
Section
355.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
355.015
AO:374
3. Within five (5) feet of the line of any alley;
4. Within twenty-five (25) feet of the curb line or the driveable surface
of an intersecting street, except where a sign stating otherwise has
been erected;
5. Within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant;
6. On a crosswalk;
7. Within fifteen (15) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
8. Within an intersection;
9. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at edge of a
highway or street;
10. On any roadway which is designated for parallel parking and on
which adjacent curbs exist, other than stopping, standing or
parking with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and
within eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb;
11. On any roadway which is designated for parallel parking and on
which adjacent curbs do not exist, other than stopping, standing or
parking in such a manner as to leave the necessary paved
travelway plus one (1) foot on each side available as a freeway;
12. On those streets which have been signed or marked for angle
parking, other than stopping, standing or parking at the angle to
the curb or edge of the roadway as indicated by such signs or
marking;
13. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or
parking;
14. In or on a front or side yard, unless otherwise authorized by
ordinance. Nothing in this enumerated Subsection shall prohibit
the parking of motor vehicles in a front yard for a reasonable period
of time for the purpose of washing, waxing, cleaning or polishing
said motor vehicle. Additionally, nothing in this enumerated
Subsection shall prohibit an individual from parking a motor
vehicle on a private yard if necessary for ingress and egress from
the residence, and if that person is defined under Missouri law as a
physically disabled person or temporarily disabled person, and
such vehicle bears either a disabled person license plate or
windshield placard properly displayed in accordance with the law;
15. On any street, alley or other public place within the City for the
purpose of washing, cleaning and/or repairing any vehicle;
16. In such a manner as to interfere with or obstruct the traffic or the
easy ingress and egress to or from any street, alley or public or
private driveway;
Section
355.015
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
355.015
AO:375
Section 355.020. Parking Not to Obstruct Traffic.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such
a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10)
feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
Section 355.030. Parking in Alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
Section 355.040. Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited.
Section 355.050. Parking Adjacent to Schools.
Section 355.060. Parking Prohibited on Narrow Streets.
Section 355.070. Standing or Parking on One-Way Streets.
The City Manager is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any
one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when
17. In front of a public or private driveway.
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal
purpose of:
1. Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
2. Repair such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
A. The City Manager is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school
property when such parking would, in his/her opinion, interfere with
traffic or create a hazardous situation.
B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of
a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person
shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
A. The City Manager is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking
upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty
(20) feet or upon one (1) side of a street as indicated by such signs when
the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet.
B. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets
as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such
street in violation of any such sign.
Section
355.015
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
355.070
AO:376
such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such
left-hand side in violation of any such sign.
Section 355.080. Standing or Parking on One-Way Roadways.
In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one (1) direction upon any such roadway, no person
shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way
roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The
City Manager is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be
permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect
signs giving notice thereof.
Section 355.090. No Stopping, Standing or Parking Near Hazardous
or Congested Places.
Section 355.100. Parking Prohibited — Certain Blocks. [R.O. 2008
§345.030; Ord. No. 5499 §1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 6385 §1, 6-25-2001;
Ord. No. 6528 §§1 — 2, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 6721 §§1 — 2, 1-10-2005;
Ord. No. 7396 §1, 2-13-2012; Ord. No. 7747 §1, 4-27-2015]
A. The City Manager is hereby authorized to determine and designate by
proper signs places not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in length in
which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an
especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any
such designated place.
A. In order to maintain the safety and welfare for the citizens of the City,
the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle in the following blocks at
any time along the roadway or curb is hereby prohibited:
1. Main Street (Business United States 71) from United States 71
Bypass (south junction) to United States 71 Bypass (north
junction), except parking is allowed:
a. On the west side of Main Street from one hundred thirty-five
(135) feet north of First Street to Fifth Street;
b. On the east side of Main Street from one hundred thirty (130)
feet north of First Street to Sixth Street;
c. On the west side of Main Street from First Street to one
hundred thirty-five (135) feet south of First Street.
2. Missouri State Highway 136 (East Third Street), except vehicles
may be parked between Main Street and Dewey Street.
3. Missouri State Highway 46 (West First Street), except vehicles may
be parked from Main Street to Buchanan Street.
Section
355.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
355.100
AO:377
4. United States Highway 71, in its entirety, including upon the
highway or any part of the area of the highway right-of-way.
5. Missouri Route V, in its entirety, including upon the highway or any
part of the area of the highway right-of-way.
6. The north curb of College Avenue from a point thirty-eight (38) feet
east of North Munn Avenue east curb line to a point two hundred
eighteen (218) feet west of the west curb of Ray Avenue [or
nineteen (19) feet west of the Bearcat Arena/Bearcat Stadium
service drive].
7. No vehicle shall be parked on either side of:
a. Second Street from Dunn Street to Frederick Street;
b. Eighth Street from Mulberry Street to one hundred thirty-two
(132) feet west of Walnut Street;
c. Ninth Street from Mulberry Street to the Northwest Missouri
State University property boundary line;
d. Eleventh Street from Main Street to one hundred thirty-two
(132) feet west of Walnut Street;
e. Sixteenth Street from North College Drive to City limits west;
f. Country Club Road, in its entirety;
g. Depot Street from Third Street to north City limits;
h. Dunn Street from Second Street to College Avenue;
i. South Avenue, in its entirety;
j. Walnut Street from Twelfth Street to Lincoln Street;
k. Munn Avenue from Route V to Edwards Street;
l. United States Highway 71, in its entirety, including upon the
highway or any part of the area of the highway right-of-way;
m. Missouri Route V, in its entirety, including upon the highway or
any part of the area of the highway right-of-way.
8. No vehicles shall be parked on the south side of those streets
running generally east and west, except parking is allowed as
otherwise provided in this Section and on the south side of the
following:
a. First Street from a point one hundred thirty (130) feet west of
Main Street to Market Street and from Saunders Street to
Davis Street;
b. Second Street from Buchanan Street to Market Street;
Section
355.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
355.100
AO:378
Section 355.105. (Reserved)60
Section 355.107. No Parking Zones. [R.O. 2008 §310.120; Ord. No.
5258 §1, 11-28-1994; Ord. No. 6292 §1, 5-22-2000]
c. Third Street from Fillmore Street to Dewey Street;
d. Fourth Street from Fillmore Street to Vine Street;
e. Fifth Street from Market Street to Buchanan Street;
f. Sixth Street from Main Street to Market Street;
g. The south side of Seventh Street from Depot Street to Laura
Street;
h. Jenkins Street from Main Street to one hundred thirty-five
(135) feet east of Main Street, providing the vehicle is angle
parked.
9. No vehicles shall be parked on the east side of those streets
running generally north and south except parking is allowed as
otherwise provided in this Section and on the east side of the
following:
a. Saunders Street from First Street to Jenkins Street;
b. Vine Street from Second Street to Fourth Street;
c. Market Street from Second Street to Sixth Street;
d. Buchanan Street, from Second Street to Third Street and from
Fourth Street to Fifth Street;
e. Fillmore Street from Fifth Street to Sixth Street.
A. Where signs are duly posted "No Parking Here to Corner", it shall be
unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in the
following places:
1. North curb of West Third Street beginning at a point sixty-one (61)
feet from the west curb line of Munn Avenue and extending
westward a distance of sixty-one (61) feet.
2. Beginning at the east curb line of North Seventh Street and
extending eastward a distance of sixty (60) feet.
3. Beginning at the west curb line of North Seventh Street and
extending westward a distance of sixty (60) feet.
60.Editor's Note — At the city's request, section 355.105 was removed from the code prior to
adoption. Section 355.105 "no parking streets" was a duplication of section 355.100
"parking prohibited — certain blocks". At the editor's discretion, this section has been
reserved for the city's future use.
Section
355.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
355.107
AO:379
Section 355.110. Prohibited Parking — Certain Hours. [R.O. 2008
§345.040; Ord. No. 5499 §1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 8137, 10-8-2018]
Section 355.120. Parking Prohibited — Emergency Snow Route.
[R.O. 2008 §345.050; Ord. No. 5499 §1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 6527
§§1 — 2, 3-3-2003]
4. North curb of West Third Street beginning at a point fifty-five (55)
feet from the east curb line of Munn Avenue and extending
eastward a distance of fifty-five (55) feet. [Ord. No. 7398 §1,
2-13-2012]
5. North curb of West Third Street beginning at a point on the
northerly extension of the east right-of-way line of South Frederick
Avenue and extending westward a distance of fifty (50) feet. [Ord.
No. 7468 §1, 10-22-2012]
A. In order to maintain the safety and welfare of the citizens of the City,
and in order to allow for street cleaning, the stopping, standing or
parking of a vehicle in the following blocks is hereby prohibited
between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M., Monday through Friday:
1. 2nd Street from Vine Street to Fillmore Street;
2. 3rd Street from Vine Street to Fillmore Street;
3. 4th Street from Vine Street to Fillmore Street;
4. 5th Street from Vine Street to Fillmore Street;
5. Market Street from 2nd Street to 6th Street;
6. Main Street from 1st Street to 6th Street;
7. Buchanan Street from 4th Street to 5th Street.
A. During the term of a snow emergency, in order to maintain the safety
and welfare for the citizens of the City, the stopping, standing or
parking of a vehicle is prohibited on or along any street or roadway
designated as an emergency snow route.
B. The following are designated as emergency snow routes within the City
of Maryville:
1. Jenkins Street from Buchanan Street to Market Street;
2. 1st Street from Buchanan Street to Depot Street;
3. 2nd Street from Fillmore Street to Vine Street;
4. 3rd Street from Fillmore Street to Vine Street;
5. 4th Street from Dunn Street to Vine Street;
Section
355.107
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
355.120
AO:380
Section 355.130. Parking Prohibited — Physically Disabled. [R.O.
2008 §345.060; Ord. No. 5499 §1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 5599 §1,
10-27-1997]
6. 5th Street from Fillmore Street to Vine Street;
7. 6th Street from Fillmore Street to Vine Street;
8. 7th Street from Depot Street to four hundred fifteen (415) feet west
of Walnut Street;
9. Fillmore Street from 2nd Street to 7th Street;
10. Buchanan Street from Lincoln Street to 7th Street;
11. Vine Street from 1st Street to 5th Street;
12. College Avenue from Dunn Street to Country Club Road;
13. Prather Avenue from Walnut Street to North College Drive;
14. Edwards Street from Munn Street to Laura Street;
15. Halsey Street from Laura Street to Depot Street;
16. Lincoln Street from Main Street to Walnut Street;
17. Country Club Drive from 1st Street to College Avenue;
18. Munn Avenue from College Drive to Route V;
19. Market Street from South Avenue to 7th Street;
20. North College Drive from 16th Street to Northwest Missouri State
University;
21. Laura Street from 7th Street to Halsey Street;
22. Depot Street from 1st Street to Halsey Street;
23. Davis Street from Edwards Street to 7th Street;
24. Market Street from South Avenue to 7th Street;
25. Main Street, in its entirety;
26. South Avenue, in its entirety;
27. Walnut Street from Lincoln Street to South Avenue.
C. Whenever in the sole discretion of the City Manager or designated
agent, it is determined that snow has accumulated or it is probable that
snow will accumulate to such a depth that snow removal operations will
be required, the City Manager or designated agent may declare a snow
emergency for such term or duration as deemed appropriate.
Section
355.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
355.130
AO:381
A. There shall be one (1) parking space designed for the exclusive use of
vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or card issued
pursuant to Sections 301.071 or 301.142, RSMo., in each of the
following:
1. 100 block of East Third Street, south side of street.
2. 200 block of West Third Street, south side of street.
3. 100 block of East Fourth Street, north side of street.
4. 200 block of East Fourth Street, north side of street.
5. 300 block of North Market Street, east side of street.
6. 400 block of North Market Street, east side of street.
7. 100 block of East Jenkins Street, south side of street.
8. 100 block of East Jenkins Street, north side of street.
9. 100 block of South Market Street, west side of street.
Such spaces shall be indicated by a sign upon which shall be
inscribed the international symbol of accessibility, and shall
also include any appropriate wording to indicate that the space
is reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a
distinguishing license plate or card. The sign shall also state, or
an additional sign shall be posted below or adjacent to the sign
stating the following: "$50.00 to $300.00 fine". The specific
location of the parking spaces within the blocks noted and the
location of appropriate signage is deemed to be a ministerial
act to be determined by the City Manager, or his/her agent, in
consultation with the Director of Public Safety.
B. Any person or corporation in lawful possession of a public off-street
parking facility may designate reserved parking spaces for the
exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or
card issued pursuant to Sections 301.071 or 301.142, RSMo., as close
as possible to the nearest accessible entrance. Such designation shall
be made either by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from
each space, a sign upon which is inscribed the international symbol of
accessibility, and may also include any appropriate wording to indicate
that the space is reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles which display
a distinguishing license plate or card.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park in a parking space reserved
under authority of this Section without displaying a valid distinguishing
license plate or card issued pursuant to Sections 301.071 or 301.142,
RSMo.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, without authorization, to use a
distinguishing license plate or card issued pursuant to Sections
Section
355.130
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
355.130
AO:382
Section 355.140. Parking Vehicles — Precautions. [R.O. 2008
§345.070; Ord. No. 5499 §1, 2-24-1997]
All vehicles shall be parked with all adequate precautions taken to prevent
the same from moving.
Section 355.150. Parking Prohibited — Private Property. [R.O. 2008
§345.080; Ord. No. 5499 §1, 2-24-1997]
301.071 or 301.142, RSMo., to park in a parking place reserved under
authority of this Section.
E. Law Enforcement Officials may enter upon private property open to
public use to enforce the provisions of this Section, including entry
upon private property designated by the owner of such property for the
exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or
card issued pursuant to Sections 301.071 or 301.142, RSMo.
F. Violation of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) and not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00).
G. Non-conforming signs or spaces otherwise required pursuant to this
Section which are in use prior to the effective date of this Section
(October 27, 1997) shall not be in violation of this Section during the
useful life of such signs or spaces. Under no circumstances shall the
useful life of the non-conforming signs or spaces be extended by means
other than those means used to maintain any sign or space on the
owner's property which is not used for vehicles displaying a disabled
license plate.
A. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any privately owned land,
parking lot or driveway or upon any public parking lot, after notice has
been posted which prohibits, restricts or limits such parking without
the express or implied consent of such owner, occupant, lessee or
licensee of such land by the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee, as
hereinafter provided.
B. Notice shall include a sign or signs each with dimensions not less than
eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and bearing the words
"No Parking", together with any qualifications or reservations on such
parking, if any. Said sign(s) shall be conspicuously displayed on such
land, parking lot or driveway by the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee.
C. Upon the complaint being made by any such owner, occupant, lessee or
licensee of any parking of a vehicle in violation of this Section, the
Director of Public Safety or any Public Safety Officer shall remove or
cause to be removed such vehicle and shall impound and store such
vehicle at the expense of the driver or owner thereof. The towing of
such vehicle shall be regulated by Section 217.040.
Section
355.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
355.160
AO:383
Section 355.160. Parking Prohibited — Exceptions. [R.O. 2008
§345.090; Ord. No. 5499 §1, 2-24-1997]
Section 355.170. Parking Prohibited — To Sell or Solicit. [R.O. 2008
§345.100; Ord. No. 5499 §1, 2-24-1997]
It shall be unlawful to park in any vehicle for the purpose of selling,
displaying for sale, soliciting for sale or storing any machinery, goods, wares
or merchandise.
Chapter 360
STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY
Section 360.010. City Manager to Designate Curb Loading Zones.
The City Manager is hereby authorized to determine the location of
passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain
appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which
the provisions of this Section are applicable.
Section 360.020. Permits for Curb Loading Zones.
The City Manager shall not designate or sign any curb loading zone upon
special request of any person unless such person makes application for a
permit for such zone and for two (2) signs to indicate the ends of each
such zone. The City Manager upon granting a permit and issuing such
A. Load/Unloading. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit
any stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle for such period of time as
is reasonably necessary to load or unload personal property from or into
vehicles. Said stopping, standing or parking shall occur in such a
manner as not to obstruct traffic and the vehicle being actively loaded
or unloaded shall not be double parked.
B. Repair. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit the
stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle upon a roadway for such time
as is necessary for the making of emergency repairs. However, due
diligence shall be used to remove such vehicle from the streets.
C. Recreational Vehicles/Pleasure Boats. Nothing in this Chapter shall be
construed to prohibit parking or storage as authorized by Sections
405.210(3) and 405.210(4).
D. Fairs/Festivals. Upon petition by any person, when special
circumstances exist such as fairs, festivals and other similar events, the
City Council of the City of Maryville may waive the provisions of any
ordinance in this Chapter for such period of time deemed appropriate
by it. Before waiving any such provision, the City Council of the City of
Maryville shall conclude that the public interest will be served by such
action.
Section
355.160
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
360.020
AO:384
signs shall collect from the applicant and deposit in the City Treasury a
service fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per year or fraction thereof and may by
general regulations impose conditions upon the use of such signs and for
reimbursement of the City for the value thereof in the event of their loss or
damage and their return in the event of misuse or upon expiration of permit.
Every such permit shall expire at the end of one (1) year.
Section 360.030. Standing in Passenger Curb Loading Zone.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in
any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the
regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only
for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
Section 360.040. Standing in Freight Curb Loading Zones.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect.
Section 360.050. City Manager to Designate Public Carrier Stops
and Stands.
The City Manager is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops,
bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier
motor vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such number
as he/she shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to
the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand
shall be designated by appropriate signs.
Section 360.060. Stopping, Standing and Parking of Buses and
Taxicabs Regulated.
A. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided
herein.
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any
place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their
baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone
so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
C. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position
with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18)
inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so
as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
Section
360.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
360.060
AO:385
Section 360.070. Restricted Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop
or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has
been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver
of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone.
Chapter 365
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR
PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Section 365.010. Application of Chapter.
The provisions of this Title prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle
shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on
official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or
official traffic control device.
Section 365.020. Regulations Not Exclusive.
The provisions of this Title imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve
any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in
specified places or at specified times.
Section 365.030. Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain
Streets.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the streets described by ordinance.
Section 365.040. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours specified by ordinance of any day except
Sunday and public holidays within the districts or upon any of the streets
described by ordinance.
D. The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as
provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a
taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
Section
360.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
365.050
AO:386
Section 365.050. Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited During
Certain Hours on Certain Streets.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours specified by ordinance of
any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district or upon any
of the streets described by ordinance.
Section 365.060. Parking Signs Required.
Whenever by this Title or any ordinance of the City any parking time limit is
imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty
of the City Manager to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no
such regulations shall be effective unless said signs are erected and in place
at the time of any alleged offense.
Section 365.070. Commercial Vehicles Prohibited From Using
Certain Streets.
In cases where an equally direct and convenient alternate route is provided,
an ordinance may describe and signs may be erected giving notice thereof
that no persons shall operate any commercial vehicle upon streets or parts
of streets so described except those commercial vehicles making deliveries
thereon.
Chapter 370
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
Section
365.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
365.070
AO:387

ARTICLE I
Light Regulations
Section 370.010. When Lights Required.
Section 370.020. Headlamp on Motor Vehicles.
Except as in this Article provided, every motor vehicle other than a motordrawn
vehicle and other than a motorcycle shall be equipped with at least
two (2) approved headlamps mounted at the same level with at least one (1)
on each side of the front of the vehicle. Every motorcycle shall be equipped
with at least one (1) and not more than two (2) approved headlamps. Every
motorcycle equipped with a sidecar or other attachment shall be equipped
with a lamp on the outside limit of such attachment capable of displaying a
white light to the front.
Section 370.030. Multiple-Beam Headlamps — Arrangement.
A. "When lighted lamps are required" means at any time from a half (½)
hour after sunset to a half (½) hour before sunrise and at any other time
when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons
and vehicles on the highway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet
ahead. Lighted lamps shall also be required any time the weather
conditions require usage of the motor vehicle's windshield wipers to
operate the vehicle in a careful and prudent manner as defined in
Section 304.012, RSMo. The provisions of this Section shall be
interpreted to require lighted lamps during periods of fog even if usage
of the windshield wipers is not necessary to operate the vehicle in a
careful and prudent manner.
B. When Lights Required — Violation — Penalty.
1. No person shall drive, move, park or be in custody of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any street or highway during the times
when lighted lamps are required unless such vehicle or
combination of vehicles displays lighted lamps and illuminating
devices as hereinafter in this Article required. No person shall use
on any vehicle any approved electric lamp or similar device unless
the light source of such lamp or device complies with the conditions
of approval as to focus and rated candlepower.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 307.120, RSMo., or any
other provision of law, violation of this Section shall be deemed an
infraction and any person who violates this Section as it relates to
violations of the usage of lighted lamps required due to weather
conditions or fog shall only be fined ten dollars ($10.00) and no
court costs shall be assessed.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the headlamps or the auxiliary driving
lamp or the auxiliary passing lamp or combination thereof on motor
vehicles other than motorcycles or motor-driven cycles shall be so
Section
370.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.030
AO:389
Section 370.040. Dimming of Lights — When.
Every person driving a motor vehicle equipped with multiple-beam road
lighting equipment, during the times when lighted lamps are required, shall
use a distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and
of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a safe distance
in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements and
limitations: Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming
vehicle within five hundred (500) feet or is within three hundred (300) feet
to the rear of another vehicle traveling in the same direction, the driver
shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that the
glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the other driver, and in no
case shall the high-intensity portion which is projected to the left of the
prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle be aimed higher than the
center of the lamp from which it comes at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet
ahead, and in no case higher than a level of forty-two (42) inches above the
level upon which the vehicle stands at a distance of seventy-five (75) feet
ahead.
Section 370.050. Taillamps — Reflectors.
arranged that the driver may select at will between distributions of
light projected to different elevations and such lamps may, in addition,
be so arranged that such selection can be made automatically, subject
to the following limitations:
1. There shall be an uppermost distribution of light, or composite
beam, so aimed and of such intensity as to reveal persons and
vehicles at a distance of at least three hundred fifty (350) feet
ahead for all conditions of loading.
2. There shall be a lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam,
so aimed and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles
at a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet ahead; and on a
straight level road under any condition of loading none of the highintensity
portion of the beam shall be directed to strike the eyes of
an approaching driver.
A. Every motor vehicle and every motor-drawn vehicle shall be equipped
with at least two (2) rear lamps, not less than fifteen (15) inches or more
than seventy-two (72) inches above the ground upon which the vehicle
stands, which when lighted will exhibit a red light plainly visible from a
distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear. Either such rear lamp or
a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with
a white light the rear registration marker and render it clearly legible
from a distance of fifty (50) feet to the rear. When the rear registration
marker is illuminated by an electric lamp other than the required rear
lamps, all such lamps shall be turned on or off only by the same control
switch at all times.
Section
370.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
370.050
AO:390
Section 370.060. Auxiliary Lamps — Number — Location.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed three (3) auxiliary
lamps mounted on the front at a height not less than twelve (12) inches
nor more than forty-two (42) inches above the level surface upon which the
vehicle stands.
Section 370.070. Cowl, Fender, Running Board and Backup Lamps.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two (2) side cowl
or fender lamps which shall emit a white or yellow light without glare.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one (1) running
board courtesy lamp on each side thereof which shall emit a white or yellow
light without glare. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with a backup lamp
either separately or in combination with another lamp, except that no such
backup lamp shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in
forward motion.
Section 370.080. Spotlamps.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed one (1) spotlamp but
every lighted spotlamp shall be so aimed and used so as not to be dazzling
or glaring to any person.
B. Every motorcycle registered in this State, when operated on a highway,
shall also carry at the rear, either as part of the rear lamp or separately,
at least one (1) approved red reflector which shall be of such size and
characteristics and so maintained as to be visible during the times
when lighted lamps are required from all distances within three
hundred (300) feet to fifty (50) feet from such vehicle when directly in
front of a motor vehicle displaying lawful undimmed headlamps.
C. Every new passenger car, new commercial motor vehicle, motor-drawn
vehicle and omnibus with a capacity of more than six (6) passengers
registered in this State after January 1, 1966, when operated on a
highway shall also carry at the rear at least two (2) approved red
reflectors, at least one (1) at each side, so designed, mounted on the
vehicle and maintained as to be visible during the times when lighted
lamps are required from all distances within five hundred (500) to fifty
(50) feet from such vehicle when directly in front of a motor vehicle
displaying lawful undimmed headlamps. Every such reflector shall meet
the requirements of this Article and shall be mounted upon the vehicle
at a height not to exceed sixty (60) inches nor less than fifteen (15)
inches above the surface upon which the vehicle stands.
D. Any person who knowingly operates a motor vehicle without the lamps
required in this Section in operable condition is guilty of an infraction.
Section
370.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.090
AO:391
Section 370.090. Colors of Various Lamps — Restriction of Red
Lights.
Headlamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights substantially white in color;
auxiliary lamps, cowllamps and spotlamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights
substantially white, yellow or amber in color. No person shall drive or
move any vehicle or equipment, except a school bus when used for school
purposes or an emergency vehicle, upon any street or highway with any
lamp or device thereon displaying a red light visible from directly in front
thereof.
Section 370.100. Limitations on Lamps Other Than Headlamps —
Flashing Signals Prohibited Except on Specified Vehicles.
Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle other than
headlamps, spotlamps, front direction signals or auxiliary lamps which
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than three hundred (300)
candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the
level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more
than seventy-five (75) feet from the vehicle. Alternately flashing warning
signals may be used on school buses when used for school purposes and on
motor vehicles when used to transport United States mail from post offices
to boxes of addressees thereof and on emergency vehicles as defined in
Section 300.010 of this Title and on buses owned or operated by churches,
mosques, synagogues, temples or other houses of worship and on
commercial passenger transport vehicles that are stopped to load or unload
passengers, but are prohibited on other motor vehicles, motorcycles and
motor-drawn vehicles except as a means for indicating a right or left turn.
Section 370.110. Limitation on Total of Lamps Lighted at One Time.
At the times when lighted lamps are required, at least two (2) lighted
lamps shall be displayed, one (1) on each side of the front of every motor
vehicle except a motorcycle and except a motor-drawn vehicle except when
such vehicle is parked subject to the provisions governing lights on parked
vehicles. Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlamps as in this
Article required is also equipped with any auxiliary lamps or a spotlamp
or any other lamp on the front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity
greater than three hundred (300) candlepower, not more than a total of four
(4) of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one
time when upon a highway.
Section 370.120. Other Vehicles — How Lighted.
All vehicles, including agricultural machinery or implements, road
machinery, road rollers, traction engines and farm tractors not in this
Article specifically required to be equipped with lamps, shall be equipped
during the times when lighted lamps are required with at least one (1)
lighted lamp or lantern exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of five
hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle and with a lamp or lantern
Section
370.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
370.120
AO:392
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to
the rear, and such lamps and lanterns shall exhibit lights to the sides of such
vehicle.
Section 370.130. Animal-Driven Vehicles — Lighting Requirements
— Penalty.
Section 370.135. Penalty for Violations.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall upon
conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of an infraction. The terms "person" as
used in this Article shall mean and include any individual, association, joint
stock company, copartnership or corporation.
A. Any person who shall place or drive or cause to be placed or driven
upon or along any State highway of this City any animal-driven vehicle
whatsoever, whether in motion or at rest, shall after sunset to one-half
(½) hour before sunrise have attached to every such vehicle at the rear
thereof a red taillight or a red reflecting device of not less than three (3)
inches in diameter of effective area or its equivalent in area. When such
device shall consist of reflecting buttons, there shall be no less than
seven (7) of such buttons covering an area equal to a circle with a three
(3) inch diameter. The total subtended effective angle of reflection of
every such device shall be no less than sixty degrees (60°) and the
spread and efficiency of the reflected light shall be sufficient for the
reflected light to be visible to the driver of any motor vehicle
approaching such animal-drawn vehicle from the rear of a distance of
not less than five hundred (500) feet.
B. In addition, any person who operates any such animal-driven vehicle
during the hours between sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise
shall have at least one (1) light flashing at all times the vehicle is on any
highway of this City. Such light or lights shall be amber in the front and
red in the back and shall be placed on the left side of the vehicle at a
height of no more than six (6) feet from the ground and shall be visible
from the front and the back of the vehicle at a distance of at least five
hundred (500) feet.
C. Any person operating an animal-driven vehicle during the hours
between sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise may, in lieu of the
requirements of Subsection (B) of this Section, use lamps or lanterns
complying with the rules promulgated by the Director of the
Department of Public Safety.
D. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of an
infraction.
Section
370.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.135
AO:393

ARTICLE II
Other Vehicle Equipment
Section 370.140. Other Equipment of Motor Vehicles.
A. Signaling Devices. Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a horn,
directed forward, or whistle in good working order capable of emitting
a sound adequate in quantity and volume to give warning of the
approach of such vehicle to other users of the highway and to
pedestrians. Such signaling device shall be used for warning purposes
only and shall not be used for making any unnecessary noise, and no
other sound-producing signaling device shall be used at any time.
B. Muffler Cutouts. Muffler cutouts shall not be used and no vehicle shall
be driven in such manner or condition that excessive and unnecessary
noises shall be made by its machinery, motor, signaling device, or other
parts, or by any improperly loaded cargo. The motors of all motor
vehicles shall be fitted with properly attached mufflers of such capacity
or construction as to quiet the maximum possible exhaust noise as
completely as is done in modern gas engine passenger motor vehicles.
Any cutout or opening in the exhaust pipe between the motor and the
muffler on any motor vehicle shall be completely closed and
disconnected from its operating lever and shall be so arranged that it
cannot automatically open, or be opened or operated, while such
vehicle is in motion.
C. Brakes. All motor vehicles, except motorcycles, shall be provided at all
times with two (2) sets of adequate brakes kept in good working order,
and motorcycles shall be provided with one (1) set of adequate brakes
kept in good working order.
D. Mirrors. All motor vehicles which are so constructed or loaded that the
operator cannot see the road behind such vehicle by looking back or
around the side of such vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror so
adjusted as to reveal the road behind and be visible from the operator's
seat.
E. Projections On Vehicles. All vehicles carrying poles or other objects,
which project more than five (5) feet from the rear of such vehicle,
shall, during the period when lights are required by this Chapter, carry
a red light at or near the rear end of the pole or other object so
projecting. At other times a red flag or cloth, not less than sixteen (16)
inches square, shall be displayed at the end of such projection.
F. Towlines. When one vehicle is towing another, the connecting device
shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. During the time that lights are
required by Sections 307.020 to 307.120, RSMo., the required lights
shall be displayed by both vehicles. Every towed vehicle shall be
coupled to the towing vehicle by means of a safety chain, cable or
equivalent device in addition to the primary coupling device, except
that such secondary coupling device shall not be necessary if the
Section
370.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.140
AO:395
Section 370.150. Loads Which Might Become Dislodged to Be
Secured — Failure — Penalty.
Section 370.160. Seat Belts.
connecting device is connected to the towing vehicle by a centerlocking
ball located over or nearly over the rear axle and not supported
by the rear bumper of the towing vehicle. Such secondary safety
connecting devices shall be of sufficient strength to control the towed
vehicle in the event of failure of the primary coupling device. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to wreckers towing
vehicles or to vehicles secured to the towing vehicle by a fifth-wheel
type connection. The provisions of this Subsection shall also not apply
to farm implements or to any vehicle which is not required to be
registered.
G. Commercial Motor Vehicles And Trailers. When being operated on any
highway, street or road of this City, commercial motor vehicles and
trailers shall be equipped with adequate and proper brakes, lighting
equipment, signaling devices, steering mechanisms, horns, mirrors,
windshield wipers, tires, wheels, exhaust system, glazing, air pollution
control devices, fuel tank and any other safety equipment required by
the State in such condition so as to obtain a certificate of inspection and
approval as required by the provisions of Section 307.360, RSMo.
H. Devices attached to or towed by motor vehicles for the purpose of
transporting hay shall have the protruding parts raised or retracted
when not in use to a position which will not cause injury or damage to
persons or property in the vicinity of such device when on the highways,
streets or roads of this City.
A. All motor vehicles and every trailer and semi-trailer operating upon the
public highways, streets or roads of this City and carrying goods or
material or farm products which may reasonably be expected to
become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer as a
result of wind pressure or air pressure and/or by the movement of the
vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer shall have a protective cover or be
sufficiently secured so that no portion of such goods or material can
become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer while
being transported or carried.
B. Operation of a motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer in violation of this
Section shall be an infraction, and any person who pleads or is found
guilty thereof shall be punished as provided by law.
A. As used in this Section, the term "truck" means a motor vehicle
designed, used or maintained for the transportation of property.
B. As used in this Section, the term "passenger car" means every motor
vehicle designed for carrying ten (10) persons or less and used for the
transportation of persons; except that the term "passenger car" shall
Section
370.140
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
370.160
AO:396
Section 370.170. Transporting Children Under Sixteen Years of Age
— Restraint Systems.
not include motorcycles, motorized bicycles, motortricycles and trucks
with a licensed gross weight of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or
more.
C. Each driver, except persons employed by the United States Postal
Service while performing duties for that Federal agency which require
the operator to service postal boxes from their vehicles or which
require frequent entry into and exit from their vehicles, and front seat
passengers of a passenger car manufactured after January 1, 1968,
operated on a street or highway in the City, and persons less than
eighteen (18) years of age operating or riding in a truck, as defined in
Subsection (A) of this Section, on a street or highway of this City shall
wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt that meets Federal
National Highway, Transportation and Safety Act requirements. No
person shall be stopped, inspected or detained solely to determine
compliance with this Subsection. The provisions of this Section and
Section 370.170 of this Chapter, shall not be applicable to persons who
have a medical reason for failing to have a seat belt fastened about their
body, nor shall the provisions of this Section be applicable to persons
while operating or riding a motor vehicle being used in agricultural
work-related activities. Non-compliance with this Subsection shall not
constitute probable cause for violation of any other provision of law. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to the transporting of
children under sixteen (16) years of age, as provided in Section 370.170
of this Chapter.
D. Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child less than sixteen
(16) years of age shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and
fastened restraint under Section 370.170 of this Chapter.
E. Except as otherwise provided for in Section 370.170 of this Chapter,
each person found guilty of violating the provisions of Subsection (B) of
this Section is guilty of an infraction for which a fine not to exceed ten
dollars ($10.00) may be imposed. All other provisions of law and court
rules to the contrary notwithstanding, no court costs shall be imposed
on any person due to a violation of this Section.
F. If there are more persons than there are seat belts in the enclosed area
of a motor vehicle, then the passengers who are unable to wear seat
belts shall sit in the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle
unless the motor vehicle is designed only for a front-seated area. The
passenger or passengers occupying a seat location referred to in this
Subsection is not in violation of this Section. This Subsection shall not
apply to passengers who are accompanying a driver of a motor vehicle
who is licensed under Section 302.178, RSMo.
A. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
Section
370.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.170
AO:397
CHILD BOOSTER SEAT — A seating system which meets the Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R 571.213, as
amended, that is designed to elevate a child to properly sit in a
Federally approved safety belt system.
CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM — A seating system which
meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R.
571.213, as amended, and which is either permanently affixed to a
motor vehicle or is affixed to such vehicle by a safety belt or a universal
attachment system.
DRIVER — A person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle.
B. Every driver transporting a child under the age of sixteen (16) years
shall be responsible, when transporting such child in a motor vehicle
operated by that driver on the streets or highways of this City, for
providing for the protection of such child as follows:
1. Children less than four (4) years of age, regardless of weight, shall
be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate for
that child.
2. Children weighing less than forty (40) pounds, regardless of age,
shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate
for that child.
3. Children at least four (4) years of age but less than eight (8) years
of age, who also weigh at least forty (40) pounds but less than
eighty (80) pounds, and who are also less than four (4) feet nine (9)
inches tall, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system or
booster seat appropriate for that child.
4. Children at least eighty (80) pounds or children more than four (4)
feet, nine (9) inches in height shall be secured by a vehicle safety
belt or booster seat appropriate for that child.
5. A child who otherwise would be required to be secured in a booster
seat may be transported in the back seat of a motor vehicle while
wearing only a lap belt if the back seat of the motor vehicle is not
equipped with a combination lap and shoulder belt for booster seat
installation.
6. When transporting children in the immediate family when there are
more children than there are seating positions in the enclosed area
of a motor vehicle, the children who are not able to be restrained by
a child safety restraint device appropriate for the child shall sit in
the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle unless the motor
vehicle is designed only for a front seat area. The driver
transporting children referred to in this Subsection is not in
violation of this Section.
Section
370.170
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
370.170
AO:398
Section 370.180. Vision-Reducing Material Applied to Windshield
or Windows Without Permit Prohibited — Penalty — Rules —
Procedure.
This Subsection shall only apply to the use of a child passenger
restraint system or vehicle safety belt for children less than
sixteen (16) years of age being transported in a motor vehicle.
C. Any driver who violates Subdivision (1), (2) or (3) of Subsection (B)
herein, is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction may be punished
by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and court costs. Any
driver who violates Subdivision (4) of Subsection (B) herein, is guilty of
an infraction and, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine of not
more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and court costs. Any driver who violates
Subdivision (4) of Subsection (B) herein, shall be subject to the penalty
in Subsection (E) of Section 370.160 of this Chapter. If a driver receives
a citation for violating Subdivision (1), (2) or (3) of Subsection (B)
herein, the charges shall be dismissed or withdrawn if the driver prior
to or at his/her hearing provides evidence of acquisition of a child
passenger restraint system or child booster seat which is satisfactory to
the Court or the party responsible for prosecuting the driver's citation.
D. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any public carrier for
hire. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to students four (4)
years of age or older who are passengers on a school bus designed for
carrying eleven (11) passengers or more and which is manufactured or
equipped pursuant to Missouri Minimum Standards for School Buses as
school buses are defined in Section 301.010, RSMo.
A. Any person may operate a motor vehicle with front sidewing vents or
windows located immediately to the left and right of the driver that
have a sun-screening device, in conjunction with safety glazing
material, that has a light transmission of thirty-five percent (35%) or
more plus or minus three percent (3%) and a luminous reflectance of
thirty-five percent (35%) or less plus or minus three percent (3%).
Except as provided in Subsection (C) of this Section, any sun-screening
device applied to front sidewing vents or windows located immediately
to the left and right of the driver in excess of the requirements of this
Section shall be prohibited without a permit pursuant to a physician's
prescription as described below. A permit to operate a motor vehicle
with front sidewing vents or windows located immediately to the left
and right of the driver that have a sun-screening device, in conjunction
with safety glazing material, which permits less light transmission and
luminous reflectance than allowed under the requirements of this
Subsection may be issued by the Department of Public Safety to a
person having a serious medical condition which requires the use of a
sun-screening device if the permittee's physician prescribes its use. The
Director of the Department of Public Safety shall promulgate rules and
regulations for the issuance of the permit. The permit shall allow
operation of the vehicle by any titleholder or relative within the second
Section
370.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.180
AO:399
Section 370.190. Headgear Required — Motorcycles or
Motortricycles.
Section 370.200. Studded Tires — Prohibited When.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any road or highway of this
City between the first (1st) day of April and the first (1st) day of November
while the motor vehicle is equipped with tires containing metal or carbide
studs.
Section 370.210. Restriction on Use of Metal-Tired Vehicles.
degree of consanguinity or affinity, which shall mean a spouse, each
grandparent, parent, brother, sister, niece, nephew, aunt, uncle, child
and grandchild of a person who resides in the household. Except as
provided in Subsection (B) of this Section, all sun-screening devices
applied to the windshield of a motor vehicle are prohibited.
B. This Section shall not prohibit labels, stickers, decalcomania or
informational signs on motor vehicles or the application of tinted or
solar-screening material to recreational vehicles as defined in Section
700.010, RSMo., provided that such material does not interfere with the
driver's normal view of the road. This Section shall not prohibit factoryinstalled
tinted glass, the equivalent replacement thereof or tinting
material applied to the upper portion of the motor vehicle's windshield
which is normally tinted by the manufacturer of motor vehicle safety
glass.
C. Any vehicle licensed with a historical license plate shall be exempt from
the requirements of this Section.
D. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section is guilty of an
infraction.
A. Every person operating or riding as a passenger on any motorcycle or
motortricycle, as defined in this Title, upon any highway of this City
shall wear protective headgear at all times the vehicle is in motion. The
protective headgear shall meet reasonable standards and specifications
established by the Director of Revenue.
B. The penalty for failure to wear protective headgear as required by
Subsection (A) of this Section shall be deemed an infraction for which a
fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) may be imposed.
Notwithstanding all other provisions of law and court rules to the
contrary, no court costs shall be imposed upon any person due to such
violation. No points shall be assessed pursuant to Section 302.302,
RSMo., for a failure to wear such protective headgear.
A. No metal-tired vehicle shall be operated over any of the improved
highways of this City, except over highways constructed of gravel or
claybound gravel, if such vehicle has on the periphery of any of the road
Section
370.180
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
370.210
AO:400
Section 370.220. Passengers in Trucks.
wheels any lug, flange, cleat, ridge, bolt or any projection of metal or
wood which projects radially beyond the tread or traffic surface of the
tire unless the highway is protected by putting down solid planks or
other suitable material or by attachments to the wheels so as to prevent
such vehicles from damaging the highway, except that this prohibition
shall not apply to tractors or traction engines equipped with what is
known as caterpillar treads when such caterpillar does not contain any
projection of any kind likely to injure the surface of the road. Tractors,
traction engines and similar vehicles may be operated which have upon
their road wheels "V" shaped, diagonal or other cleats arranged in such
manner as to be continuously in contact with the road surface if the
gross weight on the wheels per inch of width of such cleats or road
surface, when measured in the direction of the axle of the vehicle, does
not exceed eight hundred (800) pounds.
B. No tractor, tractor engine or other metal-tired vehicle weighing more
than four (4) tons, including the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
drive onto, upon or over the edge of any improved highway without
protecting such edge by putting down solid planks or other suitable
material to prevent such vehicle from breaking off the edges of the
pavement.
C. Any person violating this Section, whether operating pursuant to a
permit or not, or who shall willfully or negligently damage a highway,
shall be liable for the amount of such damage caused to any highway,
bridge, culvert or sewer, and any vehicle causing such damage shall be
subject to a lien for the full amount of such damage, which lien shall not
be superior to any duly recorded or filed chattel mortgage or other lien
previously attached to such vehicle; the amount of such damage may be
recovered in any action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. As used in this Section, the term "truck" means a motor vehicle
designed, used or maintained for the transportation of property.
B. No person shall operate any truck, as defined in Subsection (A) of this
Section, with a licensed gross weight of less than twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds on any highway which is part of the State or Federal
highway system or when such truck is operated within the corporate
limits of the City when any person under eighteen (18) years of age is
riding in the unenclosed bed of such truck. No person under eighteen
(18) years of age shall ride in the unenclosed bed of such truck when
the truck is in operation.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
1. Any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of the
employee's duties where it is necessary to ride in the unenclosed
bed of the truck;
Section
370.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.220
AO:401
Section 370.230. Altering Passenger Motor Vehicle by Raising
Front or Rear of Vehicle Prohibited, When — Bumpers Front and
Rear Required, When Certain Vehicles Exempt.
2. Any person while engaged in agricultural activities where it is
necessary to ride in the unenclosed bed of the truck;
3. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck while such truck
is being operated in a parade, caravan or exhibition which is
authorized by law;
4. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck has
installed a means of preventing such person from being discharged
or such person is secured to the truck in a manner which will
prevent the person from being thrown, falling or jumping from the
truck;
5. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
being operated solely for the purpose of participating in a special
event and it is necessary that the person ride in such unenclosed
bed due to a lack of available seating. "Special event", for the
purposes of this Section, is a specific social activity of a definable
duration which is participated in by the person riding in the
unenclosed bed;
6. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
being operated solely for the purposes of providing assistance to,
or ensuring the safety of, other persons engaged in a recreational
activity; or
7. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
the only legally titled, licensed and insured vehicle owned by the
family of the person riding in the unenclosed bed and there is
insufficient room in the passenger cab of the truck to accommodate
all passengers in the truck. For the purposes of this Section, the
term "family" shall mean any persons related within the first
degree of consanguinity.
A. No person shall operate any passenger motor vehicle upon the public
streets or highways of this City, the body of which has been altered in
such a manner that the front or rear of the vehicle is raised at such an
angle as to obstruct the vision of the operator of the street or highway
in front or to the rear of the vehicle.
B. Every motor vehicle which is licensed in this State and operated upon
the public streets or highways of this City shall be equipped with front
and rear bumpers if such vehicle was equipped with bumpers as
standard equipment. This Subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles
designed or modified primarily for off-highway purposes, while such
vehicles are in tow, or to motorcycles or motor-driven cycles, or to
motor vehicles registered as historic motor vehicles when the original
Section
370.220
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
370.230
AO:402
design of such vehicles did not include bumpers nor shall the provisions
of this Subsection prohibit the use of drop bumpers. Maximum bumper
heights of both the front and rear bumpers of motor vehicles shall be
determined by weight category of gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
measured from a level surface to the highest point of the bottom of the
bumper when the vehicle is unloaded and the tires are inflated to the
manufacturer's recommended pressure. Maximum bumper heights are
as follows:
Maximum
front bumper
height
Maximum rear
bumper height
Motor vehicles except commercial
motor vehicles
22 inches 22 inches
Commercial motor vehicles
(GVWR) 4,500 lbs. and under
24 inches 26 inches
4,501 lbs. through 7,500 lbs. 27 inches 29 inches
7,501 lbs. through 9,000 lbs. 28 inches 30 inches
9,001 lbs. through 11,500 lbs. 29 inches 31 inches
C. Any person knowingly violating the provisions of this Section is guilty of
an infraction.
Section
370.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.230
AO:403
Chapter 373
TRUCKS
Section 373.010. Definition. [R.O. 2008 §355.010; Ord. No. 4893 §1,
7-18-1990]
The following word shall have the meaning set out below when used in this
Chapter.
TRUCK — Any vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semi-trailer, or any
combination thereof, propelled or drawn by mechanical power and
designated or used in the transportation of property upon the highways.
Section 373.020. Truck Routes. [R.O. 2008 §355.020; Ord. No. 4893
§1, 7-18-1990]
Section 373.030. Trucks Prohibited in Residential Areas. [R.O. 2008
§355.030; Ord. No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
No person shall operate or drive or cause to be operated or driven any
motor truck or any commercial vehicle in excess of one (1) ton weight upon
any residential street in the City, however, nothing contained herein shall
be construed to impair the right to cross such street within the limits at
intersection points, nor to enter such street where it is desired to deliver
goods, wares or merchandise to a person resident upon such street.
Section 373.040. Parking of Trucks and Vehicles Towing Trailers.
[R.O. 2008 §355.040; Ord. No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
No person shall park any vehicle having a manufacturer's rated capacity of
one (1) ton or greater, or any vehicle, trailer or combination thereof or any
vehicle or trailer having a load projecting from said vehicle or trailer, which
has an overall length greater than twenty (20) feet or overall width greater
than six and one-half (6½) feet, upon any street, alley, public parking lot
or other public place within the City limits except during the loading and
A. No commercial vehicle or truck having a rate load capacity in excess of
one (1) ton shall be driven on any street except:
1. Route 71 from the North City Limits to the South City Limits.
2. First Street from Main Street to the West City Limits.
3. First Street from North Depot to the East City Limits.
4. North Depot Street from First Street to the North City Limits.
5. Third Street from Main Street East to North Depot Street.
6. South Avenue from Main Street to the West City Limits.
B. Notice or sign reflecting this prohibition shall be required to be posted.
Section
370.230
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
373.040
AO:404
unloading of freight, wares, goods or merchandise germane to the business
or firm operating said vehicle.
Section 373.050. Responsibility of Owner for Parking, Etc.,
Violation. [R.O. 2008 §355.050; Ord. No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
If any vehicle is found upon a street in violation of any provisions of this
Chapter relating to the stopping, standing, or parking and the identity of
the operator cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name
such vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for such
violation.
Chapter 375
BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES
Section 375.010. Bicycle and Motorized Bicycle — Defined.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall mean:
BICYCLE — Every vehicle propelled solely by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, or two (2) parallel wheels
and one (1) or two (2) forward or rear wheels, all of which are more than
fourteen (14) inches in diameter, except scooters and similar devices.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Any two- or three-wheeled device having an
automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more
than fifty (50) cubic centimeters, which produces less than three (3) gross
brake horsepower, and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum
speed of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on level ground. A
motorized bicycle shall be considered a motor vehicle for purposes of any
homeowners' or renters' insurance policy.
Section 375.020. Brakes Required.
Every bicycle and motorized bicycle shall be equipped with a brake or
brakes which will enable its driver to stop the bicycle or motorized bicycle
within twenty-five (25) feet from a speed of ten (10) miles per hour on dry,
level, clean pavement.
Section 375.030. Lights and Reflectors — When Required —
Standards to Be Met.
A. Every bicycle and motorized bicycle when in use on a street or highway
during the period from one-half (½) hour after sunset to one-half (½)
hour before sunrise shall be equipped with the following:
1. A front-facing lamp on the front or carried by the rider which shall
emit a white light visible at night under normal atmospheric
conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway at five hundred
(500) feet;
Section
373.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
375.030
AO:405
Section 375.040. Rights and Duties of Bicycle and Motorized
Bicycle Riders.
Every person riding a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon a street or highway
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle as provided by Chapter 304, RSMo.,
and this Title, except as to special regulations in this Chapter, and except
as to those provisions of Chapter 304, RSMo., and this Title, which by their
nature can have no application.
Section 375.050. Riding to Right — Required for Bicycles and
Motorized Bicycles — Mandatory Use of Bicycle Path by Bicycles.
Every person operating a bicycle or motorized bicycle at less than the
posted speed or slower than the flow of traffic upon a street or highway shall
ride as near to the right side of the roadway as safe, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction,
except when making a left turn, when avoiding hazardous conditions, when
the lane is too narrow to share with another vehicle, or when on a one-way
street. Bicyclists may ride abreast when not impeding other vehicles.
Section 375.060. Bicycle to Operate on the Shoulder Adjacent to
Roadway, When — Roadway Defined.
2. A rear-facing red reflector, at least two (2) square inches in
reflective surface area, or a rear-facing red lamp on the rear which
shall be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a
straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver
under the lower beams of vehicle headlights at six hundred (600)
feet;
3. Reflective material and/or lights on any part of the bicyclist's
pedals, crank arms, shoes or lower leg visible from the front and
the rear at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a
straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver
under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at two hundred
(200) feet; and
4. Reflective material and/or lights visible on each side of the bicycle
or bicyclist and visible at night under normal atmospheric
conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a
vehicle driver under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at
three hundred (300) feet. The provisions of this Subsection shall
not apply to motorized bicycles which comply with National
Highway Traffic and Safety Administration regulations relating to
reflectors on motorized bicycles.
A. A person operating a bicycle at less than the posted speed or slower
than the flow of traffic upon a street or highway may operate as
described in Section 375.050 of this Chapter, or may operate on the
shoulder adjacent to the roadway.
Section
375.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
375.060
AO:406
Section 375.070. Bicycle Required to Give Hand or Mechanical
Signals.
The operator of a bicycle shall signal as required in Section 340.190 of
this Title, except that a signal by the hand and arm need not be given
continuously if the hand is needed to control or operate the bicycle. An
operator of a bicycle intending to turn the bicycle to the right shall signal as
indicated in Section 340.190 of this Title, or by extending such operator's
right arm in a horizontal position so that the same may be seen in front and
in rear of the vehicle.
Section 375.080. Penalty for Violation.
Any person seventeen (17) years of age or older who violates any provision
of this Chapter is guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor
more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). If any person under seventeen (17)
years of age violates any provision of this Chapter in the presence of a Police
Officer, said officer may impound the bicycle or motorized bicycle involved
for a period not to exceed five (5) days upon issuance of a receipt to the
child riding it or to its owner.
Section 375.090. Motorized Bicycles — License Required.
Section 375.100. Equipment Required.
No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any highways, streets or
roads in this City unless it is equipped in accordance with the minimum
requirements for construction and equipment of MOPEDS, Regulation
VESC-17, approved July, 1977, as promulgated by the Vehicle Equipment
Safety Commission.
Chapter 377
B. A bicycle operated on a roadway, or the shoulder adjacent to a roadway,
shall be operated in the same direction as vehicles are required to be
driven upon the roadway.
C. For purposes of this Section, and Section 375.050, "roadway" means
that portion of a street or highway ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
A. No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any highways, streets or
roads in this City unless the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle.
B. No motorized bicycle may be operated on any public thoroughfare
located within this City which has been designated as part of the
Federal interstate highway system.
C. Violation of this Section shall be deemed an infraction.
Section
375.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
375.100
AO:407
SNOWMOBILES
Section 377.010. Operation Upon Public Streets, Highways and
Areas. [R.O. 2008 §365.010; Ord. No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
Section 377.020. Restricted Streets, Highways and Areas. [R.O.
2008 §365.020; Ord. No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
Section 377.030. Riding on City Parkways and Sidewalks
Prohibited. [R.O. 2008 §365.030; Ord. No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public sidewalks within the
Municipal Limits of the City, nor shall they be operated upon that portion
of the public streets and highways located between the curb line and the
sidewalk, commonly referred to as "parkway".
Section 377.040. Violations. [R.O. 2008 §365.040; Ord. No. 4893 §1,
7-18-1990]
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter is guilty of an ordinance
violation. Each occurrence of violation is a separate offense.
A. Snowmobiles may be operated upon the streets, highways, and areas
not herein specified as restricted within the Municipal Limits of the City
as follows:
1. By a person sixteen (16) years of age or older and holding a valid
Missouri driver's license.
2. In a single file manner, in the proper lane of traffic but as close to
the curb as possible under existing circumstances.
3. Snowmobiles traveling on public streets, highways and areas shall
not exceed the posted speed limits and observe the other traffic
regulations of the City.
4. All snowmobiles shall be operated in a manner as to yield the rightof-
way to all other traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard.
5. All snowmobiles operated in permitted areas or streets shall be
equipped with operable head and tail lights and a muffler in good
working order to prevent excessive and unusual noise.
6. Any person operating a snowmobile or riding passenger must be
wearing a helmet.
A. Snowmobiles may not be operated upon the following public streets,
highways or areas within the Municipal Limits of the City:
1. All parks.
2. State highway system.
Section
375.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
377.040
AO:408
Chapter 379
SKATEBOARDS
Section 379.010. Operation Upon Public Streets and Sidewalks.
[R.O. 2008 §370.010; Ord. No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
Section 379.020. Restricted Streets and Sidewalks. [R.O. 2008
§370.020; Ord. No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
Section 379.030. Parents, Guardians — Responsibility. [R.O. 2008
§370.030; Ord. No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
The parent or guardian of any child shall not authorize or knowingly permit
any such child to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 379.040. Compliance With This Chapter, Effect of. [R.O.
2008 §370.040; Ord. No. 4893 §1, 7-18-1990]
Operation of a skateboard in a manner complying with the provisions of
this Chapter shall not constitute a violation of any other provision of the
Maryville Municipal Code.
Section 379.050. Violations. [R.O. 2008 §370.050; Ord. No. 4893 §1,
7-18-1990; Ord. No. 5418 §1, 5-28-1996]
Each and every person violating any provision of Title III, Traffic Code,
shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall
A. Skateboards may be operated upon the public streets and sidewalks not
herein specified as restricted within the Municipal Limits of the City as
follows:
1. In a single file manner, in the proper lane of traffic but as close to
the curb as possible under existing circumstances.
2. Skateboards traveling on public streets shall observe all traffic
regulations of the City.
3. Skateboards in use on public streets during the period from onehalf
(½) hour after sunset to one-half (½) hour before sunrise shall
be equipped with reflective tape outlining the edges of the
skateboard so as to be visible at night under normal atmospheric
conditions on straight, level, unlighted streets when viewed by a
vehicle driver under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at
two hundred (200) feet.
A. No person shall ride a skateboard at any time upon any street specified
in this Code as an emergency snow route.
B. No person shall ride a skateboard at any time upon a sidewalk within an
area zoned commercial under the Zoning Ordinance of this City.
Section
377.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
379.050
AO:409
be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be
imprisoned in jail for not more than three (3) months, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 380
LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
Section
379.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
379.050
AO:410
ARTICLE I
Operator's Licenses
Section 380.010. Driving While License Suspended or Revoked.61
[Ord. No. 7362 §1, 9-26-2011]
Section 380.020. Operation of Motor Vehicle Without Proper
License Prohibited — Motorcycles — Special License.62
A. A person commits the offense of driving while revoked if such person
operates a motor vehicle on a highway when such person's license or
driving privilege has been canceled, suspended or revoked under the
laws of this State or any other State and acts with criminal negligence
with respect to knowledge of the fact that such person's driving
privilege has been canceled, suspended or revoked.
B. A first violation of this Section shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). A subsequent violation of this
Section shall be punishable pursuant to Section 100.120, hereof.
A. Unless otherwise provided for by law, it shall be unlawful for any
person, except those expressly exempted by Section 380.040, to:
1. Operate any vehicle upon any highway in this City unless the
person has a valid license as required by Chapter 302, RSMo., or a
temporary instruction permit issued in compliance with Section
302.130, RSMo., or an intermediate driver's license issued in
compliance with Section 302.178, RSMo., in his/her possession;
2. Operate a motorcycle or motortricycle upon any highway of this
City unless such person has a valid license that shows the person
has successfully passed an examination for the operation of a
motorcycle or motortricycle as prescribed by the Director of
Revenue. The Director of Revenue may indicate such upon a valid
license issued to such person or shall issue a license restricting the
applicant to the operation of a motorcycle or motortricycle if the
actual demonstration, required by Section 302.173, RSMo., is
conducted on such vehicle;
3. Authorize or knowingly permit a motorcycle or motortricycle
owned by such person or under such person's control to be driven
upon any highway by any person whose license does not indicate
that the person has passed the examination for the operation of a
motorcycle or motortricycle or has been issued an instruction
permit therefor;
4. Operate a motor vehicle with an instruction permit, intermediate
driver's license or license issued to another person;
61.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
62.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
380.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.020
AO:411
Section 380.025. Effect of Revocation — Penalty.
Any resident or non-resident whose license, right or privilege to operate
a motor vehicle in this State has been suspended or revoked as provided
in Sections 302.010 — 302.540, RSMo., shall not operate a motor vehicle
in this State under a license, permit or registration certificate issued by
any other jurisdiction or otherwise during such suspension or after such
revocation until a new license is obtained when and as permitted under
Sections 302.010 — 302.540, RSMo. Violation of any provision of this
Section is an ordinance violation and on conviction therefor a person shall
be punished as prescribed by Section 302.321, RSMo.
Section 380.030. Prohibited Uses of License.
5. Operate a motor vehicle in violation of the provisions of Sections
302.130 and 302.178, RSMo., regarding accompaniment by a
qualified driver or stated hours of operation; or
6. Drive a commercial motor vehicle, unless fully licensed in
compliance with Chapter 302, RSMo., except when operating
under an instruction permit as provided for in Section 302.720,
RSMo.
B. A first violation of Subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this Section shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). A
subsequent violation of Subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this Section shall be
punishable pursuant to Section 100.120, hereof. Any violation of
Subsection (A)(3) and (4) of this Section shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00).
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Display or to permit to be displayed, or to have in his/her
possession, any license knowing the same to be fictitious or to have
been canceled, suspended, revoked, disqualified or altered;
2. Lend to or knowingly permit the use of by another any license
issued to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof;
3. Display or to represent as one's own any license not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
4. Fail or refuse to surrender to the Clerk of any Division of the Circuit
Court or the Director any license which has been suspended,
canceled, disqualified or revoked as provided by law;
5. Use a false or fictitious name or give a false or fictitious address on
any application for a license, or any renewal or duplicate thereof, or
knowingly to make a false statement;
6. Knowingly conceal a material fact or otherwise commit a fraud in
any such application;
Section
380.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
380.030
AO:412
Section 380.040. Exemptions From License Law.
7. Authorize or consent to any motor vehicle owned by him/her or
under his/her control to be driven by any person, when he/she has
knowledge that such person has no legal right to do so, or for any
person to drive any motor vehicle in violation of any of the
provisions of Sections 302.010 to 302.780, RSMo.;
8. Employ a person to operate a motor vehicle in the transportation of
persons or property with knowledge that such person has not
complied with the provisions of Sections 302.010 to 302.780,
RSMo., or whose license has been revoked, suspended, canceled or
disqualified or who fails to produce his/her license upon demand of
any person or persons authorized to make such demand;
9. Operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of the
restrictions imposed in a restricted license; or
10. Fail to carry his/her instruction permit, valid operator's license
while operating a vehicle and to display instruction permit or said
license upon demand of any Police Officer, court official or any
other duly authorized person for inspection when demand is made
therefor. Failure to exhibit his/her instruction permit or license as
aforesaid shall be presumptive evidence that said person is not a
duly licensed operator.
A. The following persons are exempt from license hereunder:
1. Any person while operating any farm tractor or implement of
husbandry temporarily operated or moved on a highway;
2. A non-resident who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and who has
in his/her immediate possession a valid license issued to him/her in
his/her home State or country;
3. A non-resident who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and who
has in his/her immediate possession a valid license issued to him/
her in his/her home State or country which allows such person to
operate a motor vehicle in the transportation of persons or
property as classified in Section 302.015, RSMo.; or
4. Convicted offenders of the Department of Corrections who have not
been convicted of a motor vehicle felony as follows — driving while
intoxicated, failing to stop after an accident and disclosing his/her
identity, or driving a motor vehicle without the owner's consent —
may operate State-owned trucks for the benefit of the correctional
facilities, provided that such offender shall be accompanied by a
Correctional Officer or other staff person in such truck.
Section
380.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.040
AO:413

ARTICLE II
Vehicle Licensing
Section 380.050. State Vehicle License Plates Required.
No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle or trailer upon any street
or highway of this City unless such motor vehicle or trailer has properly
displayed a valid license plate or plates or temporary permit issued to the
lawful owner of the vehicle by the Department of Revenue of the State
of Missouri, except that any person who is a non-resident of the State of
Missouri may operate or park any motor vehicle or trailer upon any street
or highway of this City, provided the motor vehicle or trailer has been duly
registered for the current year in the State, country or other place of which
the owner is a resident, provided that at all times such motor vehicle or
trailer is being operated or parked upon the streets or highways of this City,
the valid license plate or plates or temporary permit is properly displayed
on such vehicle or trailer.
Section 380.055. Registration of Motor Vehicles Operated for First
Time in State.
Application for registration of a motor vehicle not previously registered in
Missouri, operated for the first time on the public highways of this State,
and previously registered in another State shall be made within thirty (30)
days after the owner of such motor vehicle has become a resident of this
State.
Section 380.060. Method of Displaying License Plates.
No motor vehicle or trailer shall be operated on any highway of this City
unless it shall have displayed thereon the license plate or set of license
plates issued by the Director of Revenue or the State Highways and
Transportation Commission and authorized by Section 301.140, RSMo.
Each such plate shall be securely fastened to the motor vehicle or trailer
in a manner so that all parts thereof shall be plainly visible and reasonably
clean so that the reflective qualities thereof are not impaired. License
plates shall be fastened to all motor vehicles except trucks, tractors, truck
tractors or truck-tractors licensed in excess of twelve thousand (12,000)
pounds on the front and rear of such vehicles not less than eight (8) nor
more than forty-eight (48) inches above the ground, with the letters and
numbers thereon right side up. The license plates on trailers, motorcycles,
motortricycles and motor scooters shall be displayed on the rear of such
vehicles, with the letters and numbers thereon right side up. The license
plate on buses, other than school buses, and on trucks, tractors, truck
tractors or truck-tractors licensed in excess of twelve thousand (12,000)
pounds shall be displayed on the front of such vehicles not less than eight
(8) nor more than forty-eight (48) inches above the ground, with the letters
and numbers thereon right side up, or if two (2) plates are issued for the
vehicle pursuant to Subsection (3) of Section 301.130, RSMo., displayed in
the same manner on the front and rear of such vehicles. The license plate or
Section
380.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.060
AO:415
plates authorized by Section 301.140, RSMo., when properly attached, shall
be prima facie evidence that the required fees have been paid.
Section 380.070. Unauthorized Plates, Tags, Stickers, Signs.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or trailer on which there is
displayed on the front or rear thereof any other plate, tag or placard bearing
any number except the plate furnished by the Director of Revenue or the
placard herein authorized and the official license tag of any municipality
of this State, nor shall there be displayed on any motor vehicle or trailer a
placard, sign or tag bearing the words "license lost", "license applied for"
or words of similar import as a substitute for such number plates or such
placard.
Section 380.080. License Plates on Vehicles Displayed for Sale.
No person shall show, exhibit, display or have in possession for the purpose
of sale any motor vehicle bearing or displaying thereon any number or
license plates except those of the dealer or owner so displaying said motor
vehicle; provided however, that where the motor vehicle is placed on
consignment with a dealer by the owner thereof, there may be displayed a
number or license plate issued to the owner thereof.
Section 380.090. Certificate of Ownership Required for Registered
Vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in this City a motor vehicle or
trailer required to be registered as provided by law unless a certificate of
ownership has been applied for as provided in Section 301.190, RSMo.
Section 380.100. Transfer of Certificate of Ownership Upon Sale of
Vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or sell in this City any motor
vehicle or trailer registered under the laws of this State unless at the
time of delivery thereof there shall pass between the parties a certificate
of ownership with an assignment thereof as provided in Section 301.210,
RSMo., as amended, and the sale of any motor vehicle or trailer registered
under the laws of this State, without the assignment of such certificate of
ownership, shall be fraudulent and void.
Section 380.110. Removal of Plates on Transfer of Vehicle — Use by
Purchaser.
Upon the transfer of ownership of any motor vehicle or trailer, the
certificate of registration and the right to use the number plates shall expire
and the number plates shall be removed by the owner at the time of the
transfer of possession, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than the
person to whom such number plates were originally issued to have the same
in his/her possession whether in use or not, unless such possession is solely
for charitable purposes; except that the buyer of a motor vehicle or trailer
Section
380.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
380.110
AO:416
who trades in a motor vehicle or trailer may attach the license plates from
the trade-in motor vehicle or trailer to the newly purchased motor vehicle or
trailer. The operation of a motor vehicle with such transferred plates shall
be lawful for no more than thirty (30) days. As used in this Section, the term
"trade-in motor vehicle or trailer" shall include any single motor vehicle or
trailer sold by the buyer of the newly purchased vehicle or trailer, as long
as the license plates for the trade-in motor vehicle or trailer are still valid.
Section 380.120. Sale by Dealer.
Upon the sale of a motor vehicle or trailer by a dealer, a buyer who has
made application for registration, by mail or otherwise, may operate the
same for a period of thirty (30) days after taking possession thereof if during
such period the motor vehicle or trailer shall have attached thereto, in the
manner required by Section 301.130, RSMo., number plates issued to the
dealer. Upon application and presentation of proof of financial responsibility
as required under Subsection (5) of Section 301.140, RSMo., and
satisfactory evidence that the buyer has applied for registration, a dealer
may furnish such number plates to the buyer for such temporary use. In
such event, the dealer shall require the buyer to deposit the sum of ten
dollars fifty cents ($10.50), to be returned to the buyer upon return of the
number plates, as a guarantee that said buyer will return to the dealer such
number plates within thirty (30) days.
Section 380.130. False Information by Dealer.
No dealer shall advise any purchaser of a motor vehicle or trailer that such
purchaser may drive such a motor vehicle or trailer without compliance
with the foregoing license requirements.
Section
380.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.130
AO:417

ARTICLE III
Financial Responsibility
Section 380.140. Financial Responsibility Required.
A. No owner of a motor vehicle registered in this State or required to be
registered in this State shall operate the vehicle, or authorize any other
person to operate the vehicle registered, or maintain registration of a
motor vehicle, or permit another person to operate such vehicle upon
the streets or the alleys of this City unless the owner maintains the
financial responsibility as required in this Section which conforms to
the requirements of the laws of this State. Furthermore, no person shall
operate a motor vehicle owned by another with the knowledge that the
owner has not maintained financial responsibility unless such person
has financial responsibility which covers the person's operation of the
other's vehicle. However, no owner shall be in violation of this
Subsection if he/she fails to maintain financial responsibility on a motor
vehicle which is inoperable or being stored and not in operation.
B. For purposes of this Section, the term "financial responsibility" shall
mean the ability to respond in damages for liability on account of
accidents occurring after the effective date of proof of said financial
responsibility, arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a
motor vehicle, in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) because of bodily injury to or death of one (1) person in
any one (1) accident and, subject to said limit for one (1) person, in the
amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) because of bodily injury
to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one (1) accident and in the
amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) because of injury to or
destruction of property of others in any one (1) accident.
C. Proof of financial responsibility may be shown by any of the following:
1. A current insurance identification card issued by a motor vehicle
insurer or by the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri for
self-insurance. A motor vehicle liability insurance policy, a motor
vehicle liability insurance binder, or receipt which contains the
name and address of the insurer, the name and address of the
named insured, the policy number, the effective dates of the policy
and a description by year and make of the vehicle, or at least five
(5) digits of the vehicle identification number or the word "Fleet" if
the insurance policy covers five (5) or more motor vehicles shall be
satisfactory evidence of insurance in lieu of an insurance
identification card.
2. A certificate of the State Treasurer of a cash or security deposit
according to Section 303.240, RSMo.
3. A surety bond according to Section 303.230, RSMo.
Section
380.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.140
AO:419
Section 380.150. Display of False Evidence of Insurance — Penalty
— Confiscation of False Evidence.
No person shall display evidence of insurance to a Law Enforcement Officer
knowing there is no valid liability insurance in effect on the motor vehicle
as required pursuant to this Article or knowing the evidence of insurance is
illegally altered, counterfeit or otherwise invalid as evidence of insurance.
If the Law Enforcement Officer issues a citation to a motor vehicle operator
for displaying invalid evidence of insurance, the officer shall confiscate the
evidence for presentation in court. Any person convicted of violating this
Section is guilty of an ordinance violation.
Section 380.160. Alteration, Production or Sale of Invalid
Insurance Card.
No person shall alter an invalid insurance card to make it appear valid. No
person knowingly shall make, sell or otherwise make available an invalid or
counterfeit insurance card. Any person who violates this Section is guilty of
an ordinance violation.
D. Proof of financial responsibility shall be carried at all times in the
insured motor vehicle or by the operator of the motor vehicle if the
proof of financial responsibility is effective as to the operator rather
than to the vehicle. The operator of an insured motor vehicle shall
exhibit the insurance identification card on the demand of any Peace
Officer, commercial vehicle enforcement officer or commercial vehicle
inspector who lawfully stops such operator or investigates an accident
while that officer or inspector is engaged in the performance of the
officer's or inspector's duties.
E. However, no person shall be found guilty of violating this Section if the
operator demonstrates to the court that he/she met the financial
responsibility requirements of Section 303.025, RSMo., at the time the
Peace Officer wrote the citation.
F. Any person who violates any provisions of this Section shall be guilty of
an ordinance violation and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) for each and every violation.
Section
380.140
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
380.160
AO:420
Chapter 385
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section 385.010. Abandoned Vehicles or Trailers Prohibited.63
No person shall abandon any motor vehicle or trailer on the right-of-way of
any public road or State highway as set out in Section 217.020 of this Code.
Section 385.020. Obstructing the Flow of Traffic Prohibited.64
Except in the case of an accident resulting in the injury or death of any
person, the driver of a vehicle which for any reason obstructs the regular
flow of traffic on the roadway of any public road or State highway shall
make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved so as not
to block the regular flow of traffic. Any person who fails to comply with the
requirements of this Section is guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00).
Section 385.030. Towing of Abandoned Property on Public Real
Property.65
A. Any Law Enforcement Officer, or an official of the City where the City's
real property is concerned, may authorize a towing company to remove
to a place of safety:
1. Any abandoned property on the right-of-way of:
a. Any interstate highway or freeway in an urbanized area of the
City left unattended for ten (10) hours, or immediately if a Law
Enforcement Officer determines that the abandoned property
is a serious hazard to other motorists;
b. Any interstate highway or freeway outside of an urbanized
area of the City left unattended for twenty-four (24) hours, or
after four (4) hours if a Law Enforcement Officer determines
that the abandoned property is a serious hazard to other
motorists;
c. Any State highway other than an interstate highway or freeway
outside of an urbanized area, left unattended for more than
twenty-four (24) hours;
63.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §577.080, RSMo.
64.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §304.151, RSMo.
65.State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.155.1(2009), 304.155.3, RSMo.
Section
380.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
385.030
AO:421
provided that commercial motor vehicles referred to in
Subsections (a — c) not hauling waste designated as
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103(a) may only be removed
under this Section to a place of safety until the owner or
owner's representative has had a reasonable opportunity to
contact a towing company of choice; or
d. Any State highway other than an interstate highway or freeway
in an urbanized area, left unattended for more than ten (10)
hours.
2. Any unattended abandoned property illegally left standing upon
any highway or bridge if the abandoned property is left in a position
or under such circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement
of traffic where there is no reasonable indication that the person in
control of the property is arranging for its immediate control or
removal.
3. Any abandoned property which has been abandoned under Section
385.010 herein or Section 577.080, RSMo.
4. Any abandoned property which has been reported as stolen or
taken without consent of the owner.
5. Any abandoned property for which the person operating such
property is arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer
takes the person into custody and where such person is unable to
arrange for the property's timely removal.
6. Any abandoned property which due to any other State law or City
ordinance is subject to towing because of the owner's outstanding
traffic or parking violations.
7. Any abandoned property left unattended in violation of a State law
or City ordinance where signs have been posted giving notice of the
law or where the violation causes a safety hazard.
8. Any abandoned property illegally left standing on the waters of this
State as defined in Section 306.010, RSMo., where the abandoned
property is obstructing the normal movement of traffic, or where
the abandoned property has been unattended for more than ten
(10) hours or is floating loose on the water.
9. Any abandoned property for which the person operating such
property or vehicle eludes arrest for an alleged offense for which
the officer would have taken the offender into custody.
B. When the City Department of Public Safety authorizes a tow pursuant
to this Section in which the abandoned property is moved from the
immediate vicinity, it shall complete a crime inquiry and inspection
report.
Section
385.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
385.030
AO:422
Section 385.040. General Provisions and Procedures.66
C. Any City agency other than the City Department of Public Safety
authorizing a tow under this Section where property is towed away
from the immediate vicinity shall report the tow to the City Department
of Public Safety within two (2) hours of the tow, along with a crime
inquiry and inspection report.
A. Payment Of Charges. The owner of abandoned property removed as
provided in this Chapter shall be responsible for payment of all
reasonable charges for towing and storage of such abandoned property
as provided in Section 385.050.
B. Crime Inquiry And Inspection Report. Upon the towing of any
abandoned property pursuant to Section 385.030 or under authority of
a Law Enforcement Officer or local governmental agency pursuant to
Section 217.040, the City Department of Public Safety, where it
authorized such towing or was properly notified by another
governmental agency of such towing, shall promptly make an inquiry
with the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) and any statewide
Missouri law enforcement computer system to determine if the
abandoned property has been reported as stolen and shall enter the
information pertaining to the towed property into the statewide law
enforcement computer system. If the abandoned property is not
claimed within ten (10) working days of the towing, the tower who has
online access to the Department of Revenue's records shall make an
inquiry to determine the abandoned property owner and lienholder, if
any, of record. In the event that the records of the Department of
Revenue fail to disclose the name of the owner or any lienholder of
record, the tower shall comply with the requirements of Subsection (3)
of Section 304.156, RSMo. If the tower does not have online access, the
City Department of Public Safety shall submit a crime inquiry and
inspection report to the Missouri Director of Revenue. The City
Department of Public Safety shall also provide one (1) copy of the
report to the storage facility and one (1) copy to the towing company. A
towing company that does not have online access to the department's
records and that is in possession of abandoned property after ten (10)
working days shall report such fact to the City Department of Public
Safety. The crime inquiry and inspection report shall be designed by the
Director of Revenue and shall include the following:
1. The year, model, make and property identification number of the
property and the owner and any lienholders, if known;
2. A description of any damage to the property noted by the Law
Enforcement Officer authorizing the tow;
66.State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.155.5 — 6 (2004), 304.155.11 —
12(2004), 304.158.1, 304.158.5, 304.158.7, RSMo.
Section
385.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
385.040
AO:423
3. The license plate or registration number and the State of issuance,
if available;
4. The storage location of the towed property;
5. The name, telephone number and address of the towing company;
6. The date, place and reason for the towing of the abandoned
property;
7. The date of the inquiry of the National Crime Information Center,
any statewide Missouri law enforcement computer system, and any
other similar system which has titling and registration information
to determine if the abandoned property had been stolen. This
information shall be entered only by the City Department of Public
Safety;
8. The signature and printed name of the Law Enforcement Officer
authorizing the tow;
9. The name of the towing company, the signature and printed name
of the towing operator, and an indicator disclosing whether the
tower has online access to the department's records; and
10. Any additional information the Missouri Director of Revenue deems
appropriate.
C. Reclaiming Property. The owner of such abandoned property, or the
holder of a valid security interest of record, may reclaim it from the
towing company upon proof of ownership or valid security interest of
record and payment of all reasonable charges for the towing and
storage of the abandoned property.
D. Lienholder Repossession. If a lienholder repossesses any motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel without the
knowledge or cooperation of the owner, then the repossessor shall
notify the City Department of Public Safety within two (2) hours of the
repossession and shall further provide the Department of Public Safety
with any additional information the Department of Public Safety deems
appropriate. The City Department of Public Safety shall make an
inquiry with the National Crime Information Center and the Missouri
statewide law enforcement computer system and shall enter the
repossessed vehicle into the statewide law enforcement computer
system.
E. Notice To Owner/Tow Lien Claim. Any towing company which comes
into possession of abandoned property pursuant to this Chapter and
who claims a lien for recovering, towing or storing abandoned property
shall give notice to the title owner and to all persons claiming a lien
thereon, as disclosed by the records of the Missouri Department of
Revenue or of a corresponding agency in any other State. The towing
company shall notify the owner and any lienholder within ten (10)
Section
385.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
385.040
AO:424
business days of the date of mailing indicated on the notice sent by the
Missouri Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 304.156, RSMo.,
by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain the
following:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the storage facility;
2. The date, reason and place from which the abandoned property
was removed;
3. A statement that the amount of the accrued towing, storage and
administrative costs are the responsibility of the owner, and that
storage and/or administrative costs will continue to accrue as a
legal liability of the owner until the abandoned property is
redeemed;
4. A statement that the storage firm claims a possessory lien for all
such charges;
5. A statement that the owner or holder of a valid security interest of
record may retake possession of the abandoned property at any
time during business hours by proving ownership or rights to a
secured interest and paying all towing and storage charges;
6. A statement that, should the owner consider that the towing or
removal was improper or not legally justified, the owner has a right
to request a hearing as provided in this Section to contest the
propriety of such towing or removal;
7. A statement that if the abandoned property remains unclaimed for
thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the notice, title to the
abandoned property will be transferred to the person or firm in
possession of the abandoned property, free of all prior liens; and
8. A statement that any charges in excess of the value of the
abandoned property at the time of such transfer shall remain a
liability of the owner.
F. Physical Search Of Property. In the event that the Missouri Department
of Revenue notifies the towing company that the records of the
Department of Revenue fail to disclose the name of the owner or any
lienholder of record, the towing company shall attempt to locate
documents or other evidence of ownership on or within the abandoned
property itself. The towing company must certify that a physical search
of the abandoned property disclosed no ownership documents were
found and a good faith effort has been made. For purposes of this
Section, "good faith effort" means that the following checks have been
performed by the company to establish the prior State of registration
and title:
1. Check of the abandoned property for any type of license plates,
license plate record, temporary permit, inspection sticker, decal or
Section
385.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
385.040
AO:425
other evidence which may indicate a State of possible registration
and title;
2. Check the law enforcement report for a license plate number or
registration number if the abandoned property was towed at the
request of a law enforcement agency;
3. Check the tow ticket/report of the tow truck operator to see if a
license plate was on the abandoned property at the beginning of
the tow, if a private tow; and
4. If there is no address of the owner on the impound report, check
the law enforcement report to see if an out-of-state address is
indicated on the driver license information.
G. Petition In Circuit Court. The owner of the abandoned property
removed pursuant to this Chapter or any person claiming a lien, other
than the towing company, within ten (10) days after the receipt of
notification from the towing company pursuant to Subsection (E) of this
Section may file a petition in the Associate Circuit Court in the County
where the abandoned property is stored to determine if the abandoned
property was wrongfully taken or withheld from the owner. The petition
shall name the towing company among the defendants. The petition
may also name the agency ordering the tow or the owner, lessee or
agent of the real property from which the abandoned property was
removed. The Missouri Director of Revenue shall not be a party to such
petition but a copy of the petition shall be served on the Director of
Revenue.
H. Notice To Owner. Notice as to the removal of any abandoned property
pursuant to this Chapter shall be made in writing within five (5)
working days to the registered owner and any lienholder of the fact of
the removal, the grounds for the removal, and the place to which the
property has been removed by either:
1. The public agency authorizing the removal; or
2. The towing company, where authorization was made by an owner
or lessee of real property.
If the abandoned property is stored in any storage facility, a
copy of the notice shall be given to the operator of the facility.
The notice provided for in this Section shall include the amount
of mileage if available shown on the abandoned property at the
time of removal.
I. Tow Truck Requirements. Any towing company which tows abandoned
property for hire shall have the towing company's name, City and State
clearly printed in letters at least three (3) inches in height on the sides
of the truck, wrecker or other vehicle used in the towing.
Section
385.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
385.040
AO:426
Section 385.050. Maximum Charges.67
J. Storage Facilities. Persons operating or in charge of any storage facility
where the abandoned property is stored pursuant to this Chapter shall
accept cash for payment of towing and storage by a registered owner or
the owner's agent claiming the abandoned property.
K. Disposition Of Towed Property. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 301.227, RSMo., any towing company who has complied with
the notification provisions in Section 304.156, RSMo., including notice
that any property remaining unredeemed after thirty (30) days may be
sold as scrap property, may then dispose of such property as provided in
this Subsection. Such sale shall only occur if at least thirty (30) days
have passed since the date of such notification, the abandoned property
remains unredeemed with no satisfactory arrangements made with the
towing company for continued storage, and the owner or holder of a
security agreement has not requested a hearing as provided in Section
304.156, RSMo. The towing company may dispose of such abandoned
property by selling the property on a bill of sale as prescribed by the
Director of Revenue to a scrap metal operator or licensed salvage
dealer for destruction purposes only. The towing company shall forward
a copy of the bill of sale provided by the scrap metal operator or
licensed salvage dealer to the Director of Revenue within two (2) weeks
of the date of such sale. The towing company shall keep a record of
each such vehicle sold for destruction for three (3) years that shall be
available for inspection by law enforcement and authorized Department
of Revenue officials. The record shall contain the year, make,
identification number of the property, date of sale, and name of the
purchasing scrap metal operator or licensed salvage dealer and copies
of all notifications issued by the towing company as required in this
Chapter. Scrap metal operators or licensed salvage dealers shall keep a
record of the purchase of such property as provided in Section 301.227,
RSMo. Scrap metal operators and licensed salvage dealers may obtain a
junk certificate as provided in Section 301.227, RSMo., on vehicles
purchased on a bill of sale pursuant to the Section.
A. A towing company may only assess reasonable storage charges for
abandoned property towed without the consent of the owner.
Reasonable storage charges shall not exceed the charges for vehicles
which have been towed with the consent of the owner on a negotiated
basis. Storage charges may be assessed only for the time in which the
towing company complies with the procedural requirements of this
Chapter.
B. The City Council may from time to time establish maximum reasonable
towing, storage and other charges which can be imposed by towing and
storage companies operating within the City, and which are consistent
with this Chapter and with Sections 304.155 to 304.158, RSMo. Any
67.State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.156.2, 304.158.6, 304.158.10, RSMo.
Section
385.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
385.050
AO:427
Section 385.060. Sale of Abandoned Property by City.68
When the City has physical possession of the abandoned property, it may
sell the abandoned property, in accordance with its established provisions
and regulations and may transfer ownership by means of a bill of sale signed
by the City Clerk and sealed with the official City Seal. Such bill of sale
shall contain the make and model of the abandoned property the complete
abandoned property identification number, and the odometer reading of the
abandoned property, if available and shall be lawful proof of ownership for
any dealer registered under the provisions of Section 301.218, RSMo., or
Section 301.560, RSMo., or for any other person.
Chapter 400
ZONING COMMISSION
violation of said established maximum charges shall be deemed a
violation of this Section of the Code and shall be punishable pursuant
to Section 100.120.
C. A towing company may impose a charge of not more than one-half (½)
of the regular towing charge for the towing of abandoned property at
the request of the owner of private real property or that owner's agent
pursuant to this Chapter if the owner of the abandoned property or the
owner's agent returns to the abandoned property before it is removed
from the private real property. The regular towing charge may only be
imposed after the abandoned property has been removed from the
property and is in transit.
68.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §304.156, RSMo.
Section
385.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
385.060
AO:428
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 400.010. Commission Created. [R.O. 2008 §400.010; Ord.
No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
In order for the City to avail itself of the powers conferred by Sections
89.010 to 89.140, RSMo., there is hereby created and appointed a
commission to be known as the Zoning Commission.
Section 400.020. Composition, Appointments, Term, Compensation.
[Ord. No. 7206 §1, 4-26-2010; Ord. No. 7208 §1, 5-10-2010]
Section 400.030. Meetings, Quorum, Record, Officers. [R.O. 2008
§400.030; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
The members of the Zoning Commission shall meet the third Wednesday of
each month. They shall select one (1) of their citizen members as Chairman,
one (1) as Vice Chairman, and a Secretary each of whom shall serve one
(1) year from the first (1st) day of May of the year in which they are
selected or until their successors have been selected by the Commission.
Special meetings may be called at any time by the Chairman or, in his/
her absence, by the Vice Chairman. A majority of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Commission shall
cause a proper record to be kept of its proceedings and prepare and adopt
rules for the transaction of its business.
A. The Planning Commission shall consist of not more than fifteen (15) nor
less than seven (7) members, including:
1. The Mayor, if the Mayor chooses to be a member;
2. A member of the Council selected by the Council, if the Council
chooses to have a member serve on the Commission; and
3. Not more than fifteen (15) nor less than five (5) citizens appointed
by the Mayor and approved by the Council. Members of the
Commission shall be a resident of the City of Maryville no less than
one (1) year prior to being appointed. All citizen members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation. The term of each of
the citizen members shall be for four (4) years, except that the
terms of the citizen members first appointed shall be for varying
periods so that succeeding terms will be staggered. Any vacancy in
a membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment
as aforesaid. The Council may remove any citizen member for
cause stated in writing and after public hearing.
Section
400.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:429

ARTICLE II
Amendments
Section 400.040. Procedure for Zoning Changes. [R.O. 2008
§400.040; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
All requests, from whatever source, for any amendment, supplement,
change, modification or repeal of such regulations and restrictions as may
be contained in the Zoning Ordinance, including amendments to the
boundaries of the Zoning Districts or classifications indicated on the Official
Zoning Map, shall be made in accordance with the requirements and
procedures as provided in this Chapter.
Section 400.050. Rezoning Defined. [R.O. 2008 §400.050; Ord. No.
4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
The term "rezoning" shall mean the proposed amendment, change or
modification of the boundaries of zoning districts or classifications indicated
on the Official Zoning Map.
Section 400.060. Application for Rezoning. [R.O. 2008 §400.060;
Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 6023 §1, 1-26-1998; Ord. No.
6585 §§1 — 2, 9-15-2003; Ord. No. 6690 §§1 — 2, 9-27-2004]
A. All applications for rezoning shall be made by written application to the
Administrative Secretary, Public Works, on forms provided therefor.
Unless the application shall conform in all respects to the requirements
of this Chapter, it shall not be accepted by the Administrative Secretary,
Public Works.
B. Information Required. An application for rezoning shall contain the
following information:
1. Plot plan of the property affected by the proposed rezoning drawn
to a scale of not smaller than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet and
indicating thereon the dimensions of the property, the dimensions
and locations of any buildings or structures, driveway access to
public right-of-way, on-site drives and off-street parking areas
located thereon and all public and private rights-of-way including
utility easements bounding or intersecting the property;
2. List the names and current mailing address of owners, together
with the street address and legal description of all property
(exclusive of streets and alleys) within one hundred eighty-five
(185) feet distance from the boundary of the property effected by
the proposed rezoning. This list shall be prepared and certified by a
qualified abstractor or by the Nodaway County Assessor's Office;
3. Present zoning classification and use of the property affected by
the rezoning;
Section
400.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.060
AO:431
Section 400.070. Application for Zoning Ordinance Amendment.
[R.O. 2008 §400.070; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
All requests for an amendment of the text of the Zoning Ordinance shall be
made by written application to the City Clerk and shall state the wording
of the proposed amendment of the Zoning Ordinance including the portions
thereof to be repealed or modified and the reasons therefor.
Section 400.080. Zoning Commission Action. [R.O. 2008 §400.080;
Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 5567 §1, 7-28-1997; Ord. No.
6015 §1, 12-15-1997; Ord. No. 6508 §1, 10-28-2002]
4. Requested zoning classification and desired use of the property
affected by the rezoning; and
5. Justification for the zoning requested.
C. Application Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee
based on the area of property for which rezoning is requested,
computed as follows:
For the first 10,000 square feet $125.00
For the next 60,000 square feet per each 1,000 square
feet or fraction thereof
$1.00
For the next 130,000 square feet per each 1,000
square feet or fraction thereof
$0.50
D. Postage Fee. In addition to the non-refundable application fee described
above, the application shall also be accompanied by a non-refundable
postage fee which shall be computed by the Administrative Secretary,
Public Works, by multiplying the number of certified mailings required
to landowners within a one hundred eighty-five (185) foot distance from
the boundary of the property affected by the proposed rezoning by the
then applicable postal rates for such certified mail. The number of
mailings shall be computed based upon the information provided in
accordance with Subsection (B) above.
E. Time Of Application. The Administrative Secretary, Public Works, shall
note the date of filing of the application.
A. Upon acceptance of an application by the Director of Public Works or
his/her designee, a public hearing thereon shall be held by the Zoning
Commission at the next regular meeting thereof which occurs at least
three (3) weeks following the date of acceptance.
1. Notice of rezoning hearing. Prior to the public hearing before the
Zoning Commission as required pursuant to this Section, notice
thereof shall be given in compliance with the following provisions:
a. The owners of all property within a one hundred eighty-five
(185) feet distance from the boundary of the property affected
Section
400.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
400.080
AO:432
by a rezoning application shall be furnished written notice
by certified mail at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
Said notice shall set forth the nature of the proposed rezoning
and the date, time and location of the hearing before the
Zoning Commission. The hearing under this Section may be
held irrespective of the actual receipt of the notice by all
property owners if the notices were mailed by certified mail at
least twelve (12) days prior to the hearing.
b. All members of the Zoning Commission shall be furnished
written notice at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Said
notice shall set forth the nature of the proposed rezoning and
the date, time and location of the hearing before the Zoning
Commission.
2. Zoning Commission hearing. The Zoning Commission shall conduct
a hearing at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard. The Commission may require the
applicant to furnish such additional information as may be
necessary for a full understanding of the proposed rezoning.
Prior to any vote by the Zoning Commission to either approve
or disapprove the application, the Zoning Commission shall first
specifically consider and answer the following as they relate to the
property for which rezoning is sought.
a. A specific description of the zoning request, including both the
current zoning of the property and the proposed new zoning.
b. How the proposed rezoning relates to the current zoning map
of the City of Maryville, including whether there are similar or
contiguous zones to the property to be sought to be rezoned
and/or whether the rezoning would provide a transitional
buffer zone.
c. The anticipated use of the property including the changes in
density, both as to structures and number of people, based
upon the applicant's stated intended use of the property.
d. The maximum use to which the property could be subjected
under the allowable limits of the rezoning designation sought
by the applicant, including maximum density of number of
structures, maximum density of people and a description of the
maximum types of other uses allowable under the proposed
zoning designation.
e. Citation to any other zone(s) to which the property could be
rezoned which would allow the use of the property as stated by
the applicant but which would be a lower density or use
designation than the rezoning designations sought by the
applicant.
Section
400.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.080
AO:433
Section 400.090. Council Action. [R.O. 2008 §400.090; Ord. No.
4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 6508 §1, 10-28-2002]
3. Continuance of the hearing. For good cause shown by the
application, by the City or upon its own motion, the Zoning
Commission may recess or continue a hearing to a date certain.
Notice shall be posed advising the public of such continuance.
4. Withdrawal of application. The applicant may withdraw his/her
application by filing a written request with the City Clerk at any
time. However, no refund of the deposit shall be made upon such
withdrawal.
5. Zoning Commission finding and recommendation. At the conclusion
of the hearing, after fully considering the application, any input
from citizens and City staff, and the discussion regarding the issues
set forth in Subparagraph (2) above, the Zoning Commission shall
vote to either approve or disapprove the application. In its
discretion, the Zoning Commission may recommend approval of
rezoning to a zoning classification other than that requested in the
application, if the desired use of the applicant would be permissible
in that zone and the applicant files written concurrence. The
Zoning Commission shall immediately forward its recommendation
for disposition of the application to the City Clerk, which
recommendation shall be accompanied by the answers as
determined by the Zoning Commission to the property use
questions enumerated in Subparagraph (2) above.
A. Following action by the Zoning Commission, the City Clerk shall
transmit the application to the Council together with the
recommendations and findings of the Zoning Commission and shall
include a copy of the determination by the Zoning Commission as to the
property use questions enumerated in Section 400.080. The Council
shall hold a public hearing at which parties in interest and citizens shall
have an opportunity to be heard. The City Clerk shall schedule the
public hearing on the agenda for the next regular Council meeting
following the final action of the Zoning Commission for which
publication requirements can be satisfied.
1. Notice of hearing before the Council. At least fifteen (15) days prior
to the hearing, the City Clerk shall publish notice of the time and
place of the public hearing before the Council in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City. Additionally, said notice shall
describe the nature of the proposed rezoning and the property
affected by the rezoning by both legal description and location by
address or other general description.
2. Decision of the Council. Following the public hearing, the Council
shall vote to approve or deny the application. The decision of the
Council to approve or deny the application shall be by introduction
of a bill in the form of an ordinance on the agenda following the
Section
400.080
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
400.090
AO:434
public hearing. The ordinance shall provide that it shall be effective
upon passage and adoption.
3. Effect of protest petition. In case of a protest against a change in
zoning regulations or boundaries by petition as provided by Section
89.060, RSMo., such amendment shall not become effective except
by the favorable vote of two-thirds (?) of all the members of the
Council.
4. Reconsideration of application. Once denied by the Council, no
subsequent application for rezoning of a particular parcel of land to
the zone which was denied will be accepted until one (1) full year
shall have elapsed from the date of the previous denial by the
Council.
Section
400.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.090
AO:435
Chapter 405
ZONING CODE
Section
400.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
400.090
AO:436
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 405.010. Establishment of Zones. [R.O. 2008 §405.010; Ord.
No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
In carrying out the provisions of Sections 89.010 through 89.140, RSMo.,
the Planning Commission of Maryville, Missouri, have divided the City
into districts and have prepared regulations pertaining to such districts in
accordance with a comprehensive plan and designated to accomplish the
purposes set forth in Section 89.030, RSMo., as amended to accomplish the
general and specific purposes of this Title.
Section 405.020. Zones Listed. [R.O. 2008 §405.020; Ord. No. 4984
§1, 6-10-1991]
A. Symbols, titles, and a brief description of each of the zones established
by this Chapter are as follows:
1. Residential zones.
a. "AG" — Agricultural Zone. Provides for agriculture, very low
density residential development, and interim uses under
specific conditions.
b. "R-1" — Single-Family Residence. 8,800 square foot zone.
Provides for low density residential uses.
c. "R-2" — Single-Family Residence. 6,600 square foot zone.
Provides for single-family residences on moderate size lots.
d. "R-2" Modified Residence Zone. 6,600 square foot zone.
Provides for single-family residences in a duplex unit.
e. "R-3" — Multi-Family. 8,000 square foot minimum lot size.
Provides for multiple family dwellings.
f. "R-4" — Multi-Family Residence. 8,000 square foot minimum
lot size. Provides for multiple family dwellings.
2. Commercial zones.
a. "C-O" — Office Building District. To provide areas for
professional buildings and offices to be used only for
administrative or professional functions.
b. "C-1" — Restricted Business District. To provide a zone for a
wide range of non-offensive retail establishments and services.
c. "C-2" — General Business District. To provide a zone which will
take into account the special characteristics of the Central
Business District.
Section
405.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.020
AO:437
Section 405.025. Overlay Districts. [Ord. No. 7432 §1, 7-9-2012]
Section 405.030. Planned Districts. [R.O. 2008 §405.030; Ord. No.
4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
d. "C-3" — Commercial District. To provide for the efficient use of
business land near major thoroughfares.
3. Industrial zones.
a. "M-1" — Light Industrial District. To provide for non-offensive
industrial and manufacturing uses which can meet rigid
performance standards.
b. "M-2" — General Industrial District. To provide for greater
latitude in meeting performance standards than the "M-1"
Zone, but limiting retail and service business.
A. Each of the districts hereinbefore set forth shall be referred to as
Overlay Districts and create special zoning districts, placed over
existing base zones listed in Section 405.020 and identifies special
provisions in addition to those in the underlying base zone. Overlay
Districts shall be as follows:
1. "CTO" — Campus Town Overlay District.
2. "UNO" — University Neighborhood Overlay District.
A. Each of the districts hereinbefore set forth shall have a separate and
distinct counterpart known and herein referred to as a Planned District.
A "Planned District" shall be for the purpose of permitting and
regulating the uses heretobefore permitted in the equivalent district
and further provide for and encourage latitude and flexibility in the
location of buildings, structures, roads, drives, variations in yards and
open spaces all subsequent to approval of the plan by local officials. The
purpose is to allow development of tracts of land to their fullest extent
and at the same time observe the general intent and spirit of these
regulations. Planned Districts shall be as follows:
1. "RP-1" — Planned Single-Family Residence District.
2. "RP-2" — Planned Single-Family Residence District.
3. "RP-4" — Planned Multi-Family Residence District.
4. "CP-O" — Planned Non-Retail Business District.
5. "CP-1" — Planned Restricted Business District.
6. "CP-2" — Planned General Business District.
7. "CP-3" — Planned Commercial District.
8. "MP-1" — Planned Light Industrial District.
Section
405.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.030
AO:438
Section 405.040. Official Zoning Map. [R.O. 2008 §405.040; Ord.
No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
The location, size, shape, and boundaries of the zones to which the
provisions of the text of this Chapter are applicable, shall be indicated
on the atlas of maps which is entitled "Official Zoning Map" incorporated
herein and by this reference made a part hereof and such maps, after being
adopted by reference as a part of this Chapter and so certified by the City
Clerk together with the text; shall be maintained by the City Clerk and
such atlas shall be the Official Zoning Map, for purposes of enforcement
of this Title. Any amendment to the zoning classifications on the Official
Zoning Map shall include the legal description of the land involved including
appropriate adjacent public rights-of-way on public property and such
amendments shall be promptly and permanently noted on the face of the
maps in the custody of the City Clerk.
Section 405.050. Interpretation of Map. [R.O. 2008 §405.050]
9. "MP-2" — Planned Heavy Industrial District.
A. The following rules shall govern interpreting the boundaries of zones as
portrayed on the Official Zoning Map:
1. The boundaries of the zones, except where otherwise referenced,
are intended to follow the lines of platted lots, center lines of
streets and alleys, and when lines appear to be not more than ten
(10) feet from the line of a platted lot, the boundary shall be
interpreted as being coincidental therewith.
2. When boundaries cross unplatted property or platted lots
otherwise than set forth above, and their distances are not clearly
marked, their location shall be determined by use of the scale of the
map and every such line shall be interpreted to fall on the nearest
multiple of ten (10) feet.
3. Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall
be construed as following City limits.
4. Boundaries indicated as following railroad tracks shall be
construed to be midway between the rails of the main tracks.
5. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to
follow shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall
be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries
indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams,
rivers, canals, lakes, reservoirs, flood control channels or other
bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines and
shall move with such center lines in case of shifting.
6. In case of doubt or dispute, the boundary lines shall be determined
by the Board of Adjustment upon receiving of an appeal from a
ruling of the Building Official.
Section
405.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.060
AO:439
Section 405.060. Annexation. [R.O. 2008 §405.060; Ord. No. 4984
§1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 6723 §§1 — 2, 1-13-2005]
A. Upon such annexation, all territory that is annexed into the City of
Maryville shall upon such annexation be classified and zoned in
accordance with the following:
1. No previous zoning ordinance in effect. If at the time of annexation
the newly annexed land is not subject to a valid zoning ordinance
duly imposed by a properly authorized governmental subdivision of
this State, the following regulations shall apply:
a. Immediately upon annexation, the property shall automatically
receive a zoning designation of the most restrictive zone which
allows the use to which the property was being subjected at the
time of annexation;
b. In the event portions of the tract are being subjected to
different uses which would require different zoning
designations, the property shall be automatically divided into
zoning sections based upon the actual use of the areas of the
property at the time of annexation and shall automatically
receive a zoning designation of the most restrictive zone which
allows the use to which that portion of the property was being
subjected at the time of annexation;
c. Notwithstanding the foregoing paragraphs, in the event such
automatic zoning designation would result in "spot-zoning" in
violation of the ordinances of the City of Maryville, the
automatic zoning shall instead be zoning consistent with the
zoning of the adjoining property at the time of annexation. In
the event the property is adjoined by tracts with different
zoning designations, the property shall immediately be
referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission and no
development shall be allowed upon said property until the
property is assigned a zone pursuant to the regulations of this
Chapter and the laws of the State of Missouri.
d. Thereafter the City of Maryville shall adopt such zoning
regulations for the land as are appropriate in accordance with
the procedures prescribed by this Chapter and the laws of the
State of Missouri.
2. Pre-existing zoning ordinance in effect. If at the time of the
annexation the newly annexed land is subject to a valid zoning
ordinance duly imposed by a properly authorized governmental
subdivision of the State, upon annexation said land shall remain
subject to the zoning designations in effect prior to annexation until
such time as the City of Maryville shall adopt zoning regulations for
the annexed territory in accordance with the procedures
prescribed by this Chapter and the laws of the State of Missouri.
Section
405.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.060
AO:440
Section 405.070. Zoning Lots to Be Designated. [R.O. 2008
§405.070; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
In order to facilitate the enforcement of this Chapter, the device of zoning
lots as defined herein shall be used. A parcel of land shall be designated and
suitably recorded by the Building Official as forming the site of each new
building, structure or use of land or the site of any building structure or use
of land designated for any alteration or modification requiring a building
permit or certificate of occupancy. Said parcel shall conform in dimensions
and area to the provisions of this Chapter. A zoning lot may or may not
coincide with platted lot lines.
Section 405.080. Applicability to Land and Building. [R.O. 2008
§405.080; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no
building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all
of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
Section 405.090. Applicability, Open Space. [R.O. 2008 §405.090;
Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
3. Timing of action. The Planning and Zoning Commission and the
City Council of the City of Maryville shall adopt the regulations
envisioned herein in a timely manner.
A. No open space surrounding any building shall be encroached upon or
reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the yard, lot area and
building location regulations herein designed for the zone in which such
building or open space is located. No yard, off-street parking space, offstreet
loading space, or other open space surrounding any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Chapter except as
otherwise specified herein, shall be considered as providing a yard or
open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on
one (1) platted lot shall be considered as the required open space on
another platted lot unless the other platted lot is in the same ownership
and is declared as a single zoning lot in applying for a building permit,
and provided no land so considered as part of a required building site or
zoning lot in the application for a building permit for an existing
building. The required yard or open space for any use, building or
structure shall be contained in the same zone as required for the
principal use, its buildings or accessory buildings.
B. No lot, yard, off-street loading space, off-street parking space or other
open space required for an existing building by the regulations
contained herein shall be hereafter reduced in dimension or area below
the minimum requirements set forth herein for said building or
structure, except to provide for the extension, establishment or
widening of a public street or highway.
Section
405.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.100
AO:441
Section 405.100. Interpretation — Priority of Contracts. [R.O. 2008
§405.100; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
Section 405.110. Airport Approach and Turning Zones — Height
Restrictions. [R.O. 2008 §405.110; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
Notwithstanding height restrictions specified for any specific zone set forth
herein, no building, structure, vegetation, or use of land shall be
constructed or permitted to grow to a height exceeding the limits indicated
on the zoning district maps entitled "Airport Approach and Turning Zone"
which are a part of this Title, or may hereafter be adopted as a part of this
Title.
Section 405.120. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §405.120; Ord. No. 4984
§1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 5255 §1, 11-28-1994; Ord. No. 5292 §1,
4-10-1995; Ord. No. 6689 §§1 — 2, 9-27-2004; Ord. No. 7213 §1,
5-10-2010]
A. It is not the intention of this Chapter to defeat the purposes of any
contract, deed restriction or protective covenant when such instrument
is not inconsistent with this Title or contains stricter requirements. In
the event this Title conflicts with other ordinances, rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to law, or State or Federal law, then the
more strict provisions shall apply.
B. Areas which are included within the boundaries of an Urban Renewal
Plan or other area plan which has been officially adopted and approved
by the Council and a contract with the Federal or other government
consummated as a consequence thereof, shall not be the subject of any
zoning change which will defeat the purposes of such contract.
A. For the purpose of this Title, certain words and terms used herein shall
be defined and interpreted as follows:
All words used in the present tense include the future tense. All words
in the plural number include the singular number, and all words in
the singular number include the plural number, unless the natural
construction of the wording indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is
mandatory and not directory. The word "used" shall be deemed also to
include "designed, intended or arranged to be used."
ACCESSORY RENTALS, ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL RENTALS,
ACCESSORY UNITS AND ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL UNITS[Ord. No.
7434 §1, 7-9-2012] —
A habitable living unit that is:
a. Within or added to a single-family dwelling; or
A detached dwelling on the same lot as a single-family
dwelling, which:
(1) Is not open to the remainder of the single-family dwelling;
b.
1.
Section
405.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.120
AO:442
ALLEY — A minor way, dedicated to public use, which is primarily for
vehicular access to the back side of the properties otherwise abutting
on a street.
APARTMENT HOTEL — An apartment house which furnishes service
for the use of its tenants which are ordinarily furnished by hotels, but
the privilege of which is not primarily available to the public.
AUTO WRECKING — The collection, burning out, dismantling or
wrecking of used motor vehicles, wheeled or track equipment, or
trailers, or the storage, sale of, dumping or dismantled, partially
dismantled, obsolete or wrecked motor vehicles, wheeled or track
equipment, or trailers of their parts. The dismantling and rebuilding
other than customer repair of more than one (1) motor vehicle, piece
of wheeled or track equipment, or trailer at a time even though not
for profit or a principal use of a parcel of land shall be defined as
"auto wrecking." The storage of a partially dismantled motor vehicle,
piece of wheeled or track equipment or trailer shall be considered auto
wrecking.
BLOCK — A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public
highway, streets, streams, railroad rights-of-way, parks, or a
combination thereof. There may be more than one (1) numbered block
as shown on a plat, falling within a single block as herein defined.
BOARD — The Board of Zoning Adjustment of the City of Maryville,
Missouri.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof or partial roof supported
by columns, posts or walls for the enclosure of persons, animals,
equipment or chattels of any kind. A residential building within the
meaning of this Chapter shall include a building enclosed by a
continuous wall, regardless of the existence of platted lot lines through
the area occupied by such building. A commercial or industrial
structure may, within the meaning of this Chapter, consist of separate
buildings where party walls or ownership lines exist in such a manner
Includes separate, complete, independent and permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation; and
(2)
Which complies with the requirements of R-2 zones
[Currently found in Section 405.240(A)(1)(b)].
(3)
For purposes of the requirement in Subsection (1)(b)(2) hereof, the
unit shall, at a minimum, have the following amenities separate
and exclusive from the single-family dwelling: a direct entrance
from the exterior of the dwelling; lavatory; bathing or showering
facilities; access to running water with sink; hot cooking facilities;
electrically powered cold food storage, and no less than two outside
access points (door or window) sufficient to comply with thencurrent
building/fire code requirements.
2.
Section
405.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.120
AO:443
as to indicate the intent that they be separate buildings. A tent shall be
defined as a building for the purposes of this Chapter.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The distance measured from the mean elevation
of the grade at the front face of the building to the highest point on the
roof or parapet of said building.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The official appointed by the administration
or the City Council of Maryville, Missouri, and charged with the
responsibility of enforcing this Title.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — Any structure erected or constructed,
including buildings as herein defined, the use of which required
location on the ground or attachment to something located on the
ground and which is incidental and customarily appurtenant to a
principal use permitted on the zoning lot, but not including fences and
walls of less than six (6) feet in height, or bank protection structures,
regardless of height, provided they do not project more than one (1)
foot above the surface of the ground on high side.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the primary
use of the site on which it is situated. In any residential district any
dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal building of the site on
which it is located.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A permit issued by the Building
Official indicating that the use of the building or land in question is in
conformity with this Chapter or that there has been a legal variance
therefrom as provided by this Chapter.
CLINIC, MEDICAL — A building or portion of a building containing
the offices and associated facilities of one (1) or more practitioners
providing medical, dental, psychiatric, osteopathic, chiropractic,
physical therapy or similar services for outpatients only, with or without
shared or common spaces and equipment. A common area pharmacy or
drug dispensary available to persons other than patients being treated
therein or making charges separate from bills for professional services
of said practitioners shall not be considered as a medical clinic use.
CLUB — Shall include clubhouse and shall mean a voluntary association
of persons organized for cultural, recreational, fraternal, civic,
charitable or similar purpose but shall not include an organization or
premises, the chief activity of which is a service or activity customarily
carried on as business even though it may be chartered and named for
purposes herein defining a club.
COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of
Maryville, Missouri.
COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Maryville, Missouri.
COUNTRY CLUB — For the purposes of this Chapter, Shall include
golf courses, par-3 courses, swimming pools, tennis clubs, and
neighborhood clubhouses, any and each of which shall be located on
a site of not less than one (1) acre and open only to membership
Section
405.120
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.120
AO:444
subscribing for the use of all facilities for a term of not less than one
(1) year and members' non-paying guests. Sleeping facilities other than
for one (1) caretaker or manager and his/her family shall be prohibited.
Clubs operated as restaurants, cocktail lounges, card rooms, beer
taverns, bowling alleys, pool and billiard parlors and similar activities
normally carried on as a business shall be construed to limit the method
of operation of such facilities enumerated in this definition when owned
or operated by a governmental agency.
DAY CARE CENTER — A dwelling or other facility conducted or
maintained for any part of the twenty-four-hour day to provide care for
hire for more than ten (10) children not related to the day care provider,
except those operated in connection with a business establishment as a
convenience for its customers and except boarding homes for children.
DAY CARE HOME — A dwelling occupied by a day care provider and
conducted or maintained for any part of the twenty-four-hour day to
provide care for hire for seven (7) but not more than ten (10) children
not related to the day care provider.
DRIVE-IN — May be used as a noun or adjective and shall refer to a
business which is designed to serve patrons while they are reposed in
vehicles or by means of service windows with the intent that products
be consumed in automobiles. This shall not be construed to include
places for making deposits from automobiles such as drive-in bank
windows, post office drop boxes or laundry or cleaning drop boxes.
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for
residential occupancy, excluding hotels, motels, boarding, rooming and
lodging houses, travel trailers/recreational vehicles and tourist courts.
DWELLING UNIT — Any building or portion thereof which provides
complete and independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons,
having permanent provisions for living, eating, sleeping, cooking and
sanitation and which has a separate entrance/exit and separate utility
metering.
DWELLING, ATTACHED (ROW) — A multifamily dwelling in which each
dwelling unit has a separate outdoor entrance and is either:
DWELLING, DETACHED — A dwelling that is completely surrounded by
open space on the same lot.
DWELLING, MOBILE — A vehicle used or so constructed as to permit
its being used as a conveyance upon a public street or highway and
duly licensable as such, and shall include self-propelled vehicles so
designed, constructed, reconstructed, or added to by any means, in
Joined to one (1) other dwelling unit at one (1) side by one (1) party
wall; or
1.
Joined to two (2) other dwelling units by one (1) party wall on each
side; or
2.
3. Under one (1) roof.
Section
405.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.120
AO:445
such a manner as will permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling or
sleeping place of one (1) or more persons and supported by wheels,
jacks or similar supports. Transportable dwellings not meeting building
code requirements for a dwelling shall be treated as mobile dwellings.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion thereof containing
two (2) or more dwelling units under one (1) roof.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building containing one (1) dwelling
unit only.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two (2) dwelling
units only, referred to as duplex dwelling units.
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS — Any liquid which gives off flammable vapors,
as determined by the flash point from an open-cup tester as used
for test of burning oils, at or below a temperature of eighty degrees
Fahrenheit (80° F.), is flammable.
FLOOR AREA — The floor area of a building, as used in calculating
the gross floor area ratio or as otherwise used in this Chapter, shall
include all areas having headroom of seven (7) feet or more, including
basement areas where they are used as a dwelling unit for sleeping
accommodations, or other family eating or living purposes, but not
include basement floor areas used for utility and storage purposes.
Floor area for business and industrial buildings shall include all usable
floor space above grade and that portion of basements used for the
conduct of business or industry, but not including utility areas of said
basements. Measurements shall be made at the outside of outside
walls. An area may be surfaced with natural earth and still be
considered a floor.
GOLF COURSE — Standard-sized layouts of at least nine (9) holes and
shall not include miniature golf courses, par-3 golf courses, pitch and
putt courses or driving ranges.
GRADE — The mean elevation of the ground measured along the wall
of a building, or lot line, or the top of a street curb not yet constructed,
or an official grade of an alley surface, as appropriate to the context in
which the term is used.
GROSS FLOOR AREA RATIO (GFAR) — The floor area of a building
divided by the area of the zoning lot as defined herein. (For example, a
building one (1) story high covering an entire lot would have a GFAR of
1.0 where as a building two (2) stories high covering an entire lot would
have a GFAR of 2.0 while a building one (1) story high covering half a
lot would have a GFAR of 0.5. Both principal and accessory buildings
shall be considered in calculating gross floor area.
GROUND COVERAGE — The area of a zoning lot occupied by all
buildings expressed as a percentage of the gross area of the zoning lot.
GROUP HOME — Any home in which eight (8) or fewer unrelated
mentally or physically handicapped persons reside, and may include
two (2) additional persons acting as houseparents or guardians who
Section
405.120
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.120
AO:446
need not be related to each other or to any of the mentally or physically
handicapped persons residing in the home.
HEIGHT, BUILDING — See "building height."
HOME OCCUPATION, GENERAL —
A business occupation or profession carried on within a residential
dwelling by the resident thereof, and which shall have the following
characteristics:
There shall not be external evidence of the occupation with the
exception of one (1) unlighted name plate of not more than
one (1) square foot in area attached flat against the building.
Advertising displays and advertising devices displayed through
a window of the building shall not be permitted.
a.
There shall be no emission of smoke, dust, odor, fumes, glare,
noise, vibration, electrical or electronic disturbance detectible
at the zoning lot line.
b.
The activity shall employ only members of the immediate
family of the resident of the dwelling.
c.
There shall not be a stock of goods on the premises in excess
of thirty (30) cubic feet in volume, none of which shall be of a
flammable nature.
d.
There shall be no signs, radios, television, newspapers,
handbill or similar types of advertising linking the address of
the premises with the home occupation.
e.
Said home occupation shall not involve continual visits by the
general public, except that music lessons may be given to
four (4) pupils at a time, and a dressmaker may have two (2)
customers at a time. A beauty shop or barber shall not be
considered a home occupation.
f.
The above listed characteristics of a home occupation shall not
be construed to restrict the sale of garden produce grown on
the premises.
g.
Said occupation may include the caring for not more than six
(6) children at one time for hire.
h.
i. Room or board for hire, but not for more than two (2) persons.
1.
Any business, occupation or profession, the operation of which
does not meet the aforesaid characteristics, shall not be
interpreted to be a home operation despite the fact that it may
attempt to operate in a residential building.
2.
Section
405.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.120
AO:447
HOME OCCUPATION, LIMITED —
JUNK — Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash,
rubber debris, waste, or junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles,
or parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous
material.
LOT — A zoning lot unless the context shall clearly indicate a lot of
record, in which case a lot is a lot of record.
A business, occupation or profession carried on within a residential
dwelling by the resident thereof, and which has the following
characteristics:
There shall be no external or externally visible evidence of the
occupation, business or profession whatsoever.
a.
There shall be no emission of smoke, dust, odor, fumes, glare,
noise, vibration, electrical or electronic disturbance detectable
at the zoning lot line.
b.
The activity shall employ only members of the immediate
family of the resident of the dwelling.
c.
d. There shall be no stock of goods on the premises.
There shall be no machinery other than that normally found in
a home.
e.
There shall be no contact at the premises with customers or
clients other than by telephone or mail, except that music
lessons may be given to one (1) pupil at a time, and cultural,
art or dance instruction may be given to four (4) pupils at one
time.
f.
Said occupation may include the care for of not more than six
(6) children at one time for hire.
g.
There shall be no signs, radio, television, newspaper, handbill
or similar types of advertising linking the address of the
premises with the home occupation.
h.
The above listed characteristics of a limited home occupation
shall not be construed to restrict the sale of garden produce
grown on the premises, provided this exception shall not
extend to allow the operation of a commercial greenhouse or
nursery or the existence of stands or booths for display of said
produce.
i.
1.
Any business, occupation or profession, the operation of which
does not meet the aforesaid characteristics of a limited home
occupation, shall not be interpreted to be a limited home
occupation despite the fact that it may attempt to operate in a
residential building.
2.
Section
405.120
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.120
AO:448
LOT LINE — A boundary of a zoning lot. Lot line is synonymous with
property line.
LOT OF RECORD — Land designated as a separate and distinct parcel
in a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of
the County Recorder of Nodaway County, Missouri, the deed to which
was recorded in the office of said Recorder prior to the adoption of this
Chapter (June 10, 1991).
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured
at the front building line.
LOT, CORNER — A zoning lot situated at the intersection of two (2)
streets, or bounded on two (2) or more adjacent sides by street right-ofway
lines or in the case of curved right-of-way lines, when the extension
of tangents at the side lot lines yields an internal angle which does not
exceed one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).
LOT, INTERIOR — A zoning lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, REVERSE CORNER — A corner zoning lot, the side street line of
which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the zoning
lot to its rear.
LOT, THROUGH — A zoning lot having frontage on two (2) parallel
or approximately parallel diverging or converging streets, but not
including a corner lot as defined herein.
LOT, ZONING — See "zoning lot."
MINOR REPAIR, AUTOMOBILE — The replacement of minor
assemblies or parts and tune-up of automobiles, or trucks of less than
fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds gross license weight, but not
including body and fender work, painting, engine overhaul or similar
type of work.
MODIFYING ZONE — A zone which is dependent upon a primary zone
and which is designed to add to the primary zone a specific restriction
or liberalization to meet specific locational needs which if accomplished
by an additional series of primary zones would make the ordinance
unnecessarily lengthy and complicated.
MOTOR HOTEL or HOTEL — A group of attached or detached living
units with individual toilet facilities designed primarily for transient
guests and which may include restaurants and other similar related
services. Not more than forty percent (40%) of the units in a motor
hotel may be occupied as residential units, provided each such unit
must first be approved by City Code Officials as to adequate life-safety
conditions, occupants per room, off-street parking spaces and other
conditions protecting the occupants and the public.
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING — A building or structure or portion
thereof lawfully existing at the time this Chapter (June 10, 1991) or an
amendment thereto becomes effective, which does not meet the bulk,
Section
405.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.120
AO:449
height, yard, parking, loading or other requirements of this Chapter or
any amendment thereto.
NON-CONFORMING USE — A use which lawfully occupies building or
land at the time this Chapter (June 10, 1991) or an amendment thereto
becomes effective but does not meet the requirements of this Chapter
or any amendment thereto.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING — An outdoor sign, display, device, figure,
painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard, or other thing
designed, intended or used to advertise or inform, any part of the
advertising or information contents of which is visible from any point of
the traveled ways of the interstate or primary systems.
PAR-3 GOLF COURSE — A golf course other than a miniature golf
course and other than a golf course defined herein and having greens
similar to a golf course and fairways of not less than fifty (50) yards in
length. A par-3 golf course may not be lighted unless so specified as
permitted in the text of this Chapter.
PRIMARY ZONE — A zoning classification which can stand alone as a
classification of a parcel of property.
PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USE — That use of a zoning lot which is
among the uses allowed as a matter or right as the exclusive use of a
lot under the zoning classification.
ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling containing one (1) or more lodging
rooms that accommodate one (1) or more persons who are not members
of the keeper's family; provided, however, that the letting of rooms for
hire, to the extent permitted by this Chapter as a home occupation,
shall not in itself cause a dwelling to be a rooming house. In a rooming
house, lodging or meals are provided for compensation on a weekly or
monthly basis. Rooming house includes boardinghouse.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT — A use which is not allowed in a zone as a
matter or right, but which is permitted by the Council based on findings
and recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
SPOT ZONE — Any area which is less than one-half (1/2) of a City block.
A one-half (1/2) City block shall consist of an area equal to the size of
four (4) "R-2" standard lots or an area of not less than twenty-eight
thousand eight hundred (28,800) square feet (60 ft. x 120 ft. x 4 =
28,800).
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of a floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the
upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the
finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar or crawl space is
more than six (6) feet above grade, as defined herein, for more than fifty
percent (50%) of the total perimeter, or is more than twelve (12) feet
above grade at any point, such basement, cellar or crawl space shall be
considered a story.
Section
405.120
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.120
AO:450
STREET — The entire width between property lines dedicated or
acquired for the purpose of public use for vehicular traffic or access
other than an alley. Where a way or place exists by virtue or consent
agreement or an established public right, then for the purpose of this
Chapter the way or place shall be considered to be fifty (50) feet in
width falling half on each side of the center line of the traveled way.
Where the dimensions, set out in a consent agreement, exceed fifty (50)
feet, then the larger dimension shall govern.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the structural members
of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders. Vehicles duly
licensed for operation upon public streets or highway shall not be
considered structures.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location
on the ground or attached to or resting on something having a fixed
location on the ground. Moreover, the following shall always be
considered structures: buildings, walls, fences, signs and billboards.
UNRELATED PERSONS — Persons who are not related within the third
degree of consanguinity or affinity.
USE — The purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged
or intended or to which said land or building is occupied, maintained or
leased.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use customarily incident to a principal
permitted use or building and located on the same zoning lot with such
principal use of building.
USE, SPECIFICALLY EXCLUDED — A use of land or a structure which
is excluded from a zone by the operation of other regulations of the
zone, and which is specifically enumerated as excluded for purposes of
clarity of intent and ease of reference.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending the full width of the zoning
lot, between the main building and the front lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed by buildings or structures in excess of thirty (30) inches in
height except as provided herein, the depth of which shall be measured
as the least distance between the front lot line and the front of such
main building.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending the full width of the zoning
lot, between the main building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed by buildings or structures in excess of thirty (30) inches in
height except as provided herein, the depth of which shall be measured
as the least distance between the rear lot line and the rear of such main
building.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard, between the main building and the side lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed by buildings or structures in excess of thirty (30) inches in
height except as provided herein, the depth of which shall be measured
Section
405.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.120
AO:451
Section 405.125. Violation and Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §405.125; Ord.
No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 5255 §1, 11-28-1994; Ord. No.
5292 §1, 4-10-1995]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this Title shall be deemed guilty of a ordinance violation. Each day that the
violation is permitted to exist after notification in writing by the Building
Official and the expiration of time designated in said notice shall constitute
a separate offense.
as the least distance between the side lot line and the side of such main
building.
ZONING LOT — A single tract of land, located within a single block
which at the time of filing for a building permit or certificate of
occupancy is designated by the owner or developer as a tract to be
used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single or unified
ownership or control, and assigned to the particular use, building or
structure for which the building permit or certificate of occupancy is
issued and including such area of land as may be required by the
provisions of this Chapter for such use, building or structure.
Section
405.120
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.125
AO:452
ARTICLE II
Exceptions and Encroachments
Section 405.130. Height Exceptions. [R.O. 2008 §405.130; Ord. No.
4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
Section 405.140. Yard Space. [R.O. 2008 §405.140; Ord. No. 4984
§1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 6691 §§1 — 2, 9-27-2004]
A. General Rule. Any structure hereafter erected or altered shall comply
with the height limitations of the zone in which it is located except as
specified below. However, no exception listed below shall exceed the
height restrictions of an aircraft approach and turning zone.
B. Appurtenances. The following appurtenances may exceed the
prescribed height limit except when they would violate the height
restrictions of an aircraft approach and turning zone, provided they are
normally required for a use permitted in the zone in which they are
erected or constructed: flagpoles, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator
bulkheads, silos, storage towers, observation towers, ornamental
towers, monuments, cupolas, domes, spires, standpipes and other
necessary mechanical appurtenances and their protective housing;
provided however, that any of the above except flagpoles and chimneys,
when located in any zone with a height limit of forty (40) feet or less
shall be allowed only upon finding of the Board of Adjustment that such
appurtenances will not be unduly detrimental to the surrounding
property.
C. Public And Semi-Public Buildings. Public and semi-public buildings and
structures such as hospitals, churches, sanitariums, schools and water
reservoir towers may exceed the height limits of the zone in which they
are located, provided that such buildings and structures shall provide at
least one (1) additional foot of yard space on each side for each
additional foot that such building or structure exceeds the specified
height limit of the zone in which it is located and further provided, that
a finding is made by the Board of Zoning Adjustment that such
additional height will not be materially detrimental to surrounding
property.
A. General Rule. Any building, structure or use hereafter erected, altered
or established shall comply with the yard space requirements of the
zone in which it is located except as specified below. The required yard
space for any building, structure or use shall and such required yard
space shall fall entirely upon land in a zone or zones which the principal
use is permitted. Any required yard space shall be open from thirty (30)
inches above the ground to the sky except as specified herein.
B. Yard Space Encroachments.
1. Eaves. Eaves, cornices and similar features may extend one (1) foot
into a required yard space except that eaves may encroach three
Section
405.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.140
AO:453
(3) feet into a yard space when such yard space is ten (10) feet or
more in width.
2. Chimneys. Chimneys, when not more than four (4) feet wide, may
extend one (1) foot into any required yard space. Chimneys
including those in excess of four (4) feet wide may extend two (2)
feet into any yard space when such yard is ten (10) feet or more in
width.
3. Rear yard. Accessory buildings or structure shall be permitted to
occupy a required yard with the following restrictions:
a. No such accessory structure shall be greater than fifteen (15)
feet in height nor be closer than twenty (20) feet from any
street line.
b. An accessory structure may be constructed within two (2) feet
of an inside lot line when the entire structure is within forty
(40) feet of the rear property line, or on the rear half of a lot if
the adjacent lot is built upon and the accessory building will be
entirely to the rear of the line of any principal building on the
said neighboring lot.
c. Adjoining property owners may construct accessory buildings
with party walls in lieu of the two (2) foot side yard, but in
compliance with the general location rules of (b) above,
provided such walls conform with the requirements of the
Building Code and a finding is made by the Board of
Adjustment that such party wall development will be
appropriate to the topographic conditions and in harmony with
the character of development of the neighborhood.
4. Canopies. Canopies and overhangs on any side of a business
building may extend four (4) feet into a required yard space. Signs
mounted on the face of any such canopy or overhang shall not
exceed eight (8) inches in height in any zone in which flat wall signs
are specified. Canopies and awnings on a residential building may
extend four (4) feet into any required side yard or seven (7) feet
into any required front or rear yard when they are attached to and
supported entirely by or from a wall of the building.
C. Yard Space Exception — Steep Slopes. Automobile storage garages may
be allowed within a required front or side yard when such garage will
be entirely below the grade of the lot and after a finding by the Board of
Zoning Adjustment that topographic conditions make such a location
necessary, that such orientation will not create a hazard to automobile
or pedestrian traffic in the street, and that such orientation will be in
harmony with the character of development of the neighborhood.
Section
405.140
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.150
AO:454
Section 405.150. Lot Area Exception — Existing Platting. [R.O. 2008
§405.150; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 5352 §1,
10-16-1995]
Section 405.160. Fences and Hedges. [R.O. 2008 §405.160; Ord. No.
4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 6109 §1, 8-24-1998]
A. A dwelling may be built on any platted lot of record containing seventyfive
percent (75%) of the required lot area for the district to which the
lot is located if said lot was in separate ownership and separate control
at the effective date of this Chapter (June 10, 1991) provided the front,
side and rear yard requirements for the district in which the lot is
located are met and provided dwellings are permitted in the district in
which the lot of record is located. It is not the intention of this exception
to allow buildings as a matter of right on a platted parcel which was
never intended as a building site, but rather was numbered on a plat for
identification purposes under a scheme in which multiple lots were
intended to provide one (1) building site.
B. If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of
passage (June 10, 1991) or amendment of this Chapter, and if all or part
of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and
area, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for
the purposes of this Chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used
or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width
requirements established by this Chapter, nor shall any division of any
parcel be made which creates a lot width or area below the
requirements stated in this Chapter.
A. Corner Visibility. Except in zones allowing the construction of buildings
or structures to the property line, there shall be provided an
unobstructed view across the triangle formed by joining points
measured a twenty (20) feet distance along the property line from the
intersection of two (2) streets or fifteen (15) feet along both the street
and alley line from the intersection of a street and an alley. Within said
triangle there shall be no sight obscuring or partly obscuring wall,
fence or foliage higher than thirty (30) inches above grade or in the
case of trees, foliage lower than five (5) feet. Vertical measurement
shall be made at the top of the curb on the street or alley adjacent to the
nearest side of the triangle or if no curb exists, from the edge of the
nearest traveled way.
B. Other Than Corner. On portions of a lot not covered by street or alley
intersection restrictions, the height of fences of any length and foliage
continuous for five (5) feet or more shall be limited to forty-eight (48)
inches on any street line and the front fifty (50) feet on any side lot line.
On all other portions of lot lines, hedges and continuous foliage barriers
may not exceed a height of eighty (80) inches.
Section
405.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.160
AO:455
Section 405.170. Street Width — Exceptions. [R.O. 2008 §405.170;
Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
In general, on the east side of Main Street (Highway 71) City street rightsof-
way tend to be wider than the average for the City as a whole (See
Chapter 410, Subdivision Regulations). In such areas, development of
property, where structures already exist and owners wish to extend
terraces, patios, garages, eaves, and other such improvements, these
improvements shall be allowed for front and rear yard areas, where they are
in conformance with the rest of the neighborhood (block). Such additions or
changes may be requested through a building permit and may be evaluated
by the Building Official for conformance with neighborhood norms and
where, in his/her opinion, this change would not interfere with the general
condition of the neighborhood, it may be approved. Any person being denied
a building permit for such improvements may appeal to the Board of Code
of Appeals.
Section 405.180. Existing Half Lot. [R.O. 2008 §405.180; Ord. No.
4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
A problem exists that on a half lot situation property owners should be
allowed to demolish existing structures on said lot and reconstruct a new
building in conformity with this Chapter and all appropriate building codes.
Said reconstruction shall not exceed the previous level of non-conformity
for space requirements. Property owners seeking to utilize this Section of
the Code, must apply for an appropriate demolition permit and building
permits. If denied by the Building Official, the property owner may seek a
hearing with the Board of Code of Appeals.
C. Within Building Lines. Fences and hedges erected within a portion of a
zoning lot on which a principal building, but not an accessory building,
may be erected may conform with height limits of buildings which may
be erected on such lot, but shall be subject to any building code
provisions which may be applicable.
D. Measurement Rule. Heights of fences, hedges and other continuous
foliage shall be measured from the adjacent top of the street curb,
surface of an alley or the official established grade thereof, whichever is
the higher. On inside lot lines, the measurement shall be from the
average grade of the lot line of the parcel or property having the lower
elevation.
E. Exception — Board Of Zoning Adjustment. The Board of Zoning
Adjustment may approve, or may direct as a condition for granting an
appeal, that fences or plantings of a height in excess of these
regulations be placed as shieldings between different uses, or between
like uses upon agreement between the parties affected thereby,
provided that no such approval shall have the effect of reducing corner
visibility as provided for herein.
Section
405.160
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.180
AO:456
ARTICLE III
District Regulations
Section 405.190. Uses Common to All Residential Zones. [R.O. 2008
§405.190; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
The following use shall be common to all residential zones:
Group homes. No group home shall be located within two thousand five
hundred (2,500) feet of another group home. The exterior appearance of
the home and property shall be in reasonable conformance with the general
neighborhood standards. Group homes shall be eleemosynary or not-forprofit
in nature.
Section 405.200. Principal Permitted Uses. [R.O. 2008 §405.200;
Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
A. The following uses are permitted in all residential zones subject to
further restrictions or liberalizations which are imposed by a specific
zone.
1. Off-street parking shall be provided for all uses established in the
residential zones.
2. Only one (1) building for living purposes shall be permitted on one
(1) zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein.
3. Single-family detached dwellings as defined in Section 405.120 of
this Chapter.
4. Public, parochial and private schools and colleges offering courses
of general instruction when located on sites of at least five (5)
acres, and including convents, monasteries, dormitories and other
related living structures when located on the same site as the
school or college.
5. Churches, synagogues, chapels and similar places of religious
worship and instruction of a quiet nature when located in a
substantial structure on not less than two (2) acres.
6. Crop and tree farming but not including the raising of animals or
fowl for commercial purposes, or the sale of any products at retail
on the premises.
7. Parks and recreation areas operated by the City or other political
subdivision.
8. Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use.
9. Country clubs as defined in Section 405.120 of this Chapter.
Section
405.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.200
AO:457
Section 405.210. Permitted Accessory Uses. [R.O. 2008 §405.210;
Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 5381 §1, 2-5-1996]
Section 405.220. "AG" Agricultural Zone. [R.O. 2008 §405.220; Ord.
No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
10. Day care centers when conducted or maintained within a school,
place of religious worship or public or quasi-public building for
educational, cultural or recreational use.
A. Subject to further restrictions or liberalizations which are imposed by a
specific zone, the following accessory uses are permitted in all
residential zones:
1. Private garages and private parking areas.
2. Subject to any other regulations or ordinances of the City, private
swimming pools exclusively for the use of residents of the premises
and their non-paying guests.
3. The parking of one (1) unoccupied trailer or recreational vehicle
designed for recreational use or similar self-propelled recreational
vehicle within a building or in the open in a rear or side yard,
subject to any permits required by law or ordinance and the
following restrictions:
a. On a corner lot no such trailer or self-propelled vehicle shall be
parked closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the intersection of
the right-of-way lines of the streets adjacent thereto; and
b. No such trailer or self-propelled recreational vehicle shall be
used as living quarters while so parked.
4. The storage of one (1) pleasure boat on or off a trailer, within a
building or in the open in a rear or side yard, except that no boat
shall be so stored on a corner lot closer than twenty-five (25) feet to
the intersection of the right-of-way lines of the streets adjacent
thereto.
5. Other accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
A. Purpose. This Zone is designed to preserve lands best suited for
agricultural use from encroachment of incompatible uses, and to
preserve in agricultural use, land suited to eventual development in
other uses pending proper timing for practical and economical
provision of utilities, major streets, schools and other facilities so that
reasonably compact development will occur and the fiscal integrity of
the City preserved. A change of zoning from "AG" to any other
classification shall be in accordance with planning practices established
by the Commission.
Section
405.200
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.220
AO:458
B. Principal Permitted Uses.
1. The principal permitted uses common to all residential zones.
2. Agricultural including the raising of field crops, horticulture, and
animal husbandry subject to rules and regulations of the City and
other ordinances, including kennels but excluding feed lots and
poultry farms.
3. Ranch and farm dwellings pertaining to agricultural operations.
4. Riding academies.
5. Recreational camps operated by public, charitable or religious
organizations.
6. Greenhouses.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. The permitted accessory uses common to all residential zones.
2. Living quarters for persons regularly employed on the premises,
but not including labor camps or dwellings for transient labor.
3. Guest houses, not rented or otherwise conducted as a business.
4. General home occupations.
5. Offices incidental to and necessary for conducting a permitted use.
6. Private garages, stables and barns, provided that structures for the
shelter of animals shall be at least three hundred (300) feet
distance from any residential building on a separate zoning lot.
D. Space Limits.
1. Minimum lot area — Ten (10) acres.
2. Minimum width of lot — One hundred fifty (150) feet.
3. Maximum height of building — Thirty-five (35) feet.
4. Minimum front yard — Sixty (60) feet from the front lot line.
5. Minimum rear yard — Thirty-five (35) feet.
6. Minimum side yard — Twenty (20) feet.
7. Minimum side yard on street side of corner — Sixty (60) feet from
the side lot line.
8. Maximum ground coverage including accessory buildings — Ten
percent (10%).
Section
405.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.230
AO:459
Section 405.230. "R-1" Single-Family Residence Zone. [R.O. 2008
§405.230; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 5444 §1,
7-15-1996]
Section 405.240. "R-2" Single-Family and "R-2" Modified Residence
Zones. [R.O. 2008 §405.240; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No.
5180 §1, 1-10-1994; Ord. No. 5444 §1, 7-15-1996]
A. The following requirements for uses shall exist in "R-1" Single-Family
Residence Zones:
1. No accessory rentals.
2. Family unit. Maximum of two (2) unrelated persons.
3. Minimum lot size. 8,800 square feet. Two (2) off-street parking
spaces.
4. Principal permitted uses. The principal permitted uses common to
all residential zones.
5. Principal accessory uses.
a. The permitted accessory uses common to all residential zones.
b. Limited home occupations.
6. Space limits.
a. Two (2) acres for religious and cultural uses.
b. Minimum width of lot. Seventy-five (75) feet.
c. Maximum height of building. Thirty-five (35) feet.
d. Minimum front yard. Twenty-five (25) feet.
e. Minimum rear yard. Twenty-five (25) feet.
f. Minimum side yard. Six (6) feet.
g. Minimum side yard on street side of corner. Twenty-five (25)
feet.
h. Maximum gross floor area ratio. 0.3.
i. Maximum ground coverage including accessory buildings.
Forty percent (40%).
j. Minimum street frontage. A minimum street frontage of
seventy-five (75) feet, except on the curve of curbed streets
and cul-de-sacs, in which case the minimum street frontage
shall be fifty (50) feet.
Section
405.230
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.240
AO:460
A. The following requirements for uses shall exist in "R-2" Single-Family
and "R-2" Modified Residence Zones:
1. General provisions.
a. Minimum lot size. Six thousand six hundred (6,600) square
feet.
b. Family unit. Maximum of two (2) unrelated persons.
(1) Include accessory rental for owner occupied structures —
Maximum of two (2) bedrooms with one (1) person per
bedroom.
(2) Must provide off-street parking — One (1) space per
rented bedroom.
c. Duplex units. Duplex units are allowed only in the "R-2"
Modified Zones as identified on the Official Zoning Map and
not allowed in "R-2" Single-Family Residential Zones. Duplex
units in the "R-2" Modified Zones are allowed only on open
ground and in compliance with all other "R-2" ordinance
requirements.
(1) Off-street parking. Two (2) spaces per unit.
2. Principal permitted uses. The principal permitted uses common to
all residential zones.
3. Permitted accessory uses.
a. The permitted accessory uses common to all residential zones.
b. Limited home occupations.
4. Space limits.
a. The permitted accessory uses common to all residential zones.
b. Limited home occupations.
c. Minimum lot area. Six thousand six hundred (6,600) square
feet per dwelling unit for residential uses: One (1) acre for
religious or cultural zone.
d. Minimum width lot. Sixty-six (66) feet.
e. Maximum height of building. Thirty-five (35) feet.
f. Minimum front yard. Twenty-five (25) feet.
g. Minimum rear yard. Twenty-five (25) feet.
h. Minimum side yard. Six (6) feet.
i. Minimum side yard on street side of corner. Twenty (20) feet.
Section
405.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.240
AO:461
Section 405.250. "R-3" Multi-Family Residence Zone. [R.O. 2008
§405.250; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 5444 §1,
7-15-1996]
j. Maximum gross floor area ratio. 0.3.
k. Maximum ground coverage including accessory buildings.
Forty percent (40%).
l. Minimum street frontage. A minimum street frontage of sixtysix
(66) feet, except on the curve of curbed streets and cul-desacs,
in which case the minimum street frontage shall be forty
(40) feet.
A. The following requirements for uses shall exist in "R-3" Multi-Family
Residence Zones:
1. Buffer zone.
2. Include duplex unit.
a. Minimum lot size. Eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
b. Family unit. Maximum of three (3) unrelated persons.
c. Off-street parking. Two (2) spaces per unit.
3. Three or four plex units.
a. Minimum lot size. Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
b. Family unit. Maximum of three (3) unrelated persons.
c. Off-street parking — studio and one (1) bedroom. Two (2)
spaces per unit.
(1) Two (2) or more bedrooms. Three (3) spaces per unit.
(2) Allow "C-O" and "C-1" by special use at intersections only.
Must be submitted as "PUD".
4. Principal permitted use. The principal permitted uses common to
all residential zones.
5. Permitted accessory uses.
a. The permitted accessory uses common to all residential zones.
b. General home occupations.
6. Space limits.
a. Minimum width of lot. Seventy-five (75) feet.
b. Maximum height of building. Thirty-five (35) feet.
Section
405.240
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.250
AO:462
Section 405.260. "R-4" Multi-Family Residence Zone. [R.O. 2008
§405.260; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 5444 §1, 7-15-1996;
Ord. No. 6397 §1, 8-13-2001]
c. Minimum front yard. Twenty-five (25) feet.
d. Minimum rear yard. Twenty-five (25) feet.
e. Minimum side yard. Six (6) feet.
f. Minimum side yard on street side of corner lot. Fifteen (15)
feet.
g. Maximum gross floor area ratio. 0.5.
h. Maximum ground coverage including accessory buildings.
Fifty percent (50%).
i. Minimum street frontage. A minimum street frontage of sixtysix
(66) feet, except on the curve of curbed streets and cul-desacs,
in which case the minimum street frontage shall be forty
(40) feet.
A. The following requirements for uses shall exist in "R-4" Multi-Family
Residence Districts:
1. Duplex unit.
a. Minimum lot size. Eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
b. Family unit — studio and one (1) bedroom. Maximum two (2)
unrelated persons.
c. Two (2) or more bedrooms. Maximum four (4) unrelated
persons.
d. Off-street parking — studio and one (1) bedroom. Two (2)
spaces per unit.
e. Two (2) or more bedrooms. Three (3) spaces per unit.
2. Three- and four-plex units.
a. Minimum lot size. Eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square
feet.
b. Family unit — studio and one (1) bedroom. Maximum two (2)
unrelated persons.
c. Two (2) or more bedrooms. Maximum four (4) unrelated
persons.
d. Off-street parking — studio and one (1) bedroom. Two (2)
spaces per unit.
Section
405.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.260
AO:463
e. Two (2) or more bedrooms. Three (3) spaces per unit.
3. Five-plex and above.
a. Minimum lot size. Two thousand (2,000) square feet per unit.
b. Family unit — studio and one (1) bedroom. Maximum two (2)
unrelated persons.
c. Two (2) or more bedrooms. Maximum four (4) unrelated
persons.
d. Off-street parking — studio and one (1) bedroom. Two (2)
spaces per unit.
e. Two (2) or more bedrooms. Three (3) spaces per unit.
4. Principal permitted uses.
a. The principal permitted uses common to all residential zones.
b. Multiple dwellings.
5. Permitted accessory uses.
a. The permitted accessory uses common to all residential zones.
b. General home occupations.
6. Space limits.
a. Minimum lot area. Every dwelling hereafter erected shall be
provided with a lot area per dwelling as follows:
(1) One (1) dwelling unit. Minimum lot area six thousand six
hundred (6,600) square feet.
(2) Two (2) and three (3) dwelling units. Minimum lot area
eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
(3) Four (4) dwelling units. Minimum lot area two thousand
(2,000) square feet.
(4) Five (5) dwelling units. Minimum lot area two thousand
(2,000) square feet.
(5) More than five (5) dwelling units. Minimum lot area two
thousand (2,000) square feet.
b. Maximum height of building. Thirty-five (35) feet.
c. Minimum front yard. Twenty-five (25) feet.
d. Minimum rear yard. Twenty-five (25) feet.
Section
405.260
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.260
AO:464
Section 405.270. "C-O" Office Building District. [R.O. 2008
§405.270; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
e. Minimum side yard. Six (6) feet for one (1) and two (2) story
buildings, six (6) feet plus five (5) feet per story for each story
over two (2).
f. Minimum side yard on street side of corner. Fifteen (15) feet.
g. Maximum gross floor area ratio. 0.5.
h. Maximum ground coverage including accessory buildings.
Fifty percent (50%).
i. Minimum street frontage. A minimum street frontage of sixtysix
(66) feet, except on the curve of curbed streets and cul-desacs,
in which case the minimum street frontage shall be forty
(40) feet.
A. Principal Permitted Uses. In District "C-O", no building, structure, land
or premises shall be used, and no building of structure shall be
hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or altered,
except for one (1) or more the following uses:
1. Any use permitted in Districts "R-1" to "R-4".
2. Office buildings to be used only for the administrative functions of
companies, corporations, social or philanthropic organizations or
societies;
3. Other offices limited to the following:
a. Accountants
b. Architects
c. Brokers
d. Engineers
e. Dentists, dental laboratories
f. Lawyers
g. Physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors
h. Real estate and insurance
i. Optometrists
4. Mortuaries.
5. Customary accessory uses.
6. Radio and television studios.
Section
405.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.270
AO:465
Section 405.280. "C-1" Restricted Business District. [R.O. 2008
§405.280; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
B. Performance Standards. No merchandise shall be handled or displayed
except inside buildings and no equipment or vehicle other than motor
passenger cars shall be stored outside a building in this District for
more than twenty-four (24) hours in a thirty (30) day period. A
pharmacy wherein retail sales only of prescription medicines, drugs,
pharmaceuticals and orthopedic devices, customarily incident to the
practice of medicine, and an optical dispensary wherein eye glasses,
contact lenses and medicines, supplies and devices used in connection
therewith, customarily incident to the practice of optometry, shall be
allowed as accessory uses in office building provided, at least one (1)
physician or optometrist occupies office within that building. No direct
exterior entrance to the pharmacy or optical dispensary shall be
permitted.
C. Space Limits. In District "C-O", the height of buildings, the minimum
dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family
permitted on any lot shall be as follows:
1. Height. Buildings or structures located in District "C-O" shall not
exceed two (2) stories to thirty-five (35) feet in height.
2. Front yard. A front yard no less than twenty-five (25) feet shall be
provided.
3. Rear yard. The depth of the rear yard shall be at least twenty-five
(25) feet.
D. Parking Regulations. Four (4) off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on the premises for each thousand (1,000) square feet of floor
area.
E. Noise Regulations. In no case shall the noise level exceed 40dB (A) at
repeated intervals or for a sustained length of time measured at any
point along the property line.
A. Principal Permitted Uses. In District "C-1", no building, structure, land
or premises shall be used; and no building or structure shall be
hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except
for one (1) or more of the following uses:
1. Shops and stores for sale at retail of foods and beverages for
human consumption; soft goods such as clothing and shoes; drugs
and cosmetics; furniture and appliances; printed materials;
notions; hardware and paint; kitchenware; toys; and sporting
goods; jewelry, gifts and novelties; flowers; tobacco products;
photographic equipment; antiques; artist and hobby supplies;
music supplies and medical supplies; bicycles; newspapers; books;
stationery; office supplies; package liquor stores.
Section
405.270
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.280
AO:466
2. Services such as professional offices; banks and savings and loan
associations; insurance; barber and beauty shops; schools; optical
shops; seamstress and tailoring; dry cleaning and laundry pick up
or coin-operated dry cleaning operations classed as low hazard in
the applicable codes; eating establishments; interior decorator;
photographer; shoe repairs; clinics; small animal hospitals.
3. Offices of all types, including post office, public or privately owned
utilities offices.
4. Accessory uses customarily incident to the normal operation of the
above uses, including parking lots as provided in this Chapter.
B. Performance Standards. The following standards shall not be exceeded
by any use in this District:
1. No wholesale sales shall be conducted.
2. No merchandise or equipment shall be stored or displayed outside
a building.
3. All products shall be sold and all services rendered inside a
building except that banks and savings and loan establishments
may have drive-up or walk-up service.
4. No smoke, radiation, vibration or concussion, heat or glare shall be
produced that is toxic, caustic or obviously injurious to humans or
property.
5. Alcoholic beverages and cereal malt beverages shall not be sold for
consumption on the premises except that places serving food for
consumption inside the building may serve cereal malt beverages
provided the wholesale cost of the cereal malt beverages sold does
not exceed fifty percent (50%) of gross sales on an annual basis.
6. In no case shall the noise level exceed 60dB (A) at repeated
intervals or for a sustained length of time measured at any point
along the property line.
C. Space Limits. In District "C-1", the height of buildings, the minimum
dimensions of lots and yards and the minimum lot area per family
permitted on any lot shall be as follows:
1. Height. Buildings or structures shall not exceed two (2) stories, no
building or structure shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height.
2. Front yard. A front yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet shall be
provided for one (1) and two (2) story buildings, and a front yard of
not less than fifteen (15) feet.
3. Side yard. For one (1) and two (2) story buildings no side yard is
required except that where a side line of a lot in this District abuts
the side line of a lot in a District "R-1" to "C-O" inclusive, a side yard
Section
405.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.280
AO:467
Section 405.290. "C-2" General Business District. [R.O. 2008
§405.290; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
shall then be provided the same as required in the district it abuts.
A side yard of fifteen (15) feet shall also be provided on the street
side of a corner lot containing a one (1) or two (2) story building.
4. Rear yard. No rear yard is required except that where a rear line of
a lot in this District abuts upon land in Districts "R-1" to "C-O"
inclusive, a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet shall then be
provided in this District.
D. Parking Regulations. Four (4) off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on the premises for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of
floor area.
A. Principal Permitted Uses. In District "C-2", no building, structure, land
or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall be
hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except
for one (1) or more of the following uses:
1. Any use permitted in Districts "C-O" and "C-1".
2. Shops and stores for the sale at retail or wholesale of department
store merchandise, new automobiles and trucks, used car lots,
automobile supplies, motorcycles; petroleum products (bulk plants
not permitted), pets, hotel supplies.
3. Services such as clubs, places where alcoholic beverages are
consumed on the premises, dry cleaning and laundries, appliance
and small equipment repair, printing and publishing, custom
maintenance and delivery services; radio and television
broadcasting studios, public and private entertainment and
recreation, charity and welfare services, vocational and trade
schools, veterinarians, hotels, motels and motor hotels.
4. Accessory uses customarily incident to the normal operation of
these uses, including parking lots and signs as provided in this
Chapter.
B. Performance Standards.
1. Drive-up or drive-in service may be provided where ready-to-eat
food, including beverages, except or where cereal malt beverages
in any form are served, dispensed or otherwise change hands.
2. No smoke, radiation, vibration or concussion, heat or glare shall be
produced that is perceptible outside a building and no dust, fly ash
or gas that is toxic, caustic or obviously injurious to humans or
property shall be produced.
3. Automobiles, boats and trucks for sale may be stored or displayed
outside a building. Other merchandise which may appropriately be
Section
405.280
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.290
AO:468
Section 405.300. "C-3" Commercial District. [R.O. 2008 §405.300;
Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
displayed or stored outside a building shall be kept off the public
sidewalks and streets, shall not reduce the capacity of a parking
lot below that required by this Chapter shall not occupy an area
greater than twenty percent (20%) of ground floor area of the
building.
4. In no case shall the noise level exceed 60dB (A) at repeated
intervals or for a sustained length of time measured at any point
along the property line.
C. Space Limits. In District "C-2", the height of buildings, the minimum
dimensions of lots and yards and the minimum lot area per family
permitted upon any lot shall be as follows:
1. Height. Buildings or structures shall not exceed three (3) stories in
height. No building or structure shall exceed fifty (50) feet in
height.
2. Front yard. No front yard is required in this District.
3. Side yard. No side yard is required in this District.
4. Rear yard. No rear yard is required except that where a rear line of
a lot in this District abuts upon land in a District "R-1" to "C-O"
inclusive, a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet shall then be
provided in this District.
D. Parking Regulations. No off-street parking is required in the portion of
this District bounded by Fifth, Vine, Second and Buchanan Streets. In
all other areas, four (4) off-street parking spaces shall be provided on
the premises for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area.
A. Principal Permitted Uses. In District "C-3", no building, structure, land
or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall be
hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except
for one (1) or more of the following uses:
1. Any use permitted in District "C-2".
2. Shops, stores and yards for the sale at retail or wholesale, or the
rental of such items as automotive equipment, trucks, trailers,
boats, camping accessories, tools, farm machinery and supplies,
building supplies, ice, lawn accessories.
3. Services such as automobile repair and washing, farm machinery
repair, pop bottling, miniature golf and commercial recreation,
drive-in theaters, general repair and fix-it shops, frozen foods,
including lockers, swimming pools.
4. Nurseries and greenhouses, bakeries.
Section
405.290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.300
AO:469
5. Manufacture or assembly of products to be sold only at retail on the
premises.
6. Accessory uses customarily incident to the operation of these uses,
including parking lots as provided in this Chapter.
B. Performance Standards.
1. Drive-up or drive-in service may be provided at any establishment,
except where cereal malt beverages or liquor is sold.
2. Any manufacturing or assembly of products shall be entirely within
a totally enclosed building.
3. No smoke, radiation, vibration or concussion, heat or glare shall be
produced that is perceptible outside a building and no dust, fly ash
or gas that is toxic, caustic or obviously injurious to humans or
property shall be produced.
4. In no case shall the noise level exceed 60dB (A) at repeated
intervals or for a sustained length of time measured at any point
along the property lines.
5. Automobiles and trucks for sale may be stored or displayed outside
a building but not within fifteen (15) feet of a street line, nor within
six (6) feet of a side or rear property line. Other merchandise which
may appropriately be displayed outside a building shall be kept off
public sidewalks and streets and shall not reduce the capacity of a
parking lot below that is required by this Chapter.
C. Space Limits. In District "C-3", the height of buildings, the minimum
dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family
permitted on any lot shall be as follows:
1. Height. Buildings or structures shall not exceed three (3) stories
except buildings or structures shall not exceed one hundred fortyfour
(144) feet in height.
2. Front yard. Any building hereafter constructed and any vehicle
parking, storage or display shall provide a front yard, the minimum
depth of which shall be fifteen (15) feet.
3. Side yard. No side yard is required except that where a side line of
a lot in this District abuts upon the side yard of a lot in a District
"R-1" to "C-O" inclusive, a side yard shall then be provided the same
as required in the district it abuts. Not less than fifteen (15) feet
shall be provided on the street side of a corner lot for buildings up
to three (3) stories in height. Buildings in excess of three (3) stories
in height shall provide a side yard on the street side of a corner lot
equal to half of the average height of the building above finished
grade.
Section
405.300
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.300
AO:470
Section 405.310. "M-1" Light Industrial District. [R.O. 2008
§405.310; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 6707 §1,
11-8-2004]
4. Rear yard. No rear yard required, except that when a rear lot line
abuts a lot in a District "R-1" to "C-1" inclusive, a rear yard of not
less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided.
D. Parking Regulations. Four (4) off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on the premises for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of
floor area.
A. Principal Permitted Uses. In District "M-1", no building, structure, land
or premises shall be used, no building or structure shall be hereafter
erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except for one
(1) or more of the following uses:
1. Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, or assembling of any
commodity except junk or salvage.
2. Warehousing, wholesaling and storage of any commodity except
junk or salvage.
3. Freight terminals.
4. Offices; laboratories.
5. Public utility facilities.
6. Restaurant and automatic food and beverage vending machines.
7. Structures and uses clearly accessory and necessary to the normal
operation of the above uses, including signs as herein provided.
8. Recycling collection or processing facilities operating in
accordance with all applicable ordinances.
B. Performance Standards.
1. All operations shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building.
2. All storage of materials, products or equipment shall be within a
fully enclosed building or in an open yard so screened that the
materials, products or equipment are not visible at eye level within
three hundred (300) feet of the property line.
3. No use shall be permitted or so operated as to produce or emit:
a. Smoke or particular matter of a Number 1 or darker on the
Ringlemann Chart.
b. Dust, fly ash, radiation, gases, heat, glare, or other effects
which are obviously injurious to humans at the property line.
Section
405.300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.310
AO:471
Section 405.320. "M-2" General Industrial District. [R.O. 2008
§405.320; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
c. Vibration or concussion perceptible without instruments at the
property line.
d. In no case shall the noise level exceed 70dB (A) at repeated
intervals or for a sustained length of time measured at any
point along the property line.
e. Industrial waste shall be such a quantity and nature as to not
overburden the public sewage disposal facilities or to cause
odor and unsanitary effects beyond the property line.
C. Space Limits. In District "M-1", the height of buildings and the
minimum dimensions of lots and yards shall be as follows:
1. Height. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or fifty (50) feet
in height. A structure other than a building may be erected to a
height not to exceed one hundred (100) feet, provided such
structure is set back from all property lines a distance equal to or
greater than its height.
2. Front yard. A front yard of not less than fifty (50) feet shall be
provided in District "M-1".
3. Side yard. A side yard shall be provided on each side of a building
or unit group of buildings, the total of which side yards shall be not
less than forty (40) feet and no side yard shall be less than ten (10)
feet. A side yard abutting a street in the case of a corner lot or a
side yard abutting a zoned residential lot shall be not less than
twenty (20) feet.
4. Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet shall be
provided.
D. Parking And Loading. Each establishment shall provide sufficient offstreet
parking space for all employees, customers, visitors and others
who may spend time at the establishment during working hours. Not
less than one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor
area shall be provided. Each establishment shall also provide adequate
loading space within a building or in a side or rear yard, in such a way
that all storage, standing and maneuvering of trucks shall be off the
public right-of-way. No portion of a parking area or loading space,
except the necessary drives, shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to
a public street. No portion of a paved area shall be closer than six (6)
feet to a property line.
A. In District "M-2", no building, structure, land or premises shall be used,
and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or altered, except for one or more of the
following uses:
Section
405.310
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.320
AO:472
1. Any use permitted in District "M-1".
2. Any use permitted in District "C-3".
3. Bakeries.
4. Bottling works.
5. Bus barns or lots.
6. Carpenter, cabinet or pattern shops.
7. Carpet cleaning establishments.
8. Chemical laboratories not producing noxious fumes or odors.
9. Cleaning, pressing and dyeing plants.
10. Cold storage plants.
11. Dog pounds and kennels if within an enclosed building.
12. Electro-plating works.
13. Freight terminals (rail or truck).
14. Grain handling, processing and storage.
15. Laundries.
16. Lumber yards and concrete and asphalt mixing plants.
17. Machine shops.
18. Moving, transfer or storage plants.
19. Plumbing and sheet metal shops.
20. Railroad yards.
21. Sales rooms, yards, and service for farm machinery, contractors'
equipment and well supplies.
22. Sign painting plants.
23. Storage of materials and equipment outside a building provided
such storage area is screened by a solid fence not less than six (6)
feet in height.
24. Any other use of an industrial nature after approval of the City
Council following recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
B. Performance Standards.
1. Vibration or concussion shall not be perceptible without
instruments at the property line.
Section
405.320
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.320
AO:473
Section 405.325. Campus Town Overlay District. [Ord. No. 7432 §2,
7-9-2012]
2. In no case shall the noise level exceed 70dB (A) at repeated
intervals or for a sustained length of time measured at any point
along the property line.
C. Space Limits. In District "M-2", the height of buildings, and minimum
dimensions of lots and yards shall be as follows:
1. Height. Buildings or structures shall not exceed fifty (50) feet and
shall not exceed three (3) stories in height. A structure other than a
building may be erected to a height not to exceed one hundred
(100) feet provided such structure is set back from all property
lines a distance equal to or greater than its height.
2. Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than fifty (50)
feet.
3. Side yard. A side yard shall be provided on each side of a building
or unit group of buildings, the total of which side yards shall be not
less than forty (40) feet and no side yard shall be less than ten (10)
feet. A side yard abutting a street in the case of a corner lot or a
side yard abutting a zoned residential lot shall be not less than
twenty (20) feet.
4. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15)
feet.
D. Parking And Loading Regulations. Each establishment shall provide
sufficient off-street parking space for all employees, customers, visitors
and others who may spend time at the establishment during working
hours. Not less than one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square
feet of floor area shall be provided. Each establishment shall also
provide adequate loading space in such a manner that all storage,
standing and maneuvering of trucks shall be off the public right-of-way.
No portion of a parking area or loading space, except the necessary
drives, shall be located closer than five (5) feet to a public street or
other property line.
A. The following requirements for uses shall exist in "CTO" Campus Town
Overlay Districts:
1. Purpose. This district is designed to encourage the development of
rental residential adjacent to the Northwest Missouri State
University campus and away from other predominantly singlefamily
residential neighborhoods.
2. Permitted uses. Except as otherwise indicated in this Section,
regulations, including permitted uses, required landscaping,
parking, and signage shall be those permitted in the underlying
base zoning.
Section
405.320
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.325
AO:474
3. Family unit. For this district a family unit shall be defined as no
more than (4) unrelated persons.
4. Space limits.
Regulators
1-Family
Detached
1-Family
Attached Duplex Multifamily
Other
Permitted
Uses
Site area per
housing unit
(square feet)
6,600 5,000 4,000 2,500
Minimum lot
area
6,600 5,000 8,000 10,000 6,600
Minimum lot
width (feet)
66 50 66 100 66
Minimum
yard (feet)
Front
yardA
25 25 25 25 25
Side yard 6 12 7 68 10
Street side
yard
15 15 15 15 15
Rear yard 25 25 25 25 25
Maximum
height
35 35 35 35 35
Maximum
building
coverage
50% 50% 50% 50% 50%
Maximum
impervious
coverage
70% 70% 70% 70% 70%
A. The required front yard setback is the larger of the average
of the setback of adjacent structures to the property or the
average of all properties on the blockface. An application for a
building permit must include a calculation of these averages.
The City Code Enforcement Officer may vary this requirement
if he/she determines that a different setback is necessary to
maintain the integrity of the blockface. This shall be
accompanied by a written finding of fact stating the reasons for
such determination.
B. Six (6) feet for up to two-story buildings and an additional five
(5) feet per story for each story over two (2).
Section
405.325
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.325
AO:475
Section 405.326. University Neighborhood Overlay District. [Ord.
No. 7432 §3, 7-9-2012]
5. Off-street parking. One and twenty-five hundredhs (1.25) off-street
parking stalls for each bedroom is required and can be met through
tandem parking on a paved driveway.
a. Front yard parking. Parking in front yards shall be subject to
the following:
(1) All required parking in any residential district must be
outside the required front yard.
(2) No parking for any permitted use in any residential
district, other than single-family detached, attached, or
duplex units, may be located in the required front yard.
(3) In any residential district, no single-family detached,
attached or duplex shall have more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the front yard used for driveway and offstreet
parking purposes. However, this restriction shall not
prohibit the construction of a twenty-foot-wide driveway or
a driveway expansion immediately in front of and the
minimum width reasonably necessary to provide access to
a three- or four-car garage.
(4) In any residential district, expansions of off-street parking
areas in front yards shall be of a hard surface, i.e., paved
concrete, asphalt, brick pavers, or equal.
6. Additional regulations.
a. Permitted accessory uses. One accessory residential unit is
permitted.
b. Group space limits. Group residential uses, including fraternity
and sorority houses, must provide at least eight hundred and
fifty (850) square feet of site area per resident.
A. The following requirements for uses shall exist in "UNO" University
Neighborhood Overlay Districts:
1. Purpose. This district is designed to conserve predominantly singlefamily
neighborhoods adjacent to Northwest Missouri State
University by reducing the ability of conversion to multifamily use.
2. Permitted uses. Except as otherwise indicated in this Section,
regulations, including permitted uses, required landscaping,
parking, and signage shall be those permitted in the underlying
base zoning.
3. Family unit. For the purposes of this district a family unit shall be
defined as no more than two (2) unrelated individuals.
Section
405.325
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.326
AO:476
4. Space limits.
Regulators
1-Family
Detached
1-Family
Attached Duplex Multifamily
Other
Permitted
Uses
Site area per
housing unit
(square feet)
6,600 5,000 4,000 3,000
Minimum lot
area
6,600 5,000 8,000 10,000 6,600
Minimum lot
width (feet)
66 50 66 100 66
Minimum
yard (feet)
Front yardA 25 25 25 25 25
Side yard 6 12 7 6B 10
Street side
yard
15 15 15 15 15
Rear yard 25 25 25 25 25
Maximum
height
35 35 35 35 35
Maximum
building
coverage
50% 50% 50% 50% 50%
Maximum
impervious
coverage
70% 70% 70% 70% 70%
A. The required front yard setback is the larger of the average
of the setback of adjacent structures to the property or the
average of all properties on the blockface. An application for a
building permit must include a calculation of these averages.
The City Code Enforcement Officer may vary this requirement
if he/she determines that a different setback is necessary to
maintain the integrity of the blockface. This shall be
accompanied by a written finding of fact stating the reasons for
such determination.
B. Six (6) feet for up to two-story buildings and an additional five
(5) feet per story for each story over two (2).
5. Off-street parking. Two (2) spaces per unit.
6. Additional regulations.
a. Permitted accessory uses. Accessory rentals are prohibited in
this district.
Section
405.326
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.326
AO:477
b. Multifamily development. New multifamily development must
comply with the following dispersion requirements:
(1) Any new multifamily development containing from three
(3) to eight (8) residential units must be located at least
300 feet from any preexisting multifamily development.
(2) Any new multifamily development containing from nine (9)
to twelve (12) residential units must be located an
additional thirty-five (35) feet for each additional unit over
eight (8) from any preexisting multifamily development.
(3) No new multifamily development shall exceed twelve (12)
units.
Section
405.326
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.326
AO:478
ARTICLE IV
Planned Districts
Section 405.330. Plan Approval. [R.O. 2008 §405.330; Ord. No. 4984
§1, 6-10-1991]
All plans submitted in support of permit applications shall be approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to issuance of a building permit.
Section 405.340. Planned Zoning Districts. [R.O. 2008 §405.340;
Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
Section 405.350. Objectives. [R.O. 2008 §405.350; Ord. No. 4984 §1,
6-10-1991]
A. Each of the districts hereinbefore set forth shall have a separate and
distinct counterpart known and herein referred to as a Planned District.
A "Planned District" shall be for the purpose of permitting and
regulating the uses heretofore permitted in the equivalent district and
further provide for and encourage latitude and flexibility in the location
of buildings, structures, roads, drives, variations in yards and open
spaces all subsequent to approval of the plan by local officials. Planned
Districts require attention to buffers, drainage, street patterns,
landscaping and architecture. Reference will be made to the City's
Subdivision Ordinance (See Chapter 410 of this Title). The purpose is to
allow development of tracts of land to their fullest extent and at the
same time observe the general intent and spirit of these regulations.
B. Planned Districts shall be as follows:
Equivalent District Planned District
District "R-1" Planned Single-Family Residence
District "R-2" Planned Single-Family and Duplex
Residence
District "R-3" Planned Multi-Family Residence
District "R-4" Planned Multi-Family Residence
District "C-O" Planned Non Retail Business
District "C-1" Planned Restricted Business
District "C-2" Planned General Business
District "C-3" Planned Commercial
District "M-1" Planned Light Industry
District "M-2" Planned Heavy Industry
A. The zoning of land in Maryville to one (1) of the planned districts
("RP-1" to "MP-2", inclusive) shall be for the purpose of requiring
orderly development on a quality level generally equal to that of the
equivalent standard zoning districts, but permitting variations from the
Section
405.330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.350
AO:479
Section 405.360. Standards of Development in Planned Zoning
Districts. [R.O. 2008 §405.360; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
normal and established development techniques. The use of planned
zoning procedures is intended to encourage large scale development
tracts, innovative and imaginative site planning, conservation of natural
resources and minimum waste of land. The following are specific
conditions of planned zoning:
1. A proposal to rezone land to a planned district shall be subject to
the same criteria relative to compliance with master plans, land use
policies, neighborhood compatibility, adequacy of streets and
utilities and other elements, as is normal in rezoning deliberations.
2. The submittal by the Developer and the approval by the City of
development plans represents a firm commitment by the Developer
that development will indeed follow the approved plans in concept,
intensity of use, aesthetic levels and quantities of open space.
3. Deviations in yard requirements, setbacks and relationship
between buildings are acceptable and may be approved within the
limits set out in "Standards of Development" in Section 405.360, if
it is deemed that other amenities or conditions will be gained to the
extent that an equal or higher quality of development will result
than under standard zoning procedures.
4. Residential areas will be planned and developed in a manner that
will produce more useable open space, better recreational
opportunities, safer, more attractive neighborhoods than under
standard zoning and development techniques.
5. Commercial areas will be planned and developed so as to result in
attractive, viable and safe centers and clusters, as opposed to strip
pattern along thoroughfares. Control of vehicular access,
architectural quality, landscaping and signs will be exercised to
soften the impact on nearby residential neighborhoods, and to
assure minimum adverse effects on the street system and other
services of the community.
6. The Developer will be given latitude in using innovative techniques
in the development of land not feasible under application of
standard zoning requirements.
7. Planned zoning shall not be used as a refuge from the requirements
of the equivalent district as to intensity of land use, amount of open
space or other established development criteria.
8. No use will be permitted in the planned district that is not clearly
permitted in the equivalent district.
9. Any building or portion thereof may be owned in condominium
under appropriate Missouri Statutes.
Section
405.350
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.360
AO:480
Section 405.370. Spot Zoning. [R.O. 2008 §405.370; Ord. No. 4984
§1, 6-10-1991]
A. The maximum height of buildings and structures shall be as set out in
the equivalent district.
B. The intensity of land use, the floor area and bulk of buildings, the
concentration of population, the percentage of lot coverage, the amount
of open space, light and air shall be generally equal to that required in
the equivalent zoning district.
C. The density of residential dwelling units, the parking requirements and
the performance standards shall be the same as in the equivalent
district.
D. The permitted uses shall be the same as those permitted in the
equivalent district, provided that limitations may be placed on the
occupancy of certain premises, if such limitations may be placed on the
occupancy of certain premises, if such limitation is deemed essential to
the health, safety or general welfare of the community.
E. The Planning and Zoning Commission may, in the process of approving
preliminary and final plans, approve deviations from the minimum
standards in Districts "C-O" through "M-2" as follows:
1. Setbacks of buildings and paved areas from a public street may be
reduced to seventy-five percent (75%) of the ordinance
requirement.
2. Setbacks of buildings and paved areas from a property line of the
project (other than a street line) may be reduced to eight-five
percent (85%) of the ordinance requirement.
3. Side yards between buildings may be reduced to zero.
4. Setbacks of buildings and paved areas from a freeway right-of-way
may be reduced to five (5) feet.
5. A portion of the parking area required under this Chapter may
remain unimproved in proportion to area of building being used. As
additional floor space is used, additional pavement must be
installed.
6. The foregoing deviations may be granted by the Planning and
Zoning Commission only where there is ample evidence that said
deviation will not adversely affect neighboring property, nor will it
constitute the mere granting of a privilege. Reduction of setbacks
or other open space shall be compensated by additional open space
in other appropriate portions of the project. In all cases, such
deviations shall be in keeping with good planning principles, and
must be specifically set out in the minutes of the Commission, as
well as on plans and other exhibits in the record.
Section
405.360
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.370
AO:481
A. Any parcel or group of parcels consisting of less than one-half (½) a City
block in size constitutes a spot zone. Spot zones shall not be permitted.
B. A parcel of any size may be rezoned to a lower classification when it is
adjacent to that classification.
Section
405.370
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.370
AO:482
ARTICLE V
Special Uses
Section 405.380. Special Use Permits. [R.O. 2008 §405.380; Ord.
No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 5166 §1, 9-13-1993]
A. The development and administration of the Zoning Ordinance is based
on the division of the City into districts, within any one of which the use
of land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings or
structures, as related to land, are essentially uniform. It is recognized,
however, that there are special uses which, because of their unique
character, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or
districts without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses
upon neighboring lands and upon the public need for the particular use
or the particular location. Such special uses fall into three categories:
1. Uses operated by a public agency or public-regulated utilities, or
uses traditionally affected with a public interest.
2. Uses entirely private in character, but of such a nature that the
operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
3. Uses which are of a short duration and short range impact on the
community.
B. Procedure. The approval of a special use permit shall require the same
procedure as the rezoning of land, including published notice, public
hearing, advisory decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission and
final passage by the City Council. Final action shall be by resolution of
the Council.
C. Applicability Of permit. A special permit granted under this Article is a
permit issued to the individual applying for the special use. As such,
said permit shall not run with the property, but shall be personal unto
the applicant. Any applicant shall not have the right to assign, transfer,
barter or sell said Special Use Permit and said Special Use Permit shall
terminate upon any transfer of the property by the applicant including
by sale or lease.
D. Period Of Validity.
1. No special use permit granted by the City Council shall be valid for
a period longer than one (1) year from the date of granting of the
special use permit, unless within such period:
a. A building permit is obtained and the erection or alteration of
the structure is commenced, or
b. A special use permit is obtained and the use commenced.
Section
405.380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.380
AO:483
Section 405.385. Application for Special Use Permit. [R.O. 2008
§405.385; Ord. No. 6584 §1, 9-15-2003]
2. The City Council may, upon written request of the applicant, grant
extensions not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days each,
without notice of hearing.
A. All applications for a special use permit shall be made by written
application to the Administrative Secretary, Public Works, on forms
provided therefor. Unless the application shall conform in all respects
to the requirements of this Chapter, it shall not be accepted by the
Administrative Secretary, Public Works.
B. Information Required. An application for a special use permit shall
contain the following information:
1. Plot plan of the property affected by the proposed special use
permit, drawn to a scale of not smaller than one (1) inch equals fifty
(50) feet, and indicating thereon the dimensions of the property,
the dimensions and locations of any buildings or structures,
driveway access to public rights-of-way, on-site drives, and offstreet
parking areas located thereon and all public and private
rights-of-way including utility easements bounding or intersecting
the property;
2. List of the names and current mailing address of owners, together
with the street address and legal description of all property
(exclusive of streets and alleys) within a one hundred eighty-five
(185) feet distance from the boundary of the property affected by
the proposed special use permit. This list shall be prepared and
certified by a qualified abstractor;
3. Present zoning classification and use of the property affected by
the special use permit;
4. Requested special use and desired use of the property affected by
the special use permit; and
5. Justification for the special use requested.
C. Application Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee
based on the area of property for which the special use permit is
requested, computed as follows:
For the first 10,000 square feet per each 1,000
square feet or fraction thereof
$125.00
D. Postage Fee. In addition to the non-refundable application fee described
above, the application shall also be accompanied by a non-refundable
postage fee which shall be computed by the Administrative Secretary,
Public Works, by multiplying the number of certified mailings required
to landowners within a one hundred eighty-five (185) feet distance from
Section
405.380
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.385
AO:484
Section 405.390. Standards. [R.O. 2008 §405.390; Ord. No. 4984 §1,
6-10-1991]
Section 405.400. Conditions. [R.O. 2008 §405.400; Ord. No. 4984
§1, 6-10-1991]
The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the City
Council may provide, such conditions and restrictions upon the
construction, location, and operation of a special use including time limit,
provisions for off-street parking and loading and other conditions as may
be deemed necessary to promote the general objectives of this Title and to
minimize any injury to the value of property in the neighborhood. Failure
to maintain such conditions or restrictions as may have been imposed shall
constitute grounds for revocation of the permit for such special use.
Section 405.410. Short Term Special Uses. [R.O. 2008 §405.420;
Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
the boundary of the property affected by the proposed special use
permit by the then-applicable postage rates for such certified mail.
The number of mailings shall be computed based upon the information
provided in accordance with Subsection (B), above.
E. Time Of Application. The Administrative Secretary, Public Works, shall
note the date of filing of the application.
A. No special use shall be granted unless the use:
1. Is deemed necessary for the public convenience at that location.
2. Is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated that public
health, safety, and welfare will be protected.
3. Will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in
the neighborhood in which it is located.
4. Will comply with the height and area regulations of the districts in
which it is located unless specifically granted otherwise.
A. The City Council may authorize the issuance of a Short Term Special
Use Permit for the use of a specific tract, parcel or section of the City
for such temporary short term uses as:
1. Trade shows.
2. Street fairs.
3. Expositions such as fairs, boat shows, etc.
4. Promotional ventures.
5. Entertainment and recreation including carnivals and circuses.
Section
405.385
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.410
AO:485
6. Sidewalk, truckload sales.
B. Such activities may be of a non-profit, profit making, civic or public
agency nature and may be on private or public property. A short-term
special use permit may be approved by the City Council upon public
hearing and without referral to the Planning and Zoning Commission
provided the following criteria are met:
The applicant shall submit in written form a complete description of
the proposed activity, hours of operation, ability to accommodate fire
and police services and access, need for special protection and other
characteristics that may affect the public safety, convenience and
welfare.
C. In the case of a public street or sidewalk, care shall be exercised in
maintaining safe and convenient circulation for both vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
D. A short term Special Use Permit shall not exceed seven (7) calendar
days.
Section
405.410
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.410
AO:486
ARTICLE VI
Non-Conforming Uses
Section 405.420. Non-Conforming Uses. [R.O. 2008 §405.430; Ord.
No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 5481 §1, 12-16-1996]
A. The lawful use of land, structures or buildings existing on or before the
adoption of this Chapter (June 10, 1991), although such use does not
conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued except as provided
herein, but if continuous operation is suspended, ceased or
discontinued for one hundred ten (110) calendar days, any further use
of said premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter.
B. Any lawful structure or building existing at the time of the adoption of
this Chapter (June 10, 1991), although such structure or building does
not conform with the provisions hereof, may be continued.
C. No structural alterations shall be made to any such non-conforming
structure or building which will increase its degree of non-conformity
except as may be ordered or required by law or ordinance or
regulations based on law or ordinance. This shall not be construed to
prohibit maintenance and repair work necessary to keep a structure in
sound condition.
D. Abandonment Or Discontinuance. When any non-conforming use has
discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, such use
shall not thereafter be resumed and any future use of the premises shall
be in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.
E. The lawful use of a building or land existing on the effective date of
these regulations may not be changed to another non-conforming use.
Whenever the lawful use of a building becomes non-conforming
through an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning District
Map, such use may be continued, but it may not be changed to another
non-conforming use.
F. Any non-conforming structure or building which has been damaged by
fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, riot or other calamity or
act of God to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of the fair
market value, exclusive of land and foundations at the time of such
damage or destruction, shall not be reconstructed unless the building
or structure and the use conform with this Chapter. If less than fifty
percent (50%) damage above the foundation occurs, it may be restored,
reconstructed or used as before, provided that such restoration is
commenced within one hundred ten (110) days. If construction is not
commenced within one hundred ten (110) days, the use of said land or
structure shall thereafter conform with the provisions of this Chapter.
Fair market value shall be determined by reference to current statutory
provisions pertaining to real estate assessment and the records of the
County Assessor.
Section
405.420
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.430
AO:487
Section 405.430. Registration of All Non-Conforming Uses. [R.O.
2008 §405.440; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 7433 §1,
7-9-2012]
A. All property located within any zone that does not conform to the
standards of that zone must register with the City, on forms provided, in
order that a record of non-conforming uses may be kept. The City shall
inspect property solely for purposes of memorializing such nonconforming
use and its legality under existing ordinance. From these
records, non-conforming use property shall be grandfathered, if legal
under existing ordinance. After registration and inspection verifying
same, the property owner shall be granted a non-conforming use
permit. Grandfathered property shall be inspected on an annual basis to
insure compliance with the provisions of this Code, and it shall be a
condition of the permit that the property owner grant the City access to
the dwelling thereon for inspection purposes.
B. All non-conforming use property must register within one hundred
twenty (120) days after any change in zoning ordinances passed by the
City Council by which they are affected. The City shall provide notice to
the affected property owners within fifteen (15) days of such zoning
ordinance change.
C. Any property determined to be non-conforming after the one-hundredtwenty-
day period shall be deemed non-conforming, and said property
shall convert to the standards of the zone in which it is located. The City
shall take all legal steps necessary to bring non-conforming use
property found in any zone into compliance with this Chapter, where
non-conforming use permits were not granted.
Section
405.430
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.430
AO:488
ARTICLE VII
Parking and Loading Regulations
Section 405.440. Off-Street Parking and Loading. [R.O. 2008
§405.450; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
Section 405.450. Dimensions of Parking Areas. [R.O. 2008
§405.460; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
A. It is the intent of these ordinances that all buildings, structures, and use
of land shall provide off-street parking and loading space in an amount
sufficient to meet the needs caused by the building or use of land and
that such parking and loading spaces be so oriented that they are in fact
readily useable for such purpose.
B. Each use of land, each building or structure hereafter constructed or
established, and each addition to a structure in excess of three hundred
(300) square feet, except as herein provided, shall provide off-street
parking and loading according to the standards set forth herein. When
an addition is made to a building non-conforming as to parking or
loading, a conforming amount of parking shall be supplied based upon
the size of the addition.
C. No addition to an existing building shall be constructed which reduces
the number of spaces, area or usability of existing parking or loading
space unless such building and its addition, conform with the
regulations for parking and loading contained herein. Contractual
agreements may be made between uses which generate parking
demand at different times in such a manner that the requirements of
more than one (1) use may be met by the same space provided the
parking demand for each such use involved is in fact met.
D. All off-street parking and loading spaces and all drives leading thereto
shall be paved with an asphaltic concrete surface, otherwise referred to
as "hot mix", or portland cement concrete. The Board of Zoning
Adjustment may, after public hearing grant a variance from this
requirement where use of the parking lot will be only intermittent
occasions such as in the case of fair grounds, athletic fields and the like.
E. Uses listed below shall provide parking and loading in the amounts
specified and at locations specified for the group in which such use
falls. For any use not listed, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
determine the proper requirement by classifying the proposed use
among the uses specified herein so as to assure equal treatment. In
making any such determination, the Commission shall follow the
principles set forth in the statement of purpose for the parking and
loading provisions.
A. Parking stall dimensions shall not be less than nine by twenty (9 x 20)
feet, plus the necessary space for maneuvering into and out of the
Section
405.440
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.450
AO:489
Section 405.460. Group "A" Uses of Land or Buildings — Parking
Requirements. [R.O. 2008 §405.470]
space. For standard parking lots, minimum cross dimensions shall be as
follows:
1. Ninety degree (90°) pattern — Single loaded aisle — forty-two (42)
feet — Wheel stop to opposite curb.
2. Ninety degree (90°) pattern — Double loaded aisle — sixty (60) feet
— Wheel stop to wheel stop.
3. Sixty degree (60°) pattern — Single loaded aisle — forty (40) feet —
Wheel stop to opposite curb.
4. Sixty degree (60°) pattern — Double loaded aisle — fifty-six (56)
feet — Wheel stop to opposite curb.
5. Forty-five degree (45°) pattern — Single loaded aisle — thirty-four
(34) feet — Wheel stop to opposite curb.
6. Forty-five degree (45°) pattern — Double loaded aisle — forty-seven
(47) feet — Wheel stop to wheel stop.
7. Parallel Space — Nine by twenty-three (9 x 23) feet each space.
8. Minimum distance between wheel stops on bumper to bumper
parking shall be seven (7) feet.
A. All uses of land, or buildings enumerated under Group "A" shall provide
off-street parking and loading on the same zoning lot as such building
or use for all customers or patrons frequenting the establishment and
said parking or loading space shall have convenient and unobstructed
pedestrian access across said zoning lot to a principal entrance to the
building or use. That portion of the parking requirement that is
attributed to employees may be provided within three hundred thirty
(330) feet of the use or building as hereinafter set forth in the following
sections:
1. Hotel, apartment hotel, motel, club with guest room.
a. Parking required. One (1) space for each unit for the first
twenty (20) units, plus one (1) space for each two (2) units for
those in excess or twenty (20) on site. Plus one (1) space for
each two (2) employees on the largest shift.
b. Loading space required. One (1) space for the first forty
thousand (40,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof
plus one (1) space for each additional one hundred fifty
thousand (150,000) square feet of floor area or major fraction
thereof.
2. Business, commercial and industrial uses.
Section
405.450
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
405.460
AO:490
Section 405.470. Group "B" Uses of Land and Buildings — Parking
Requirements. [R.O. 2008 §405.480; Ord. No. 4984 §1, 6-10-1991]
Parking required. As set out in the corresponding Districts "C-O"
through "M-2".
3. Hospitals and rest homes.
Parking required. One (1) space for each four (4) beds plus one (1)
space for each staff physician on-site, plus one (1) space for each
employee of all classes on the largest shift.
4. College fraternities, college sororities.
Parking required. One (1) space for each bed.
5. Clubs, organization halls.
Parking required. One (1) space for each one hundred (100) square
feet of assembly space on site, plus one (1) space for each two (2)
employees.
A. All uses of land and buildings enumerated under Group "B" shall
provide off-street parking for customers, patrons, and employees within
three hundred (300) feet of said building as hereinafter set forth in the
following manner:
1. Auditoriums, stadiums, (except schools), theaters, community
centers and similar places of public assembly.
Parking required. One (1) space for each five (5) seats in the main
assembly area, or where no fixed seats are provided, one (1) space
for each fifty (50) square feet of main assembly area.
2. Churches.
Parking required. One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the main
assembly area.
3. Libraries, museums and similar uses.
Parking required. One (1) space for each four hundred (400) square
feet of gross space to which the public has access.
4. Senior high schools, junior high schools, elementary schools,
(including public, parochial and private).
Parking required. One (1) space for each teacher or employee, plus
one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of seating
space in the auditorium or multi-purpose room, whichever is larger.
Section
405.460
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.470
AO:491
Chapter 410
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Editor's Note — Ord. no. 5354 §1, adopted October 16, 1995, repealed ch.
410 and enacted the provisions set out herein. Former ch. 410 derived from
ord. no. 4971 §1, 5-13-1991; ord. no. 5051 §1, 5-11-1992.
Section 410.010. Short Title. [R.O. 2008 §410.010; Ord. No. 5354
§1, 10-16-1995]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of Maryville, Missouri".
Section 410.020. Interpretation and Purpose. [R.O. 2008 §410.020;
Ord. No. 5354 §1, 10-16-1995]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the protection of
the public health, safety and welfare. The purpose of the Subdivision
Regulations is to encourage the development of sound, healthful and
economically stable residential neighborhoods and commercial and
industrial areas; to provide for safe, convenient and efficient traffic
circulation; to secure adequate drainage; to coordinate land development
in order to assure that future urban growth will be orderly, efficient and
conducive to minimum outlay of public and private expenditures for
providing services to new growth areas; to minimize fire hazards and to
provide for light and air in habitable structures; and to provide protection
for owners and potential buyers of property.
Section 410.030. Scope. [R.O. 2008 §410.030; Ord. No. 5354 §1,
10-16-1995]
It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those specifically repealed by this Chapter, or with private
restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private
agreements, or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which
the City is a part. Where this Chapter imposes a greater restriction upon
land than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law,
ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this Chapter shall control.
Section 410.040. Approving Agent. [R.O. 2008 §410.040; Ord. No.
5354 §1, 10-16-1995]
The provisions of this Chapter shall be administered by the Planning and
Zoning Commission with the final approval of the City Council of the City of
Maryville.
Section
405.470
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
410.050
AO:492
Section 410.050. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §410.050; Ord. No. 5354
§1, 10-16-1995; Ord. No. 6022 §1, 1-26-1998; Ord. No. 7120 §1,
6-8-2009]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
ALLEY — A minor way, dedicated to the public use, which is used primarily
for utilities and vehicular access to the back or the side of properties
otherwise abutting on a street.
BLOCK — A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways,
streets, streams, railroad right-of-way, parks, etc., or a combination thereof.
There may be more than one (1) lot within a single block.
BUILDING LINE — A line on a plat generally parallel to the street right-ofway,
indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be
erected.
CITY — The City of Maryville, Missouri.
CITY ENGINEER — An authorized representative of the City Manager
responsible for the review and inspection of projects presented for
approval.
CITY MANAGER — The City Official responsible for the administration of
the City or his/her duly authorized representative.
COUNCIL — The Governing Body of the City of Maryville, Missouri.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street having one end open to traffic and being
permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
DAY — Day shall refer to a normal work day.
DEVELOPER — The owner or agent under legal authority of the owner
or owners who undertakes to cause a parcel of land to be designed,
constructed and recorded as a Subdivision. This term may be used
interchangeably with the term "Subdivider".
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The individual designated by the City
Manager to direct the operations of the Public Works Department.
DIVIDING LINE — Shall be a line dividing a lot or parcel of land. It may be
a continuous line or a combination of lines.
EASEMENT — A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation,
or persons for the use of a parcel of land for a specific purpose.
FINAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN — Engineering drawings, for construction, of
all improvements required by the Subdivision Chapter. Also, referred to as
Construction Drawings or Engineering Drawings.
FINAL PLAT — A drawing to scale containing the items specified by these
regulations indicating the layout of lots, blocks and public ways in a
subdivision completed and improved or bonded for improvements along
with legal documents required for recording. It is also the final map,
drawing or chart on which the Subdivider's subdivision plan is presented to
Section
410.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.050
AO:493
the City Council for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to
the County Recorder of Deeds for recording.
FULL FRONTAGE — Shall be not less than the minimum lot width allowed
by Maryville City Code Chapter 405: ZONING CODE.
GENERAL PLAN — The plan or series of plans for the future development
of the City of Maryville, Missouri, approved by the City Council as the
guide for future development. Such plans may alternatively be referred to
as Master Plan, Comprehensive Plan, or Development Plan.
IMPROVEMENTS — Shall include, but not be limited to, the changes and
additions to land necessary to prepare it for building sites, including street
paving, curbing, grading, monuments, drainage ways, sewers, fire hydrants,
water mains, sidewalks, street lights, pedestrian ways and other public
works appurtenances.
LOT — A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some
legal instrument such as a recorded deed or a recorded map which is
intended to be separately owned, rented, leased, developed or otherwise
used as a unit, occupied or to be occupied by a building or group of
buildings and accessory buildings, together with such yards and lot areas
as required by the Zoning Code, and having its principal frontage upon a
street, road or place approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
City Council.
LOT SPLIT — The division of a platted lot into two (2) parcels not involving
the dedication or vacation of a street or alley.
OFFICIAL MAP — The Zoning Map adopted by the City Council showing the
zoning districts, streets, highways and parts theretofore laid out, adopted
and established by law and any amendments thereto adopted by the City
Council or additions thereto resulting from the approval of Subdivision Plats
and the subsequent filing of such approved plats.
PARCEL — A continuous quantity of land in the possession of, owned by, or
recorded as, the property of the same person or persons.
PEDESTRIAN WAY — A right-of-way dedicated to public use, which cuts
across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjoining streets or
properties.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (P.U.D.) — A land development project
comprehensively planned as an entity, via a unitary site plan, which permits
flexibility in building sites, mixtures of housing types and land use, useable
open spaces and may include the preservation of natural features.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning Commission of the
City of Maryville, Missouri, a Board appointed by the Mayor and Council,
whose purpose it is to develop plans and recommendations for development
of the City of Maryville, Missouri and to recommend resolutions for zoning
issues to the City Council. Referred to as the "Commission".
PLAT — A map drawn to scale from an accurate survey including items set
forth herein along with all certificates and statements required herein and
Section
410.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
410.050
AO:494
by State Statute for the purpose of recording a subdivision of land. Without
modifying adjectives it shall refer to land subdivision documents which have
been officially recorded. In appropriate context, a plat may refer to the
land represented by a recorded plat and may be synonymous with the word
"Subdivision". It may also be used as a verb referring to the act of preparing
a plat.
PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan prepared and submitted
with the preliminary plat for review, that shows the proposed improvements
of the subdivision in enough detail for evaluation by the Commission and
the City Council.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A drawing with supporting documents which
represents a proposal upon which a final plat is to be based. A preliminary
plat is not intended as a document to be filed or recorded.
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works
established by the City Council of the City of Maryville, Missouri.
REPLAT, RESUBDIVISION — A plat representing land which has previously
been included in a recorded plat.
RESERVE STRIP — Any section of land within or adjoining a Subdivision
which, intentionally or otherwise, serves to control access to public streets,
right-of-way or public facilities.
SPECIAL DRAINAGE AREA — The zoning of those areas which have been
or are likely to be subjected to flooding. These areas shall be identified by
the Public Works Department and recommended by the Commission to the
City Council for approval before they are designated on the Official Map.
STREETS — A public way for vehicular traffic whether designed as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard,
place or however otherwise designated.
Major streets and highways: Those which are used primarily for fast
heavy traffic.
1.
Arterial or collector street: Those streets which carry traffic from minor
streets to major streets or to other traffic generators.
2.
Minor street: A street used primarily for access to the abutting
properties.
3.
Marginal access street: A street that is parallel to and adjacent to
an arterial street and that is designed to provide access to abutting
properties so that these properties are somewhat sheltered from the
effects of the through traffic on the arterial street and so that the flow
of traffic on the arterial street is not impeded by direct driveway access
from a large number of abutting properties.
4.
Width of street: The shortest distance between the lines delineating the
right-of-way of a street.
5.
Section
410.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.050
AO:495
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed which requires permanent or
temporary location on the ground or is attached to something having a
permanent or temporary location on the ground, an edifice or building of
any kind or any piece of work artificially built or composed of parts joined
together in some manner. A detention pond shall be a structure.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Except for "lot split" as defined, shall be the
division of a tract of land six (6) or more lots, tracts, sites, parcels or areas
any one of which is less than three (3) acres in area and/or the division of
a tract of land into any number of lots, tracts, sites, parcels or areas of any
size which includes improvements, new streets, easements, rights-of-way,
rights of ingress and egress or provision for a public area or public facility.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — The division of land into not more than five (5)
lots, tracts, sites, parcels or areas, for residential purposes or existing
commercial development having a total aggregate area of ten (10) acres or
less. Also applicable shall be the following in a proposed subdivision of land:
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under
this Chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself\herself or
for another.
OTHER TERMS — All other terms used in these regulations shall have their
normal meaning, except that terms common to engineering and surveying
shall be used in their professional sense.
Section 410.060. Application of Subdivision Regulations. [R.O. 2008
§410.060; Ord. No. 5354 §1, 10-16-1995]
Does not include any new street, easement, rights-of-way, (except an
approved sewer and water system);
1.
2. Does not include a provision for a public area or public facility;
Conforms to the setback line requirements and other requirements
contained in the zoning ordinances for the City of Maryville, Missouri;
3.
Conveys the right-of-way necessary for road widening and maintenance
of City roads, where the granting of such right-of-way can be given
without undue hardship;
4.
In the interest of smart growth, betterment of the community and
citizens and development, the Public Works Director and City Manager
may reach a consensus that the proposal does not merit a
comprehensive review as a major subdivision.
5.
A. Except as provided in this Chapter, no person shall subdivide any tract
of land which is located within the City limits except in conformity with
the provisions of this Chapter. Any plat hereinafter made or any
subdivision or any part thereof lying within the limits of the City of
Maryville, Missouri, shall be prepared, presented for approval,
approved and presented for recording as herein prescribed. These
Section
410.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
410.060
AO:496
regulations are enacted under the authority of applicable Statutes of
the State of Missouri.
1. Subdivision, major procedure. Any subdivision other than a minor
subdivision shall comply with all procedures as set forth in this
Chapter.
2. Subdivision, minor procedure. A person seeking to subdivide land
as a minor subdivision shall file a written statement and a sketch
indicating the nature of the proposed development with the
Director of Public Works. If it is determined that said development
qualifies as a minor subdivision, the subdivider may proceed with
the project.
a. Lot splits, undeveloped subdivisions or subdivisions under
development.
(1) A previously platted undeveloped lot in a subdivision
under development or undeveloped shall be divided by
replat.
(2) The lots produced by replat need not be approved by the
Commission, but shall be approved by resolution of the
Council prior to recording.
(3) Lots produced by replat shall conform to all minimum
standards of this Title and other applicable Codes of the
City.
b. Lot splits, developed subdivisions.
(1) A vacant parcel in a developed area may be divided as a lot
split by either metes and bounds description or by replat.
If such lot is to be divided by metes and bounds
description, it may be so divided only one (1) time and by
only one (1) new dividing lot line and shall not again be
divided without replatting.
(2) A lot to be divided more than one (1) time or involving
more than one (1) new dividing lot shall be considered a
replat and shall be subject to all procedures set out in this
Title.
(3) A lot split by either metes and bounds description or replat
need not be approved by the Commission but shall be
approved by resolution of the Council prior to recording.
(4) In all cases, lots produced by a lot split shall conform to all
minimum standards of this Title and other applicable
codes of the City.
3. Planned unit development (P.U.D). Land under unified control to be
developed as a whole in a single development operation shall
Section
410.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.060
AO:497
Section 410.070. Enforcement. [R.O. 2008 §410.070; Ord. No. 5354
§1, 10-16-1995]
require a Development Plan which includes, but is not limited to,
the following requirements:
a. A site plan showing the locations of all buildings, structures,
streets and landscaping.
b. Detailed drawings complying with all State laws and local
ordinances.
c. Pictorial drawing of the completed development.
4. Agricultural land exemptions. The division of land for agricultural
use into parcels, all of which are ten (10) acres or more in area and
have four hundred (400) feet or more of street or road frontage and
which do not involve the creation of any new street or road,
easement or other dedication, shall be exempt from the
requirements of these regulations, provided however, that the
provisions of applicable Statutes and regulations are complied
with.
A. Recording Of Plat. No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded in the
County Recorder's Office or have any validity until it has been approved
in the manner prescribed herein. In the event any such unapproved plat
is recorded, it shall be considered invalid and the Director of Public
Works shall institute proceedings to have the plat stricken from the
records of Nodaway County, Missouri.
B. Permits. The Building Inspector shall not issue building or other
permits for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a plat has
not been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed herein.
C. Public Improvements. The City hereby defines its policy to be that the
City will withhold all public improvements of whatsoever nature,
including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of sewage
facilities and water service from all subdivisions which have not been
approved and from all areas dedicated to the public which have not
been accepted by the City Council in the manner prescribed herein.
D. Revision Of Plat After Approval. No changes, erasures, modifications or
revisions shall be made in any plat of a subdivision after approval has
been given by the City Council and endorsed in writing on the plat
unless the said plat is first resubmitted to the Commission and the
changes found acceptable. Except a "minor subdivision", as defined in
Section 410.060, shall be accepted by a Resolution of the City Council.
E. Sale Of Land In Subdivision. No owner or agent of the owner of any land
located within a subdivision shall transfer, sell, agree to sell or
negotiate to sell any land by reference to, exhibition of, or by the use of
a plan or plat of a subdivision for private development before such plan
Section
410.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
410.070
AO:498
Section 410.080. Overview of Subdivision Development. [R.O. 2008
§410.080; Ord. No. 5354 §1, 10-16-1995; Ord. No. 5443 §1,
7-15-1996]
or plat has been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed
therein.
F. Fees. The subdivider shall pay a fee for every preliminary plat
submitted to the Commission for approval as required in Section
410.160 Fees.
A. Planning Conference. Developer meets with the Director of Public
Works before development begins to learn of the general requirements
and identify potential problems.
B. Preliminary Plat. Developer prepares preliminary layout and
Preliminary Development Plans for improvements of the subdivision in
sufficient detail to allow approval by the Commission after public
hearing.
C. Review Of Preliminary Plat.
1. Check by utilities;
2. Check by Director of Public Works and Public Works Department
Staff.
D. Planning And Zoning Commission Action. Recommendation for
approval or disapproval by the Commission after a public hearing held
pursuant to Section 410.115.
E. City Council Action. Approval or disapproval by the City Council after a
public hearing pursuant to Section 410.115.
F. Final Plat. Developer prepares final plat and final development plans for
submission for approval, and obtains bonding for required
improvements.
G. Final Plat Approval, Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission
must recommend for approval the final plat and final improvement plan
if it conforms with the approved preliminary plat and preliminary
improvement plans as previously approved or bonded. After approval,
the final plat is forwarded to the City Council.
H. Final Plat Approval, City Council. If the City Council finds the final plat
conforms with the preliminary plat and the final improvement plans are
installed or properly bonded, it shall approve the final plat.
I. Filing. The Director of Public Works has signatures affixed and confirms
the filing of the plat with the County Recorder of Deeds at Subdivider's
expense. Subdivider may sell lots and/or build.
Section
410.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.090
AO:499
Section 410.090. Procedure. [R.O. 2008 §410.090; Ord. No. 5354 §1,
10-16-1995]
Section 410.100. Preliminary Plat. [R.O. 2008 §410.100; Ord. No.
5354 §1, 10-16-1995]
A. Planning Conference. Any owner, developer or agent wishing to
subdivide a parcel of land shall contact the Director of Public Works and
arrange for a Planning Conference. This conference shall be for the
purpose of determining the general requirements to be met in
developing the subdivision. If the subdivision does not involve new
streets or utilities or other improvements required of the Subdivision
Control Ordinance the Planning Conference may be waived by the
Director of Public Works.
B. Findings Of The Planning Conference. The proceedings of the Planning
Conference shall be informal. It shall be the responsibility of the
subdivider to determine the areas of agreement among the conferees
and the problems which must be explored further through individual
conferences with departments charged with administering the
provision of utilities, streets, drainage and other public facilities.
During the conference it shall be the responsibility of the Director of
Public Works to aid the subdivider in determining the general features
to be required in the subdivision. All agreements arrived at by the
conferees shall be subject to ratification by the Commission and the
City Council.
A. Plat. After the subdivider has determined the general features desired
in the subdivision, he/she may develop a preliminary plan and
preliminary development plan for filing with the Director of Public
Works for review and subsequent submittal to the Commission for
review and recommendation.
B. Filing. Six (6) weeks prior to the meeting at which consideration is
desired, the subdivider must file an application with the Director of
Public Works including nine (9) copies of the preliminary plat. The
preliminary plat and preliminary development plan shall be considered
officially filed after it is examined by the Director of Public Works and
found to be in full compliance with the requirements of these
regulations.
C. Preparation. The preliminary plat shall be prepared and certified by a
Missouri-registered Land Surveyor.
D. Form Of The Preliminary Plat. The preliminary plat shall be prepared in
accordance with current Missouri Department of Natural Resources
Division of Geology and Land Survey, Minimum Standards for Property
Boundary Surveys and shall show the following information:
1. The proposed name of the subdivision.
Section
410.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
410.100
AO:500
Section 410.110. Review and Approval of Preliminary Plat. [R.O.
2008 §410.110; Ord. No. 5354 §1, 10-16-1995]
2. Contours with intervals of five (5) feet or less with 100-year
floodplain identified.
3. The names of adjacent subdivisions or the names of record owners
of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land.
4. The location, widths, and names of all existing or platted streets or
other public ways within or adjacent to the tract, existing
permanent buildings, railroad right-of-way and other important
features such as section lines, political subdivision or corporation
lines and school district boundaries.
5. Existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground
structures within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto with
pipe sizes, grades and locations indicated.
6. All parcels of land intended to be dedicated to public use or
reserved in the deeds for the use of all property owners in the
proposed subdivision, together with the purpose of conditions or
limitations of such reservation, if any.
7. The layout, names and widths of proposed streets, alleys and
easements.
8. A plan of proposed water distribution system, sanitary sewers and
storm sewers showing pipe sizes and the location of valves, fire
hydrants and fittings, including total annual service loading
projections on receiving systems, i.e., water, sewer and storm
drainage based on a ten (10) year incident.
9. Planned locations of sidewalks and street lights.
10. The layout, numbers and scaled dimensions of proposed lots.
11. The building setback lines and dimensions for all front and side
yards as stated in the Zoning Code.
12. Indication of any portion of the subdivision for which a final plat is
to be proposed if the subdivision is to be developed in stages.
13. Proposed covenants or deed restrictions.
14. Designation of the proposed uses of the land within the subdivision
and proposed changes in zoning district designation, if any.
A. Upon receipt of the preliminary plat and preliminary improvement plan,
the Director of Public Works shall cause copies thereof to be distributed
to the representatives of any utility entities not under the control of the
City of Maryville, Missouri. The Director of Public Works shall report
Section
410.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.110
AO:501
Section 410.115. Public Hearing — Preliminary Plan. [Ord. No.
5443 §1, 7-15-1996]
the combined recommendations to the Public Safety Department, utility
companies and other concerned entities to the Commission.
B. The City Manager or his/her authorized representative may recommend
approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat and preliminary
improvement plan or any features thereof, but in expressing
disapproval, the reasons for such action shall be set forth in writing.
C. The Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of a
preliminary plat and preliminary improvement plan within sixty (60)
calendar days of its receipt unless a longer time is agreed upon with the
subdivider.
D. Upon approval or disapproval by the Commission, the preliminary plat,
the preliminary improvement plan and the Commission's
recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Council along with the
Director of Public Work's comments within thirty (30) calendar days.
E. The City Council shall review all items and approve, approve with
modifications or disapprove the preliminary plat as presented.
A. When a preliminary plat is submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for its recommendation, a public hearing shall be held by
the Commission prior to making its recommendation. The Commission
shall cause notice of its proceedings to be given by regular mail,
dispatched not less than seven (7) days prior to the date of the
proceedings. Said notice shall be given to all owners of record of any
property adjoining the property being considered by the Commission.
Said adjoining property owners shall be given the opportunity to
provide input during the proceedings of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. A copy of said notice shall be transmitted to the
Chairperson of the Commission. The Commission may adopt such other
reasonable rules and regulations as may be required to facilitate such
notice.
B. When a preliminary plat is submitted to the City Council for its
approval, a public hearing will be held by the City Council prior to
approval of the preliminary plat. Notice of this hearing will be provided
by the City Clerk who shall publish said notice in the local newspaper of
general circulation. Said publication shall occur not less than seven (7)
days prior to the public hearing. A copy of the notice shall be retained
by the City Clerk and provided to the City Council. The City Council may
adopt such other reasonable rules and regulations as may be required
to facilitate such notice.
Section
410.110
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
410.120
AO:502
Section 410.120. Effect of Disapproval of the Preliminary Plat and/
or Preliminary Improvement Plan. [R.O. 2008 §410.120; Ord. No.
5354 §1, 10-16-1995]
The subdivider may make modifications for presentation to the Director of
Public Works for review and recommendations for further Commission/City
Council consideration if deemed appropriate.
Section 410.130. Effect of Approval of Preliminary Plat and/or
Preliminary Improvement Plan. [R.O. 2008 §410.130; Ord. No. 5354
§1, 10-16-1995]
Section 410.140. Right of Subdivider After Approval. [R.O. 2008
§410.140; Ord. No. 5354 §1, 10-16-1995; Ord. No. 5566 §1,
7-28-1997]
In the event there shall be any change in City ordinance or regulations
relevant to the preliminary plat which was in existence at the time of the
approval of the preliminary plat, said approval of the preliminary plat by the
City Council shall remain effective for a period of two (2) years from the
date of modification of the relevant ordinance or regulation.
Section 410.150. Large Development Staging Procedure. [R.O. 2008
§410.150; Ord. No. 5354 §1, 10-16-1995]
A. Approval of the preliminary plat and preliminary improvement plan, as
set forth herein, shall constitute authority to proceed with preparation
of the final plat and final improvement plan.
B. The final plat shall be prepared in conformity with the approved
preliminary plat and preliminary improvement plan including any and
all changes required by the City Council.
C. Material deviation from such approved preliminary plat shall require
resubmission for approval.
D. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute authority to sell lots,
record the plat, advertise the future or conditional sale of lots based on
the preliminary plat or authority to construct permanent buildings in
reliance upon the preliminary plat layout, nor shall it constitute final
acceptance of the subdivision.
A. In order to discourage premature subdivision and uneconomic
improvements, the following procedure is provided for large
development schemes:
1. When a developer or group of developers have in their control an
area of land which they wish to plat, but of so large a size that the
majority of the lots would take more than one (1) year to sell, they
shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat and a preliminary
development plan for the entire area.
Section
410.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.150
AO:503
Section 410.160. Fees. [R.O. 2008 §410.160; Ord. No. 5354 §1,
10-16-1995]
Section 410.170. Approval of Final Plat — Development Plan. [R.O.
2008 §410.170; Ord. No. 5354 §1, 10-16-1995]
2. On such preliminary plat successive development divisions may be
designated.
3. Upon approval of the preliminary plat and preliminary development
plan the developer may prepare a final plat and final development
plan for one (1) or more development divisions, provided the order
of development allows for logical provision of streets and utilities.
4. Each development division shall be considered as a separate and
individual unit. A final plat shall be prepared and approved for each
division. The provisions of these regulations shall apply individually
to each development division and be presented as a separate filing
for recording.
A. Before delivering the preliminary plat to the Commission for
recommendation, the subdivider shall pay to the City Treasurer the
following fees:
1. Processing fee. Three (3) or more lots one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) plus thirty dollars ($30.00) for each additional lot.
2. Engineering check fee. Actual cost incurred by the City.
B. The processing fee and the engineering check fee shall not be
refundable. The City Treasurer shall receipt stamp proof of the payment
of fees upon the face of each copy of the preliminary plat. Such fees
shall not be considered payment for supervision of construction.
A. Filing. Within two (2) years of approval by the City Council of the
preliminary plat and preliminary development plan, the subdivider shall
file a final plat and development plan for the entire subdivision or for a
development division (stage), with the Office of Public Works. Sufficient
copies, not to exceed nine (9), shall be submitted to facilitate review
and approval. If a final plat and development plan is not filed within two
(2) years of the City Council approval of the preliminary plat, the plat
shall be subject to review, revision or cancellation of approval by the
City Council.
B. The final plat and development plan shall have incorporated all changes
or modifications required by the Commission and City Council. It may
constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time, provided that
such portion conforms with all the requirements of this Chapter.
Section
410.150
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
410.170
AO:504
C. Form Of Final Plat. The final plat shall be drawn in accordance with the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources Division of Geology and
Land Survey Standards of Practice No. 1.
1. Name of subdivision, points of the compass, scale of the plat, name
of subdivider, date and name and address and seal of the surveyor.
2. Location of boundary lines, in relation to section and quarter
section, all of which comprise a legal description of the property. All
locations shall be tied to a land survey corner.
3. The lines of all streets, alleys and other lands to be dedicated with
their widths and names shall conform to existing street name
patterns.
4. All lot lines, dimensions and numbering of lots and blocks shall be
according to a uniform system.
5. Statutory systems shall be complied with if applicable.
6. Building lines with zoning set back dimensions.
7. Easements for any right-of-way provided for public use, drainage,
services or utilities showing dimensions and purpose.
8. All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating the
lines of lots, tracts, or parcels of land, streets, alleys, easements
and the boundaries of the subdivision. The linear dimensions are to
be expressed in feet and decimals of feet. The plat shall show all
curve data necessary to reconstruct on the ground all curve linear
boundaries and lines and radii of all rounded corners.
9. The perimeter and blocks of the plat shall close to an allowable
unadjusted error of one (1) in five thousand (5,000).
10. The description, location and elevation of all bench marks.
11. The description and location of all permanent monuments set in the
subdivision.
12. Names in contrasting text of adjacent plats with location of
adjoining streets shown by dashed lines.
13. Legal description of the lands being subdivided.
14. Certificate of dedication signed and acknowledged by all parties
having any title interest in the land subdivided and consenting to
the preparation and recording of the plat as submitted.
15. Land surveyor's certificate and seal.
16. Certificates of approval in legally correct form and places for the
signatures of the following: Notary Public acknowledging
dedication, the Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission,
Section
410.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.170
AO:505
Section 410.180. Subdivision Design Standards. [R.O. 2008
§410.180; Ord. No. 5354 §1, 10-16-1995; Ord. No. 5426 §1,
6-25-1996; Ord. No. 5507 §1, 3-24-1997]
the Mayor and Clerk of the City of Maryville, Missouri. Other
certificates as may be required by law may be recorded as separate
instruments accompanying the plat.
D. Any zoning changes shall be recommended by the Commission and
forwarded to the City Council with the final plat.
A. The proposed subdivision shall conform to the master plan and official
map.
1. Streets. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and
location of all streets shall conform to the official map and master
plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience
and safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of
the land to be served by such streets. When not shown on the
official map or master plan, the arrangement and other design
standards of streets shall conform to the provisions found herein.
2. Relation to adjoining street system. The arrangement of streets in
new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of
existing streets in adjoining areas within grade limits and in
keeping with block length standards set out herein.
3. Projection of streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the
arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for
the proper projection of streets to the property line in keeping with
block length standards set out herein.
4. Street jogs prohibited. Street jogs, with centerline offsets of less
than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet are prohibited.
5. Dead-end or cul-de-sac. Permanent dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs,
shall be no longer than five hundred (500) feet and shall be
provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside
roadway diameter of at least ninety (90) feet and a street property
line diameter of at least one hundred fifteen (115) feet. If a deadend
street is temporary, a similar turnaround may be required by
the Commission. Provision must be made for future extension of the
street into adjoining properties.
6. Minor streets. Minor streets shall be laid out so their use by
through traffic will be discouraged.
7. Street widths. Street right-of-way widths shall be:
Section
410.170
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
410.180
AO:506
Street Type Right-of-Way
Major 100 feet
Secondary 80 feet
Minor 50 feet
Paved street width, including curb and gutter, shall be:
Major 36 feet
Secondary 36 feet
Minor 28 feet
8. Intersections. The intersection of more than two (2) streets at one
point shall be avoided except where it is otherwise impracticable to
secure a proper street system. Streets shall intersect one another
at an angle as near to a right angle as possible and no intersections
of streets at angles less than sixty (60) degrees shall be approved.
Street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of twelve (12)
feet measured at the back of curbs when the said intersection
occurs at right angles.
9. Curved streets. Curved streets are encouraged and shall relate to
natural terrain so that minimum grading is necessary. No
horizontal curve in a public street shall have a centerline radius of
less than seventy-five (75) feet.
10. Reverse curve. Reverse curves (S-curves) shall have a tangent
introduced between the curves of adequate length to allow smooth
transition.
11. Subdivision into tracts larger than ordinary building lots. Where a
tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots,
such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of
future streets and logical further resubdivision.
12. Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited except under conditions approved by the City Council.
13. Street grades. No street gradient shall be less than one-half of one
percent (0.5%) and shall not exceed the following, with due
allowance for reasonable vertical curves:
Street Type Percent Grade
Major 7
Secondary 8
Minor 10
14. Half-streets prohibited. Half-streets shall be prohibited except
where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in
conformity with the other requirements of these regulations and
Section
410.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.180
AO:507
where the Commission and City Council find it will be practical to
require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property
is subdivided.
15. Street names and numbers. Names of new streets and house
numbers shall be assigned by the Department of Public Works.
16. Access to streets across ditches. The subdivider shall provide
access to all proposed streets across all ditches in a standard
method approved by the Director of Public Works.
17. Private streets. Private streets may be approved by the City Council
and shall be built to all City specifications; public improvements
and maintenance will not be provided for any private street.
18. Hardship to owners of adjoining property avoided. Streets shall be
arranged to insure no hardships are caused to owners of adjoining
property in platting their own land and developers must insure
convenient access is allowed to adjoining property.
19. Block length. In general, provisions shall be made for through
streets at intervals of not less than one thousand three hundred
twenty (1,320) feet.
20. Alleys.
a. Residential areas. Alleys may be approved in residential areas
only by the City Council upon recommendation of the
Commission.
b. Commercial and industrial districts. Alleys shall be provided in
commercial and industrial districts. The City Council may
waive this requirement where other definite and assured
provisions are made for service access, such as off-street
loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate
for the uses proposed.
c. Width. The right-of-way width of residential and commercial
alleys shall be twenty (20) feet.
21. Dead-end. Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted. The City Council
may waive this requirement where such dead-end alley is
unavoidable and where adequate turnaround facilities have been
provided.
22. Utility easements. Easements with a right-of-way width of ten (10)
feet on each side of all rear lot lines and along certain side lot lines
where necessary for utilities shall be provided.
23. Provisions for drainage.
Section
410.180
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
410.180
AO:508
a. All developments shall be provided with a drainage system that
is adequate to prevent undue retention of surface water on the
development site.
b. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage
way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater
easement conforming substantially with the lines of such water
course, and such further width or construction or both as will
be adequate for the purpose.
c. An engineering study indicating floodplain requirements
between developed and undeveloped land for 100-year storm
frequency must accompany each preliminary and final plat.
d. All necessary channels, retention structures, etc., must be
designated.
e. Drainage must conform to Chapter 420: Flood Plain
Management and Chapter 560: Storm Water Management.
f. Drainage easements shall be sufficient in width so that
motorized equipment may be used in their maintenance.
g. No surface water may be channeled or directed into a sanitary
sewer.
h. All developments shall be constructed and maintained so that
adjacent properties are not unreasonably burdened with
surface water as a result of such developments.
24. Blocks.
a. Factors governing dimensions. Block length and width or
acreage within bounding roads must be sufficient to
accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the Zoning
Code and to provide for convenient access, circulation and
safety of street traffic.
b. Lengths. Block length shall not be less than three hundred fifty
(350) feet or exceed one thousand three hundred twenty
(1,320) feet.
c. Arrangement. A block shall be designed to provide two (2) tiers
of lots except when lots may back onto an arterial street,
highway or railroad.
d. Crosswalks. In blocks over eight hundred (800) feet long,
pedestrian crosswalks may be required by the Director of
Public Works in locations deemed necessary to public health,
convenience and necessity. Crosswalks shall be six (6) feet
wide, straight from street to street and shall contain a paved
surface four (4) feet wide.
Section
410.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.180
AO:509
Section 410.190. Improvement Plan. [R.O. 2008 §410.190; Ord. No.
5354 §1, 10-16-1995; Ord. No. 5426 §1, 6-25-1996; Ord. No. 5589 §1,
9-22-1997; Ord. No. 6641 §§1 — 2, 4-12-2004; Ord. No. 6678 §§1 —
2, 8-23-2004]
25. Lots.
a. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the
requirements of the Zoning Code.
b. Location. All lots shall abut by their full frontage on a publicly
dedicated street or a private street that has received the legal
status as such.
c. Lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to
straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
d. Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall be at least
twenty (20) feet wider on each side than the minimum street
frontage width required for a lot within that residential zoning
designation. (For illustration, in an "R-2" Zone where the
minimum street frontage is sixty-six (66) feet, this provision
shall require that no front, side or back line of a residential
corner lot shall be less than eighty-six (86) feet in length.)
e. Uninhabitable lots. Lots subject to flooding and lots deemed by
the Commission to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for
residential occupancy nor for other uses which may cause
danger to health, life or property or aggravate the flood
hazard. Such land within the plat will be set aside for uses that
will not endanger the health and safety of the public or cause
financial burden to the City.
f. Lot remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left
over after subdividing of a larger tract must be added to
adjacent lots rather than allowed to remain as unusable
parcels.
A. The following improvements shall be in place before the subdivision or
section of the subdivision is accepted by the City Council. Acceptance of
improvements shall be by a written request of the subdivider and a
resolution of the City Council accepting improvements, subject to a two
(2) year guarantee period. However, no guarantee period shall
commence between December fifteenth (15th) and April fifteenth
(15th), thereby ensuring that the guarantee period encompasses two
(2) complete winter seasons.
1. Monuments. Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle
points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as
required by the Director of Public Works. The monuments shall be
of material, size and length approved by the Director of Public
Works.
Section
410.180
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
410.190
AO:510
2. Streets and grading. All streets shall be constructed of concrete
pavement in accordance with specifications designated by the
Director of Public Works and the Street Specifications Appendix
which is on file in the City offices. Such construction shall be
subject to inspection and approval by the City Engineer and the
Director of Public Works. Grading shall be completed to official
grade on all streets for the full width of the right-of-way including
sidewalks and fills and shall be compacted sufficiently to assure
adequate support for permanent paving as set forth in the Street
Specifications Appendix and approved by the City Engineer and the
Director of Public Works. Standard installations for sanitary sewer,
storm drainage and water supply shall be installed before paving,
even though private service can be provided at the time of approval
of the final plat.
3. Curbs, gutters and drainage. Curbs, gutters and drainage
structures shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 560:
Storm Drainage Ordinance adopted by the City. Such construction
shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the City Engineer
and the Director of Public Works.
4. Water supply. The subdivider shall be required, at their own
expense, to install eight (8) inch water mains in compliance with
Title VII, "Utilities" to serve the lots within the subdivided area.
Tapping fees shall not be incurred until such time as the lot is
developed. Further, the subdivider shall be required to provide
water to each lot by completion of any one (1) of the following:
a. Locating upon the lot a water main which provides water to the
subdivision; or
b. Completing a water meter set upon the lot in accordance with
Title VII, "Utilities" which provides water service from the
water main to the lot; or
c. Completing a curb box upon the lot in accordance with Title
VII, "Utilities" which provides water service from the water
main to the lot.
5. Sanitary sewer system. The subdivider shall be required, at his/her
expense, to install a public sanitary sewer complying with Title VII,
"Utilities". Service shall be installed to each lot terminating at the
property line with an approved clean out according to Title VII,
"Utilities". Tapping fees shall not be incurred until such time as the
lot is developed.
6. Sidewalks.
a. Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed along at least one (1)
side of every minor street shown on the plat in accordance with
applicable standards and specifications of the City. Concrete
sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides of all arterial
Section
410.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.190
AO:511
Section 410.195. Improvements or Guarantees Prior to Final
Approval. [R.O. 2008 §410.195; Ord. No. 5566 §1, 7-28-1997]
Prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall agree in writing on
a form provided by the City that the subdivider will install the minimum
improvements provided herein, except sidewalks, and that the subdivider
understands no occupancy will be permitted by the City until the required
improvements are available to each lot for which occupancy is requested or
until satisfactory surety in the form of an irrevocable bank letter of credit,
deposited to the credit of the City for one hundred percent (100%) of the
cost of the public improvements, or a bond is furnished by the subdivider
or its contractor guaranteeing the installation of the improvements to said
and collector streets, provided however, that where the
property is platted in lots having an area of one (1) acre or
more, the Council may waive this requirement.
b. Sidewalks shall be completed upon each lot before a
permanent certificate of occupancy is issued.
7. Street signs. Street signs made of aluminum with reflectorized
lettering and mounted on metal posts shall be installed by the
subdivider at all street intersections on diagonally opposite
corners. Signs indicating the name of each street shall be erected
at each location as close to the corner as practical, facing traffic on
the cross street with the nearest portion of the sign not less than
one (1) foot nor more than three (3) feet back from the curb line.
The City shall approve street names and place street name signs.
8. Lighting. The minimum requirement for street lighting facilities
shall be one (1) fourteen thousand four hundred (14,400) lumens
one hundred fifty (150) watt high pressure sodium or equivalent at
each street intersection within or abutting the subdivision. Light
standards shall be approved by the Director of Public Works.
9. Landscape development. All unpaved or otherwise unimproved
areas within the public right-of-way or public use areas shall be
prepared and maintained with proper erosion control in a manner
approved by the Director of Public Works.
10. Fire hydrants. Shall be installed in a pattern approved by the
Director of Public Safety and Director of Public Works.
B. As-Built Plans. Upon completion of construction of utilities or
improvements, one (1) set of reproducible tracings of complete as-built
final plans, dated, signed and certified by the Engineer shall be filed
with the Director of Public Works showing installed improvements
including materials, size, location, depth or elevation, numbers, ends of
lines, connection ways, valves, storm sewer drains, inlets and all other
pertinent information. There shall be no connections made to utilities
serving the subdivision until all foregoing requirements have been met.
Section
410.190
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
410.195
AO:512
lots. No such surety shall be accepted unless it is enforceable by or payable
to the City or its agent in the sum at least equal to the cost of constructing
the improvements as estimated by the City Engineer and in form with surety
and conditions approved by the City Attorney.
Section 410.200. Violations. [R.O. 2008 §410.200; Ord. No. 5354 §1,
10-16-1995]
The violation of any of the provisions of the Chapter or any Section thereof
is declared a ordinance violation and subject to a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or by confinement in jail for not more than three
(3) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. A separate violation
shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which violation
occurs or continues.
Section 410.210. Variances. [R.O. 2008 §410.210; Ord. No. 5354 §1,
10-16-1995]
Section 410.215. General Provisions. [R.O. 2008 §410.215; Ord. No.
5354 §1, 10-16-1995]
A. Generally. The Commission may recommend to the City Council a
variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship
may result from strict compliance. Upon recommending any variance,
the Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary
to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as
required herein below, the Commission shall take into account the
nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the
vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed
subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon
traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be recommended
unless the Commission finds:
1. There are special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property such that the strict application of the provisions of this
Chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his/
her land.
2. The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner.
3. The recommending of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the City of
Maryville.
B. Application Required. Application for any variance shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed
for the consideration of the Commission. The petition shall state fully
the grounds for the application and all the facts relied upon by the
petitioner.
Section
410.195
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.215
AO:513
Chapter 415
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT
Section 415.010. Establishment and General Provisions. [R.O. 2008
§415.010; Ord. No. 5144 §1, 7-12-1993; Ord. No. 7206 §1,
4-26-2010]
A. Modification Of Requirements. The strict application of the terms of
these regulations may be modified by the City Council and/or upon the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission in the event
any specific provision is determined impractical in its application to a
specific parcel of land because of characteristics peculiar to said parcel
and the intent of these regulations will not be compromised.
B. Enforcement. The City Manager shall be responsible for the
enforcement of regulations and to this end all employees and officials of
the City shall report in writing any violation or suspected violation of
these regulations.
C. Severability. The provisions of these regulations are severable and if
any provision, sentence, clause, Section or part thereof shall be held
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional or inapplicable to any person or
circumstances, such illegality, invalidity, unconstitutionality or
inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, Sections or parts of these regulations or their
application to other persons and circumstances. It is hereby declared to
be the legislative intent, that these regulations would have been
adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional provisions, sentence,
clause, Section or part had not been included therein and if the person
or circumstances to which these regulations or any part thereof is
inapplicable had been specifically exempted therefrom.
A. A Board of Zoning Adjustment is hereby established and shall
hereinafter be referred to as the "Board." The Board shall consist of five
(5) members, with their primary residency located inside the City limits
of Maryville for no less than one (1) year, serving without
compensation, appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the
Council, for a term of five (5) years, excepting that when the Board shall
first be created, one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of four
(4) years, one (1) for a term of two (2) years, and one (1) for a term of
one (1) year.
B. Any vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the City Council for the
unexpired portion of the term. Should any member be absent from the
City or become incapacitated, or is disqualified, the Mayor, with the
approval of the Council, shall appoint a substitute to serve as a member
of the Board with the same powers and authority as the regular
members of the Board until the regular member has returned or is able
to serve on the Board.
Section
410.215
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
415.020
AO:514
Section 415.020. Meetings. [R.O. 2008 §415.020; Ord. No. 5144 §1,
7-12-1993]
Section 415.030. Record. [R.O. 2008 §415.030; Ord. No. 5144 §1,
7-12-1993]
The affirmative vote of two-thirds (?) of all present and voting members of
the Board of Zoning Adjustment, shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Building Official or to decide
in favor of the applicant.
Section 415.040. Appeal Before the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
[R.O. 2008 §415.040; Ord. No. 5144 §1, 7-12-1993]
Appeal to the Board may be taken within thirty (30) days after an order
becomes effective, by any person or persons aggrieved, by any
neighborhood organization as defined in Section 32.105, RSMo.,
representing such person or affected by a decision of the Building Official.
Section 415.050. Jurisdiction. [R.O. 2008 §415.050; Ord. No. 5144
§1, 7-12-1993]
A. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at
such other times as the Board may determine. Business of the Board
shall be conducted in accordance with the regulations set forth herein
and with the provisions of Missouri Statutes and shall adopt its own
rules of procedure in harmony with said provisions.
B. The Chairperson, or in his/her absence, the acting Chairperson, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
A. The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall have jurisdiction to make
decision and rulings in accordance with the following:
1. The Board may hear appeals where it is alleged there is an error in
any order, requirement, decision or interpretation made by an
Administrative Official in the enforcement of this Title.
2. Upon receipt of the appeal, if it is determined that the request by
appellant is only for a change or exception to the generally
understood wording or application of an ordinance of the City of
Maryville, then this Board shall be without jurisdiction to further
proceed. The appellant shall be informed, with or without a
hearing, that the request is in terms of a request for a general
exception, and that this Board is without jurisdiction to proceed.
The Board may recommend that appellant make his/her request
known to the City Council of the City of Maryville and/or the Board
may make a recommendation for change to any Building Official for
consideration and presentation to the City Council.
3. If the Board determines that the request is in the nature of
requesting a variance from the terms of this Title as would not be
Section
415.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.050
AO:515
Section 415.055. Definition. [R.O. 2008 §415.055; Ord. No. 5144 §1,
7-12-1993; Ord. No. 5386 §1, 2-5-1996]
As used in this Chapter, the term "undue hardship" shall mean a situation
where an existing ordinance or zoning law unreasonably limits the normally
accepted use of the property. The sole fact that the property could be used
more profitably for variances granted is not sufficient to meet the tests of
undue hardship.
Section 415.060. Finding of Variance. [R.O. 2008 §415.060; Ord. No.
5144 §1, 7-12-1993; Ord. No. 5386 §1, 2-5-1996]
Section 415.070. Granting Variance. [R.O. 2008 §415.070; Ord. No.
5144 §1, 7-12-1993; Ord. No. 5386 §1, 2-5-1996]
contrary to the public interests, that said variance is based upon
special conditions unique to Appellant and that a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this Title would result in
unnecessary hardship; or if the Board finds that there has been
an error by the Administrative Official in the interpretation or
application of an ordinance in this Title, then the Board may
proceed to a decision, all subject to the provisions of Findings of
Variance in Section 415.060. The Board of Adjustment shall not
have any authority to waive the requirement of this Title absent
showing of undue hardship which is specific and unique to
Appellant.
A. Before making a ruling on such a request for a variance, the Board shall
make the following determinations and shall record such
determinations in its proceedings:
1. The appeal falls within the jurisdiction of the Board;
2. Notice of the proceedings has been given as required;
3. Application of the provisions of the ordinance or zoning law
unreasonably limits the normally accepted use of such property;
4. The undue hardship of which the applicant complains is one
suffered by the applicant rather than by neighbors or the general
public;
5. The undue hardship relates directly to the applicant's property;
6. The undue hardship is unique to the applicant, or nearly so, rather
than one shared by the many surrounding properties;
7. The undue hardship is not the result of applicant's own actions; and
8. The variance will neither result in the extension of a nonconforming
use nor authorize the initiation of a non-conforming
use.
Section
415.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
415.070
AO:516
Section 415.080. Evaluation Sheet. [R.O. 2008 §415.080; Ord. No.
5144 §1, 7-12-1993]
All voting members shall have a recorded vote on all items listed on the
evaluation sheet as presented by the Code Enforcement Officer. The
evaluation sheet will become a recognized record in the permanent file.
Section 415.090. Fees. [R.O. 2008 §415.090; Ord. No. 5144 §1,
7-12-1993; Ord. No. 6587 §§1 — 2, 9-15-2003]
The filing fee for appeals and application for variances shall be one hundred
twenty-five dollars ($125.00) plus the cost of public notification and mailing.
The filing fee shall accompany the appeal or the application for a variance
and shall not be refundable.
Section 415.100. Notice. [R.O. 2008 §415.100; Ord. No. 5144 §1,
7-12-1993; Ord. No. 6580 §§1 — 2, 8-18-2003]
A. Before granting a variance, the Board shall take a separate vote with at
least two-thirds (?) of those present and voting, voting in favor of each
of the required findings stated in Section 415.060. Insofar as
practicable, the motion to make an affirmative finding on each of the
requirements shall include a statement of specific reasons or findings of
fact supporting such motion.
B. In exercising the above-mentioned powers such Board may, in
conformity with the provisions of Sections 89.010 to 89.140, RSMo.,
reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make
such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made
and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the
appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor
of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under
any such ordinance or to effect any variation in such ordinance.
A. With respect to any proceedings which may adversely affect the rights
or property of a person, other than the parties before the Board, it shall
cause notice of its proceedings to be given in the following manner:
1. Owners of record of property adjoining the property involved shall
be given notice by certified mail not less than seven (7) days prior
to the proceedings.
2. All other persons shall be given notice by publishing a notice of
hearing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
community not less than seven (7) days prior to the proceedings.
3. A copy of the notice shall be transmitted to the City Clerk and to the
Chairperson of the Board. The Board shall adopt such other
Section
415.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.100
AO:517
Section 415.110. Termination of Variance. [R.O. 2008 §415.110;
Ord. No. 5144 §1, 7-12-1993]
Where property is in use under the terms of a variance and such use ceases
or in the case of a structure such structure ceases to exist, then the variance
shall terminate unless the terms of the variance specify otherwise.
Section 415.120. Enforcement. [R.O. 2008 §415.120; Ord. No. 5144
§1, 7-12-1993]
It shall be the duty of the Building Official to enforce the provisions of this
Title and enforce such decisions as shall be duly passed by the Board of
Zoning Adjustment.
Section 415.130. Structures Declared Nuisance When in Violation
of Provisions — Abatement. [R.O. 2008 §415.130; Ord. No. 5144 §1,
7-12-1993]
Any structure erected, raised, or converted, of land or premises used in
violation of any of the provisions of this Title or the requirements thereof, is
hereby declared to be a common nuisance and such common nuisance may
be abated in the manner as nuisances are now or may hereafter be abated
under existing law.
Section 415.140. Penalties for Non-Compliance. [R.O. 2008
§415.140; Ord. No. 5144 §1, 7-12-1993]
Any person failing to comply with the notice of declaration of a nuisance
given by the Board of Zoning Adjustment within thirty (30) days, or
otherwise violates the provisions of this Chapter, shall be guilty of a
ordinance violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or be imprisoned in the
County Jail for not more than one (1) year, or be both fined and imprisoned.
Section 415.150. Amendments. [R.O. 2008 §415.150; Ord. No. 5144
§1, 7-12-1993]
The Council of the City of Maryville may, from time to time, make
amendments to the text and maps of this Title in accordance with the
Statutes of Missouri.
Chapter 420
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
reasonable rules and regulations as may be required to facilitate
such notice.
Section
415.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
415.150
AO:518
ARTICLE I
Finding of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
Section 420.010. Findings of Fact. [R.O. 2008 §425.010; Ord. No.
4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
Section 420.020. Statement of Purpose. [R.O. 2008 §425.020; Ord.
No. 4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
Section 420.030. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [R.O. 2008
§425.030; Ord. No. 4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
A. The flood hazard areas of Maryville, Missouri, are subject to periodic
inundation which, results in loss of life, property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
floodplains causing increases in flood heights velocities, and by the
occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazards
to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
A. It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
1. To protect human life and health;
2. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
3. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
4. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and
bridges located in floodplains;
6. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to
minimize future flood blight areas;
7. To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in
a flood area; and
8. To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
Section
420.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.030
AO:519
A. In order to accomplish its purposes, this Chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
1. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion or to flood heights or
velocities.
2. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction.
3. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters.
4. Controlling, filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase erosion of flood damage.
5. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodway waters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.
Section
420.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
420.030
AO:520
ARTICLE II
Definitions
Section 420.040. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §425.040; Ord. No. 4972
§1, 5-13-1991]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application.
ACTUARIAL OR RISK PREMIUM RATES — Those rates established by the
Administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations
which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section
1307 of the Federal Flood Plain Act and the accepted actuarial principles.
Risk premium rates include provisions for operating costs and allowances.
APPEAL — A designated AO or AH zone on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of
flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly
defined channel is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident.
Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having one percent (1%) chance of being
equalled or exceeded in any given year.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION — (for the purpose of determining rates)
Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM's effective
before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing
structures".
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Flood Insurance Study has delineated the Flood Hazard
Boundaries and the zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well
as the Flood Boundary/Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of
inland or tidal waters; or (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff
of surface waters from any source.
Section
420.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.040
AO:521
FLOODWAY FRINGE — The area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway,
that on the average is likely to be flooded once every one hundred (100)
years (i.e., that has a one percent (1%) chance of flood occurrence in any
one (1) year).
FLOODWAY or REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one (1) foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, clogged bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on
a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. For
insurance purposes the term "manufactured home" does not include park
trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the "start of construction"
or substantial improvement is commenced on or after the effective date of
the FIRM.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — (for other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub.
L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, or other improvement was within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the permit date. The "actual start" means the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of
a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure.
Section
420.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
420.040
AO:522
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either,
VARIANCE — A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
Chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by
this Chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary
hardship.
1. Before the improvement or repair is started, or
If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
For the purpose of this definition "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing,
State or local health, sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
2.
Section
420.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.040
AO:523

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
Section 420.050. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [R.O. 2008
§425.050; Ord. No. 4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
This Chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the City of Maryville, Missouri.
Section 420.060. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood
Hazards. [R.O. 2008 §425.060; Ord. No. 4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
The areas of special flood hazards identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency through a scientific and engineering report entitled
"The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Maryville, Missouri", dated
September 18, 1985, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (and
Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps) with any revision thereto are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. The Flood
Insurance Study is on file at City Hall, 415 North Market Street, Maryville,
Missouri.
Section 420.070. Penalties for Non-Compliance. [R.O. 2008
§425.070; Ord. No. 4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
Section 420.080. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [R.O. 2008
§425.080; Ord. No. 4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter
and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the most stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
A. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
Chapter and other applicable regulations.
B. Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any
of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or special
exceptions) shall constitute a ordinance violation. Any person who
violates this Chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements
shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than three (3) months, or
both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the
case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
C. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Maryville or other
appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Section
420.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.090
AO:525
Section 420.090. Interpretation. [R.O. 2008 §425.090; Ord. No.
4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
Section 420.100. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [R.O. 2008
§425.100; Ord. No. 4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This Chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City
of Maryville or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
A. In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall
be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body and,
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State Statutes.
Section
420.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
420.100
AO:526
ARTICLE IV
Administration
Section 420.110. Establishment of a Development Permit. [R.O.
2008 §425.110; Ord. No. 4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
Section 420.120. Designation of the Local Administrator. [R.O.
2008 §425.120; Ord. No. 4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
The City Manager or designated representative is hereby appointed to
administer and implement the provisions of this Chapter, by granting or
denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
Section 420.130. Duties and Responsibilities of City Manager. [R.O.
2008 §425.130; Ord. No. 4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
A. A Development Permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins with any area of special flood hazard established in
Section 420.060. No person, firm, or corporation or unit of government
shall initiate any development or substantial improvement or cause the
same to be done without first obtaining a separate permit for each
development as defined in Section 420.040. Application for a
Development Permit shall be made and forms furnished by the Code
Enforcement Officer and may include, but not be limited to; plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the
foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures.
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential
structure is to be floodproofed.
3. Certification from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the non-residential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in Section 420.170(2).
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Duties of the City Manager or designated representative shall include,
but not be limited to:
1. Review all development permits to assure that sites are reasonably
safe from flooding and that the permit requirements of this Chapter
have been satisfied.
2. Review permits for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or
local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
Section
420.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.130
AO:527
Section 420.140. Variance Procedures. [R.O. 2008 §425.140; Ord.
No. 4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
3. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in
accordance with Section 420.060 then the City Manager or
designated representative shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data available from a
Federal, State or other source, in order to administer the provisions
of Article V.
4. Verify, record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all new or substantially improved structures.
5. Verify, record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially
improved structures have been floodproofed.
6. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure the City
Manager or designated representative shall obtain certification
from a registered professional engineer or architect.
7. Notify adjacent communities and the State of Missouri Department
of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and shall submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
8. Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is
not diminished.
9. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions) the City Manager or designated
representative shall make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this Article.
A. The Board of Adjustment as established by this Code shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
Chapter.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the City Manager or designated representative
in the enforcement or administration of this Chapter.
C. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court of Nodaway
County, Missouri, as provided in Sections 536.100 through 536.140,
RSMo.
Section
420.130
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
420.140
AO:528
D. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other Sections of this Chapter, and
1. The danger that materials maybe swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
3. The susceptibility of proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
5. The necessity to the facility to a waterfront location, where
applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and,
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and
streets and bridges.
E. Conditions For Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre
or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing
Subparagraphs (2) through (6) below, have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical
jurisdiction required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this Section.
Section
420.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.140
AO:529
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. A showing of good and sufficient cause,
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local
laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given a
written notice that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
Section
420.140
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
420.140
AO:530
ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Section 420.150. General Standards. [R.O. 2008 §425.150; Ord. No.
4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
A. In all areas of special flood hazards (Zones A, AE, A1-30, AO, AH) the
following provisions are required:
1. All new construction including manufactured homes and
substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
construed with materials resistant to flood damage.
3. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
4. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and airconditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
5. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
6. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
7. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
8. The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding
buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human,
animal or plant life is prohibited.
9. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent
flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time
available after flood warning.
10. That until a floodway has been designated, no development,
including landfill, may be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on
the City's FIRM unless the applicant for the land use has
demonstrated that the proposed use, when combined with all other
existing and reasonably anticipated uses, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the 100-year flood more than one (1) foot
on the average cross-section of the reach in which the development
Section
420.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.150
AO:531
Section 420.160. Standards for Subdivision Proposals. [R.O. 2008
§425.160; Ord. No. 4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
Section 420.170. Specific Standards. [R.O. 2008 §425.170; Ord. No.
4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
or landfill is located as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Study
incorporated by reference; Section 420.060 of this Chapter.
A. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments,
including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be consistent
with the need to minimize flood damage
B. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
C. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development (including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivisions), which is greater than
either fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres.
A. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in Section 420.060 or Section 420.150,
(Zones A1-30, AE and AH) the following provisions are required:
1. Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated at or above the base flood
elevation.
2. Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated at or above the level of the base flood elevation or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
floodproofed so that below such a level the structure is water-tight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
standards of this Subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall
be provided to the official as set forth in Section 420.130(6).
3. Required for all new construction and substantial improvements.
That fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
Section
420.150
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
420.170
AO:532
Section 420.180. Floodways. [R.O. 2008 §425.180; Ord. No. 4972 §1,
5-13-1991]
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet
or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one (1) square inch for every one (1) square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot
above grade.
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
4. Manufactured homes.
a. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be
anchored in accordance with State and local Building Codes
and FIRM guidelines. In the event that over-the-top frame ties
to ground anchors are used, the following specific
requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met:
(1) Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four (4)
corners of the manufactured home, with two (2) additional
ties side at intermediate locations and manufactured
homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring one (1)
additional tie per side;
(2) Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with
five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points and
manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long
requiring four (4) additional ties per side;
(3) All components of the anchoring system be capable of
carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800)
pounds; and
(4) Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly
anchored.
b. Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within the
Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM, be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor
of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood
elevations; and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions
of Subsection (4)(a) hereof.
Section
420.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.180
AO:533
Section 420.190. Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO and AH Zones).
[R.O. 2008 §425.190; Ord. No. 4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
A. Located within areas of special flood hazards established in Section
420.060 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
1. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments unless
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is
provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
2. If Subsection (1) hereof is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of this Article.
3. In Zone A unnumbered, obtain review and reasonable utilize any
floodway data available through Federal, State or other sources of
Section 420.160(D) of this Chapter in meeting the standards of this
Section.
A. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section
420.060 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to
three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the
following provisions apply:
1. Within AO Zones.
a. All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least
as high as base flood level, the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth
number is specified).
b. All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement elevated above
the highest adjacent grade at least as high as base flood
level, the depth number specified in feet on the
community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth
number is specified), or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any
Section
420.180
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
420.190
AO:534
Section 420.200. Non-Conforming Use. [R.O. 2008 §425.200; Ord.
No. 4972 §1, 5-13-1991]
Section 420.210. Amendments. [R.O. 2008 §425.210; Ord. No. 4972
§1, 5-13-1991]
space below that level is water-tight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydro-dynamic loads and effects
of buoyancy.
c. Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be
required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
d. The anchoring requirements for manufactured homes as
established in Section 420.170(4)(a) shall be required.
2. Within AH Zones.
a. The specific standards for all areas of special flood hazards
where base flood elevation data has been provided shall be
required as set forth in Section 420.170.
b. Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be
required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
A. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of the ordinance, but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this Chapter may be continued subject
to the following conditions:
1. If such use is discontinued for ninety (90) consecutive days, any
future use of the building premises shall conform to this Chapter.
The Utility Department shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing of instances of non-conforming uses where utility services
have been discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days.
2. Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not
be entitled to continue as non-conforming uses.
B. If any non-conforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred except if it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions
of this Chapter. This limitation does not include the cost of any
alteration to comply with existing State or Local Health, Sanitary,
Building or Safety Codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a
structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State
Inventory of Historic Places.
Section
420.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.210
AO:535
A. The regulations, restrictions, boundaries set forth in this Chapter may
from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to
reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection
Act of 1973, provided however, that no such action may be taken until
after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest
and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time
and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City of Maryville, Missouri.
B. At least twenty (20) days shall elapse between the date of this
publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be
provided to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The
regulations of this Chapter are in compliance with the National Flood
Insurance Program Regulations as published in Title 44 of the Code of
Federal Regulations.
Section
420.210
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
420.210
AO:536
Chapter 425
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING
Section 425.010. Relocation Policy. [R.O. 2008 §430.010; Ord. No.
6634 §1, 3-8-2004]
A. The City Council of the City of Maryville, Missouri, adopts this
Relocation Policy to be applicable to any Tax Increment Financing Plan,
Chapter 353 (RSMo.) Plan or similar redevelopment plan approved by
the City. This Relocation Policy shall conform at all times to the
requirements of Section 523.205, RSMo.
B. Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below for purposes of the Relocation Policy.
ACQUIRING ENTITY — Any public agency, developer or the City which
is acquiring property pursuant to any Tax Increment Financing Plan,
Chapter 353 (RSMo.) Plan or similar redevelopment plan approved by
the City.
BUSINESS — Any lawful activity that is conducted:
CITY — City of Maryville, Missouri.
DECENT, SAFE AND SANITARY DWELLING — A dwelling which meets
all applicable codes. The dwelling shall:
DEVELOPER — Any person selected as a developer of a particular
redevelopment project under a Tax Increment Financing Plan, Chapter
353 (RSMo.) Plan or similar redevelopment plan.
DISPLACED PERSON — Any person that moves from real property
which is within a redevelopment area or moves such person's personal
property from real property which is within a redevelopment area
permanently and voluntarily as a direct result of acquisition,
Primarily for the purchase, sale or use of personal or real property
or for the manufacture, processing or marketing of products or
commodities; or
1.
2. Primarily for the sale of services to the public.
1. Be structurally sound, weather-tight and in good repair;
2. Contain a safe electrical wiring system;
3. Contain an adequate heating system;
Be adequate in size with respect to the number of rooms needed to
accommodate the displaced person; and
4.
For a handicapped displaced person, be free of any barriers which
would preclude reasonable ingress, egress or use of the dwelling.
5.
Section
420.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.010
AO:537
rehabilitation of, or the written notice of intent to acquire such real
property, in whole or in part, for a public purpose.
ELIGIBLE DISPLACED PERSONS — Any displaced person who
occupied the real property to be acquired or not less than ninety (90)
days prior to the initiation of negotiations and who is required to vacate
such real property.
HANDICAPPED DISPLACED PERSON — Any displaced person who
deaf, legally blind or orthopedically disabled to the extent that
acquisition of another residence presents a greater burden than other
persons encounter or to the extent that modifications to the
replacement residence would be necessary.
INITIATION OF NEGOTIATIONS — The delivery of the initial written
offer of just compensation by the acquiring entity, to the owner of the
real property, to purchase such real property for the redevelopment
project, or the notice to the person that he or she will be displaced by
rehabilitation or demolition.
PERSON — Any individual, family, partnership, limited liability
company, corporation or association.
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — That area defined as the redevelopment
area pursuant to a Tax Increment Financing Plan, Chapter 353 (RSMo.)
Plan or similar redevelopment plan.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT — Any construction project defined as a
redevelopment project pursuant to a Tax Increment Financing Plan,
Chapter 353 (RSMo.) Plan or similar redevelopment plan.
REFERRAL SITE NOTICE — The written notice of referral sites to be
provided to displaced persons by the developer pursuant to Subsection
(E) of this Relocation Policy.
RELOCATION PAYMENT — The payment to be made by the developer
to an eligible displaced person pursuant to Subsection (F) of this
Relocation Policy.
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN — Any tax increment financing
plan approved by the City.
TIF COMMISSION — The Tax Increment Financing Commission of
Maryville, Missouri.
C. Eligibility. Any displaced person shall have the right to receive
relocation assistance in accordance with the terms of this Relocation
Policy. In no event shall relocation assistance be provided to any person
who purposely resides or locates such person's business in the
redevelopment area solely for the purpose of obtaining relocation
benefits.
D. Notice. Developer shall give to every displaced person a ninety (90) day
written notice to vacate prior to the date such displaced person is
required to vacate its premises.
Section
425.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
425.010
AO:538
E. Referrals. Developer shall provide each residential displaced person
with three (3) decent, safe and sanitary dwelling referrals and shall
provide each displaced business with three (3) suitable referral sites.
Developer shall provide to each handicapped displaced person ninety
(90) days prior written notice of referral sites and shall provide to each
other displaced person sixty (60) days prior written notice of referral
sites, determined with reference to the date such displaced person is
required to vacate that person's respective premise. Concurrently, with
the referral site notice, the developer shall provide to each eligible
displaced person written notice of the availability of benefits under this
Relocation Policy. The developer shall make arrangements for
transportation to inspect referral sites for displaced persons upon a
written request for transportation made to the City by the displaced
person. Contemporaneous with the provision of a referral site notice,
the developer shall notify such displaced person in writing of the
availability of relocation payments and assistance under this Relocation
Policy.
F. Relocation Payments. Each eligible displaced person shall be entitled to
the following relocation payment from the developer.
1. Residential displaced persons. Each residential eligible displaced
person shall be provided with the option of such eligible displaced
person, either:
a. A five hundred dollar ($500.00) fixed payment; or
b. Actual reasonable costs of relocation, including actual moving
costs, utility deposits, key deposits, storage of personal
property up to one (1) month, utility transfer and connection
fees and other initial rehousing deposits, including first (1st)
and last month's rent and security deposit.
G. Special Needs. Any eligible displaced person who believes that such
eligible displaced person has any special needs as the result of such
eligible displaced person's income, age, size of family, nature of
business, availability of suitable replacement facilities and vacancy
rates of affordable facilities may advise the developer of such needs and
such needs shall be given specific consideration with respect to the
relocation benefits offered to such eligible displace person. To notify the
developer of such special needs, the eligible displaced person having
such needs must deliver written notice to the developer in care of the
City. Such notice must identify the special needs and the basis of the
special needs. The developer reserves the right to require from any
eligible displaced person claiming special needs reasonable evidence of
the alleged facts upon which a claim for special needs is based (by way
of example, copies of income tax returns if income is an issue).
H. Deadlines For Claims And Payments. All claims for relocation payments
shall be filed with the developer within six (6) months after:
1. For tenants, the date of displacement; or
Section
425.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.010
AO:539
Chapter 430
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES
Section 430.010. Purpose. [Ord. No. 7831 §1, 3-14-2016]
2. For owners, the date of displacement or the final payment for the
acquisition of the real property, whichever is later. Payment for a
satisfactory claim for relocation payments shall be made by the
developer within thirty (30) days following the developer's receipt
of sufficient documentation to support the claim.
I. Advance Payment. If any eligible displaced person demonstrates the
need for an advance payment of the relocation payment in order to
avoid or reduce a hardship, the developer shall issue the relocation
payment in order to avoid or reduce a hardship. The developer shall
issue the relocation payment subject to such safeguards as the
developer may reasonably establish and are appropriate to ensure that
the objective of the relocation payment is accomplished.
J. Waiver Of Payment. Any eligible displaced person, who is also the
owner of the applicable premises, may waive relocation payments as
part of the negotiations for acquisition of the interest held by such
eligible displaced person. Such waiver shall be in writing, shall disclose
the eligible displaced person's knowledge of the provisions of this
relocation plan and Section 523.205, RSMo., and knowledge of
entitlement to relocation payments under this relocation policy and
shall be filed with the developer.
A. Statement Of Purpose. The general purpose of this Chapter is to
regulate the placement, construction, and modification of
telecommunications towers, support structures, and antennas in order
to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, while at the same
time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the
competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the City of
Maryville. Specifically, this Chapter is intended to:
1. Provide for the appropriate location and development of
telecommunications facilities and systems to serve the citizens and
businesses of the City of Maryville;
2. Minimize adverse visual impacts of wireless communications
facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and
innovative camouflaging techniques that provide predictability for
nearby property owners and others or that future uses will not
materially alter such approved aesthetic protections without
zoning hearing procedures and input from interested parties;
3. Ensure that any new support structure is located in an area
compatible with the neighborhood or surrounding community to
the extent possible; and
Section
425.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
430.010
AO:540
Section 430.020. Definitions. [Ord. No. 7831 §1, 3-14-2016]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings and
usages indicated:
AGL (ABOVE GROUND LEVEL) — Ground level shall be determined by the
average elevation of the natural ground level within a radius of fifty (50)
feet from the center location of measurement.
ANTENNA — Any device that transmits and/or receives radio waves for
voice, data or video communications purposes, including, but not limited to,
television, AM/FM radio, microwave, cellular telephone and similar forms
of communications. The term shall exclude satellite earth station antennas
less than two (2) meters in diameter (mounted within twelve (12) feet
of the ground or building mounted) and any receive-only home television
antennas.
CABINET — A structure for the protection and security of communications
equipment associated with one (1) or more antennas where direct access to
equipment is provided from the exterior and that has horizontal dimensions
that do not exceed four (4) feet by six (6) feet; and vertical height that does
not exceed six (6) feet.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Public Works of the City or
his/her designee or official acting in such capacity.
DISGUISED SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any freestanding, man-made
structure designed for the support of antennas, the presence of which
is camouflaged or concealed as an appropriately placed and designed
architectural or natural feature. Depending on the location and type of
disguise used, such concealment may require placement underground of
the utilities leading to the structure. Such structures may include but are
not limited to clock towers, campaniles, observation towers, light standards,
4. Ensure that regulation of wireless communications facilities does
not have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless
services, and does not unreasonably discriminate among
functionally equivalent providers of such service and promotes the
provision and availability of communication services within the
City.
B. Applicability; Preemption. Notwithstanding any ordinance to the
contrary, the procedures set forth in this Chapter shall be applicable to
all wireless communications facilities existing or installed, built or
modified after the effective date of this Chapter to the fullest extent
permitted by law. No provision of this Chapter shall apply to any
circumstance in which such application shall be unlawful under
superseding Federal or State law and furthermore, if any section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Chapter is now
or in the future superseded or preempted by State or Federal law or
found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unauthorized, such
provision shall be automatically interpreted and applied as required by
law.
Section
430.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.020
AO:541
flag poles and artificial trees. For purposes of this definition, a structure
"camouflaged or concealed as an appropriately placed and designed
architectural or natural feature" shall meet the following additional criteria:
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average grade of the
base of the structure at ground level to its highest point and including the
main structure and all attachments thereto.
INCIDENTAL USE — Any use authorized herein that exists in addition to
the principal use of the property.
MODIFICATION — Any addition, deletion or change, including the addition
or replacement of antennas, or any change to a structure requiring a
building permit or other governmental approval.
SHELTER — A building for the protection and security of communications
equipment associated with one (1) or more antennas and where access to
equipment is gained from the interior of the building. Human occupancy for
office or other uses or the storage of other materials and equipment not in
direct support of the connected antennas is prohibited.
SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A tower or disguised support structure.
TOWER — A structure designed for the support of one (1) or more antennas
and including guyed towers, self-supporting (lattice) towers, or monopoles,
but not disguised support structures or buildings. The term shall also not
include any support structure that includes attachments of sixty-five (65)
feet or less in height owned and operated solely for use by an amateur radio
operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Any antenna, cabinet, shelter
and support structure and associated equipment.
It is consistent with and contributes to and does not detract from the
character and property values and use of the area and neighborhood in
which it is located;
1.
It does not contain distorted proportions, size, or other features not
typically found on the type of structure or feature to which it is
designed to replicate;
2.
It cannot be identified as an antenna support structure by persons with
reasonable sensibilities and knowledge;
3.
Its equipment, accessory buildings, or other aspects or attachments
relating to the disguised support structure are wholly concealed using a
manner consistent with and typically associated with the architectural
or natural structure or feature being replicated; and
4.
It is of a height, design and type that would ordinarily occur at the
location and neighborhood selected.
5.
Section
430.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
430.030
AO:542
Section 430.030. Application Procedures; Timing. [Ord. No. 7831
§1, 3-14-2016]
Section 430.040. General Requirements. [Ord. No. 7831 §1,
3-14-2016]
A. Applications. Applications for permitted or special uses pursuant to this
Chapter shall be subject to the supplementary procedures in this
Chapter. Applications shall be submitted to the City as a complete
application on forms provided by the City. A complete application shall
be an application submitted on the forms provided by the City, fully
executed by the applicant, identifying the specific approval sought, and
containing all attachments, fees, and information as required thereon
or by the City, consistent with this Chapter. Applications shall be
accompanied by a building permit application and other applicable
forms, and such application fees as may be established to reimburse the
City for its inspection and review costs.
B. Timing. Applications shall be decided upon within a reasonable time,
subject further to State or Federal specific additional requirements as
may apply to the particular application.
A. Applicability. The requirements set forth in this Chapter shall be
applicable to all wireless communications facilities within the City
installed, built or modified after the effective date of this Chapter to the
full extent permitted by law.
1. Principal or incidental use. wireless communications facilities may
be either a principal use in all commercial and industrial zoning
districts or an incidental use to commercial and industrial uses,
subject to any applicable requirement relating to yard or setback;
provided that only a disguised support structure shall be
authorized within a commercial district. An incidental use subject
to a leasehold interest of a person other than the lot owner may be
approved for a tower only if the leasehold area separately meets all
requirements for a separate subdivided lot, including dedicated
access, parking, and lot size, applicable to a primary use in the
district in which the use is proposed. No other district shall allow
wireless communications facilities unless required by law.
2. Building codes, safety standards, and zoning compliance. wireless
communications facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
compliance with all standards contained in applicable State and
local building codes. A certified engineer's structural report shall
be required for all applications to construct a new or modify or any
way alter an existing support structure, unless waived upon
application to the Director stating why such report is unnecessary
to the specific application and a determination in the discretion of
the Director approving such statement. In addition to any other
approvals required by this Chapter, no wireless communication
facility or portion thereof shall be erected, replaced, or expanded
Section
430.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.040
AO:543
prior to receipt of a certificate of zoning compliance, unless
otherwise required by law, and the issuance of a building permit.
For all sites located within a historic preservation district, a
certificate of appropriateness shall also be required as well as a
hearing as provided for in Section 430.060(C). For sites within City
rights-of-way:
a. The most restrictive adjacent underlying zoning district
classification shall apply unless otherwise specifically zoned
and designated on the Official Zoning Map; and
b. No application shall be submitted for permit approval without
attaching the City's consent to use the ROW for the specific
construction application.
3. Regulatory compliance. All wireless communications facilities shall
meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC,
and any other local, State or Federal agency with the authority to
regulate wireless communications facilities, and including all
required licenses, permits, and taxes applicable to such structure
and/or modification. Should such standards or regulations be
amended, then the owner shall bring such devices and structure
into compliance with the revised standards or regulations within
the time period mandated by the controlling agency. No approval
for any placement, construction or modification of any wireless
communications facilities permitted by this Chapter shall be
granted for any applicant having an uncured violation of this
Chapter, any zoning regulation regarding the lot on which the
structure is proposed, or any other governmental regulatory,
licensing, or tax requirement applicable to such antenna or
structures within the City.
4. Security. All wireless communications facilities shall be protected
from unauthorized access by appropriate security measures. A
description of proposed security measures shall be provided as part
of any application to install, build, alter or modify wireless
communications facilities. Additional measures may be required as
a condition of the issuance of a building permit as deemed
necessary by the Director or by the Governing Body in the case of a
special use permit.
5. Lighting. Support structures may be lighted at the base of the
structure for security purposes but only when approved by the
Director or by the Governing Body in the case of a special use
permit, after submission of a description of the proposed lighting
scheme as part of the application to install, build, alter or modify
the support structure and a finding by the City that such lighting
shall not unreasonably shine on residential property or otherwise
be detrimental to property values or the general character of the
surrounding area. Lighting may also be approved as a consistent
component of a disguised support structure. Equipment cabinets
Section
430.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
430.040
AO:544
and shelters may have lighting only as approved by the Director or
Governing Body on the approved site plan.
6. Advertising. Except for a disguised support structure in the form of
an otherwise lawfully permitted sign, the placement of advertising
on wireless communications facilities is prohibited other than
identification signage of not greater than one (1) square foot on
ground equipment.
7. Design.
a. Color. Subject to the requirements of the FAA or any applicable
State or Federal agency, towers and attachments shall be
painted a neutral color consistent with the natural or built
environment of the site or an alternative painting scheme
approved by the Director, or the Governing Body in the case of
special use permits, consistent with the requirements of this
Chapter. Unpainted galvanized steel support structures are not
permitted.
b. Ground equipment. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall have
an exterior finish compatible with the natural or built
environment of the site and shall also comply with any design
guidelines as may be applicable to the particular zoning
district in which the facility is located. All equipment shall be
either placed underground, contained in a single shelter or
cabinet, or wholly concealed within a building or approved
walled compounds.
c. Antenna design. Antennas attached to a disguised support
structure or tower shall be contained within the disguised
support structure or within or mounted flush on the surface of
the tower to which they are mounted so as not to defeat the
disguised design. Antennas attached to an existing building or
structure shall be of a color identical to the surface to which
they are mounted. All antennas shall be designed to be
disguised and maximally concealed on or within the support
structure. Exposed antennas on "crows nest" or other visible
platforms or extensions are prohibited. Any tower approved as
a disguised support structure shall have as a condition of
approval, unless expressly exempted in the approval, an
obligation and corresponding covenant recorded on the
property that runs with the land to the benefit of the City on
behalf of the public, prohibiting modifications of the tower that
eliminate or are materially detrimental to the disguise, unless
such is approved by a duly authorized zoning or conditional use
approval approved in the same manner as required for an
original construction of such tower or disguised support
structure with the proposed modification. If the applicant does
not wish to have such a covenant, the application shall not
qualify as a disguised structure, unless another mechanism is
Section
430.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.040
AO:545
proposed and approved to ensure that the disguise is not
subsequently eliminated or materially detrimentally altered.
d. Height. Support structures shall be no taller than necessary
and shall not exceed the height limitation of any airport overlay
zone as may be adopted by the City or other regulatory agency.
Support structures may exceed underlying zoning district
height restrictions for buildings and structures only where
shown to be necessary, provided that no reasonable alternative
exists. District height restrictions shall be considered by the
City in determining the appropriateness of the design and
location of the application under the applicable standards for
approval.
e. Monopole design. All towers shall be of a monopole design.
Lattice, guyed towers or other non-monopole tower designs
shall not be permitted.
f. Compound walls/landscaping. All disguised support structures
in the commercial district shall be surrounded by a minimum of
a six-foot-high decorative wall constructed of brick, stone or
comparable masonry materials and a landscape strip of not
less than ten (10) feet in width and planted with materials
which will provide a visual barrier to a minimum height of six
(6) feet. The landscape strip shall be exterior to any security
wall. In lieu of the required wall and landscape strip, an
alternative means of screening may be approved by the
Director, or by the Governing Body in the case of a special use
permit, upon demonstration by the applicant that an equivalent
degree of visual screening will be achieved.
g. Setbacks. All support structures and extensions or
attachments thereto and related buildings/structures shall be
separated by a safety fall zone from any public rights-of-way,
sidewalk or street, alley, parking area, playground, or building
(except for parking and buildings dedicated solely for access to
or maintenance of the support structure), and from any
property line, a distance equal to the height of the support
structure.
h. Storage. Vehicle or outdoor storage on any support structure
site is prohibited, unless otherwise permitted by the zoning.
i. Parking. On-site parking for periodic maintenance and service
shall be provided at all antenna or support structure locations
consistent with the underlying zoning district and the type of
antenna or support structure approval granted.
B. Administration. The Director shall have the authority to establish forms
and procedures consistent with this Code and applicable Federal, State,
and local law to ensure compliance and to facilitate prompt review and
administration of applications.
Section
430.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
430.050
AO:546
Section 430.050. Permitted Use. [Ord. No. 7831 §1, 3-14-2016]
Section 430.060. Special Use Permit Required. [Ord. No. 7831 §1,
3-14-2016]
A. Permitted Use. The placement of wireless communications facilities is
permitted in commercial and industrial zoning districts only as follows:
1. The attachment of additional or replacement complying antennas
or equipment to any existing fully conforming wireless
communications facility as authorized by State or Federal law
where local zoning is preempted, provided that building permit
requirements, national safety codes, and other applicable codes,
including recognized accepted industry standards for structural,
safety, capacity, reliability, and engineering, are satisfied, including
specifically the requirement to submit a certified structural
engineering report as provided in Section 430.040(A)(2).
2. The mounting of antennas on any existing and conforming building
or structure other than a support structure (such as a water tower),
provided that the presence of the antennas and equipment is
concealed by architectural elements or fully camouflaged and
concealed by painting a color identical to the surface to which they
are attached and further provided that all requirements of this
Chapter and the underlying zoning ordinance are met. Any use
authorized under this requirement shall meet the antenna design
[Section 430.040(A)(7)(c)] requirements for a disguised structure
in order to qualify as a permitted use.
3. The mounting of antennas on or within any existing high-voltage
electric transmission tower, but not exceeding the height of such
tower by more than ten (10) feet, provided that all requirements of
this Chapter and the underlying zoning ordinance are met, except
minimum setbacks provided in this Chapter shall not apply.
B. Application. Application for a permitted use under this Section shall
require submission of an application and an application fee of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) as required to cover the actual costs, but not
to exceed such amounts as may be limited by law.
A. Special Use Permit Required. All proposals to construct or modify a
wireless communications facilities not permitted by Section 430.050
(Permitted Uses) or not fully complying with the general requirements
shall be permitted only in a commercial or industrial district (unless
otherwise required by law) upon the approval of a special use permit
authorized consistent with Article V, Special Uses, of Chapter 405 of
this Zoning Code following a duly advertised public hearing by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and Governing Body, subject to the
following additional limitations:
Section
430.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.060
AO:547
1. Applications. Applications for special use permits shall be filed on
such forms required by the Director and processed subject to the
requirements of and in the manner and time frame as established
for special use permits in the Zoning Code and, in addition to such
other requirements, shall be accompanied by a deposit of one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). Except as otherwise
provided by law, no application for a special use permit under this
Section shall be deemed complete until the applicant has paid all
fees and deposits required under this Chapter. Any amount not
used by the City shall be refunded to the applicant upon written
request after a final decision. Applications requesting any
information that is prohibited by Federal or State law under the
applicable circumstance shall be deemed inapplicable to the
subject application.
2. Decision and findings required. A decision shall be
contemporaneously accompanied by substantial evidence
supporting the decision, which shall be made a part of the written
record of the meeting at which a final decision on the application is
rendered. Evidence may be submitted with the application or
thereafter, or presented during the public hearing by the applicant
or others.
3. Findings required. In addition to the determinations or limitations
specified herein and by Article V, Special Uses, of Chapter 405 of
this Zoning Code for the consideration of special use permits, no
special use permit shall be approved by the Governing Body unless
findings in the affirmative are made that the following conditions
exist:
a. That the design of the wireless communications facilities,
including ground layout, maximally reduces visual degradation
and otherwise complies with provisions and intent of this
Chapter. New towers shall be of a monopole design; and
b. That the design is a disguised support structure, or that a
disguised support is not feasible.
c. That the proposal fully complies with applicable law, including
the general requirements herein; provided that an exception to
the general requirements, other than building or safety code
compliance, may be approved upon evidence that compliance
is not feasible or is shown to be unreasonable under the
specific circumstances shown.
B. Additional Height Limitations. No tower shall be approved at a height
exceeding one hundred fifty (150) feet AGL unless the applicant clearly
demonstrates that such height is required for the proper function of the
applicant's system or that of a public safety communications system of a
governmental entity using the tower.
Section
430.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
430.060
AO:548
Section 430.070. Commercial Operation of Unlawful wireless
communications facilities. [Ord. No. 7831 §1, 3-14-2016]
Notwithstanding any right that may exist for a governmental entity to
operate or construct wireless communications facilities, it shall be unlawful
for any person to erect or operate for any private commercial purpose
any wireless communications facilities in violation of any provision of this
Chapter, regardless of whether such wireless communications facilities are
located on land owned by a governmental entity.
Section 430.080. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 7831 §1,
3-14-2016]
Except as may otherwise be provided by law, any person violating any
prohibition in this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or ninety (90) days in jail or both. Each day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 430.090. Appeals. [Ord. No. 7831 §1, 3-14-2016]
The administrative review procedures set forth in Article III of Chapter 100
("Board of Code Appeals") shall govern appeals by any aggrieved person
of a final action of any City Officer, employee, board, commission, or the
Board of Aldermen that are claimed by an aggrieved person to be unlawful
or an unconstitutional taking of property without compensation. To the
fullest extent permitted by law, the review procedures of Article III shall be
exhausted before any action may be filed in any court against the City or its
officers, employees, boards, officials or commissions.
Chapter 500
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 500.010. Purpose. [R.O. 2008 §500.020; Ord. No. 5073 §1,
7-13-1992]
The provisions of this Code shall delete the administrative organization and
enforcement rules and regulations for the technical codes and demolition
code and substitute in lieu thereof, those codes which regulate the site
C. Historic Preservation; Thirty-Day Hearing Period. A special use permit
shall not be issued for any wireless communications facilities that the
Governing Body determines would create a significant negative visual
impact or otherwise have a significant negative impact on the historical
character and quality of any property within a historic preservation
district or such district as a whole. For collocation of any certified
historic structure as defined in Section 253.545, RSMo., in addition to
all other applicable time requirements, there shall be a thirty-day time
period before approval of an application during which one or more
public hearings on collocation to a certified historic structure are held.
Section
430.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.010
AO:549
preparation and construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair, use
and occupancy of buildings, structures and building service equipment
within this jurisdiction.
Section 500.020. License Requirements. [R.O. 2008 §500.030; Ord.
No. 5073 §1, 7-13-1992; Ord. No. 5098 §1, 11-9-1992; Ord. No. 6024
§1, 1-26-1998; Ord. No. 6692 §§1 — 2, 9-27-2004]
A. Electrician License Required. No person shall install, repair or remove
any electrical wiring or equipment or otherwise engage in the practice
or business of electrical work without first securing a license therefor
from the City Clerk.
B. Mechanical Installer's License Required. No person shall install, repair
or remove any mechanical equipment or an integral part thereof or
otherwise engage in the practice or business of mechanical work
without first securing a license from the City Clerk.
C. Plumbing License Required. No person shall engage in the practice of
plumbing or otherwise engage in the practice of business of plumbing
without first securing a license from the City Clerk.
D. Contractor's License Required. No person or firm shall engage in the
practice of building, roofing, siding or concrete work without first
securing a license from the City Clerk. A contractor's license shall also
be required for any person or firm engaging in any land disturbing
activity, including, but not limited to, bulldozing, grading or any landdisturbing
activity where the area of land actually disturbed by the
activity is in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet.
E. Exception Single-Family Dwelling Owner. No license shall be required
for a bona fide owner/ occupant of a single-family dwelling which is to
be occupied exclusively for living purposes, to do any work regulated by
the Plumbing Code, Electrical Code, Mechanical Code or Building Code
of the said dwelling and any of its accessory buildings and quarters on
the condition that the said owner personally occupies the structure for
one (1) year and purchases all material and permits, call for proper
inspection, and perform all labor in connection therewith. No more than
one (1) permit will be issued within a five (5) year period unless the
owner/occupant has occupied the structure at least one (1) year after
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
F. Responsibility Of Licensed Professional. All electrical, plumbing,
building and mechanical work performed by any partnership, firm or
corporation engaged in the business of performing such work shall be
supervised by one (1) or more licensed professionals who shall be
responsible for all work performed, and said licensed professional shall
be a partner, member or officer of such partnership, firm or
corporation.
Section
500.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
500.030
AO:550
Section 500.030. Licensing Procedure. [R.O. 2008 §500.040; Ord.
No. 5073 §1, 7-13-1992; Ord. No. 6956 §1, 11-26-2007]
Section 500.040. License Fee. [R.O. 2008 §500.050; Ord. No. 5073
§1, 7-13-1992; Ord. No. 5081 §1, 8-10-1992; Ord. No. 6956 §1,
11-26-2007]
A. Application For License. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to
secure an electrician's, plumber's, mechanical or contractor's license
shall make written application to the City Clerk on forms provided
therefore stating the name and address of said person or employee in
whose name said license is to be issued, together with such additional
information concerning his/her qualifications that may be reasonably
required. Any person, firm or corporation holding an electrician,
plumber, mechanical or contractor's license from the City upon the
effective date of this Chapter (November 26, 2007), those holding a
valid trade or business license are "grandfathered" in.
B. Term Of License. All licenses issued during any year, unless sooner
revoked, shall expire on December thirty-first (31st) of that year and
may be renewed during the month of January of the year following its
issuance upon payment of the renewal fee herein specified. No
electrician, plumber or mechanical license shall be renewed more than
six (6) months after its expiration, but may be reissued by examination.
Such license shall not be transferable.
C. Code Updates. At such time the City accepts the Code updates, the City
shall conduct seminars one (1) day a week for one (1) month on
alternate days. All contractors shall be required to attend their
respective trade seminar. Failure to attend will result in the mandatory
retesting for their respective license.
A. Annual License. The annual license fee shall be paid to the City Clerk
before any license or renewal thereof is issued. Every license holder
must maintain a place of business known to the City Clerk.
License Annual Fee
Electrical $ 175.00
Plumbing $175.00
Mechanical $175.00
Contractors $175.00
B. Examination. The applicant shall be examined by a written objective
examination in compliance with State Statutes and approved by the
City Manager to determine that the applicant is knowledgeable of the
practice of electrical, plumbing or mechanical work and the provisions
of the applicable building codes of the City. If the applicant correctly
answers at least seventy percent (70%) of the questions, he/she shall be
promptly certified as passing.
Section
500.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.040
AO:551
Section 500.050. Insurance Requirements. [R.O. 2008 §500.070;
Ord. No. 5073 §1, 7-13-1992; Ord. No. 5081 §1, 8-10-1992; Ord. No.
6956 §1, 11-26-2007]
Section 500.060. Revocation of License. [R.O. 2008 §500.080; Ord.
No. 5073 §1, 7-13-1992]
1. Before any first (1st) time license is issued, the applicant shall
possess the appropriate, code book and make payment for
examination as follows:
Trade Fee
Electrical $50.00
Plumbing $50.00
Mechanical $50.00
2. Any person who fails to pass a written examination may be reexamined
twice at intervals of at least thirty (30) days. If an
applicant fails after three (3) attempts to obtain a passing score on
the written examination, no further examination shall be made
except upon payment of a new examination fee.
3. The City Clerk shall not issue a license without examination
passage for the electrical, plumbing and mechanical licenses.
A. All contractors shall show proof of general liability insurance of no less
than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) prior to issuance of
license.
B. Such insurance coverage shall indemnify the City and save it harmless
against any and all claims, demands or causes of action whatsoever
which might arise or accrue against it by reason of the granting of such
permit or the exercise of any privilege thereby conferred and to repay
all damages which may be suffered by the City or by any other person
by reason of the exercise of the permit.
A. The City Manager or his/her appointed representative shall have the
power and authority to suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant
to this Chapter for any violation, upon written notice containing
grounds therefor, which notice shall be by certified mail to the licensee.
Licenses may be removed if the license was obtained through error or
fraud; or the licensee shall have been found by the Code Enforcement
Officer to have willfully violated any provisions of the Electrical,
Mechanical, Plumbing or Building Codes of this Chapter; or shall have
forfeited the bond required herein; or shall refuse or neglect, within a
reasonable time, after notification to make such corrections to
electrical, mechanical, plumbing or construction work as ordered by
the inspector; or shall have permitted the use of his/her name by
another person to obtaining permits for doing electrical, mechanical,
plumbing or construction work under the license; or for any other good
Section
500.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
500.060
AO:552
or sufficient cause. A person or firm whose license has been revoked
shall not be permitted to apply for a new license within one (1) year
from the date of revocation. A person whose license has been revoked
and who is reapplying for a new license shall be re-examined and pay
such fees as required for a new license.
B. Appeal. Any individual aggrieved by the actions of the City Manager or
his/her appointed representative pursuant to the authority set forth in
Section 500.060 of the Municipal ordinances of the City of Maryville
shall be entitled to appeal said determination in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this Section. Said appeal shall be filed within
thirty (30) days from the date of service of the suspension or revocation
of license pursuant to this Chapter.
1. Form of appeal. The appeal filed pursuant to this Section shall be
instituted by filing at the office of the City Clerk a written appeal
containing the following:
a. A heading in the words: "Appeal of ........of......... "
b. A caption reading: "Appeal of ........." giving the names of all
appellants participating in the appeal.
c. A brief statement setting forth the legal interests of each of the
appellants as it relates to the determination of the City
Manager or his/her appointed representative in suspending or
revoking the license.
d. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the
specific order or action protested, together with any material
facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant.
e. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or
action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
f. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their
official mailing addresses.
g. The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at
least one (1) appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in
the appeal.
2. Processing of appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to
this Section, the City Clerk shall present it at the next regular or
special meeting of the Board of Appeals.
3. Scheduling and noticing appeal for hearing. As soon as practicable
after receiving the written appeal, the Board of Appeals shall fix a
date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the Board.
Such date shall not be less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty
(60) days from the date the appeal was filed with the City Clerk.
Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at
Section
500.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.060
AO:553
Section 500.070. Violation and Penalties. [R.O. 2008 §500.090; Ord.
No. 5073 §1, 7-13-1992]
Whether individually or as a member or employee of a partnership or as
an officer, agent or employee of a corporation who directs or knowingly
permits any violation of any of the provisions of the Electrical, Plumbing,
Mechanical or Building Code of this Chapter, or who aids or assists therein
or so violates any prohibition or mandate of this Chapter, shall upon
conviction thereof in Municipal Court, be guilty of a ordinance violation
punishable as provided in this Municipal Code. The practice of said work
on each separate job or at separate premises in violation of this Code shall
constitute a separate offense.
Section 500.080. Inspection Report Card. [R.O. 2008 §500.100; Ord.
No. 5073 §1, 7-13-1992]
New construction work requiring a permit shall not be commenced until the
permit holder or his/her authorized agent shall have posted or otherwise
made available a weatherproof depository adjacent to the public right-ofway
with the proper street addresses thereon in which inspection record
cards (inspection work orders) will be deposited with the required entries
thereon regarding the inspection work. This depository shall be maintained
by the permit holder until the final approval has been granted by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
Section 500.090. Building Permit Fees. [R.O. 2008 §500.110; Ord.
No. 5073 §1, 7-13-1992; Ord. No. 5167 §1, 9-13-1993; Ord. No. 6590
§1, 9-29-2003; Ord. No. 6617 §1, 2-9-2004]
least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant
by the Secretary of the Board either by causing a copy of such
notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a
copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the
address shown on the appeal.
4. Effect of failure to appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in
accordance with the provisions of this Section shall constitute a
waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of
the notice and order or any portion thereof.
5. Scope. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the
appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
6. Enforcement. Enforcement of any order of revocation or
suspension pursuant to this Section shall be stayed during the
pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.
A. Building Permit Fees.
Minimum fee $15.00
All areas for new construction or addition $0.05/sq. ft.
Section
500.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
500.090
AO:554
(includes garage, unfinished basements and
commercial buildings)
Alterations to existing (remodeling, etc.) $15.00
All siding $15.00
Repair or shingling existing structure $0.75 per 100
sq. ft.
Swimming pools 1.00/1,000 gallons or fraction
thereof.
Minimum pool fee $20.00
B. Electrical Permit Fees.
New residential construction or addition $0.03/sq. ft.
(including unfinished basements)
Minimum fee $15.00
New commercial construction or addition $0.01/sq. ft.
Service disconnecting equipment $25.00
all amps
Additions to existing wiring and service $15.00
Temporary service $15.00
Signs and outline lighting $15.00
C. Mechanical Permit Fees.
Electric, gas or oil-fired heating furnace $20.00
(floor mounted air handler — all fuels)
A/C or heat pump $15.00
Ceiling suspended furnace (all fuels) $15.00
Boiler unit $15.00
Roof-mounted heating or A/C unit $15.00
Cooling tower unit $50.00
Air or fluid circulating solar panel $15.00
Water heater (see Plumbing)
Refrigeration unit $15.00
D. Plumbing Permit Fees.
Sewer tap inspection $20.00
Water meter inspection $20.00
Dig permit $25.00
Installation or replacement $5.00
Each plumbing fixture
Section
500.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.090
AO:555
Alteration of DWV/potable water system $5.00
Water heater $5.00
Installation, repair or replacement $5.00
Water treatment equipment
Lawn sprinkler system $25.00
Backflow prevention devices $15.00
Double-check and reduced pressure
Waste pretreatment interceptor $12.00
Private sewage disposal system $45.00
Sewer tap/potable water main taps — See Section
705.730
E. Miscellaneous Fees.
Building moving over 120 square feet $50.00
Building demolition:
Minimum $25.00
First floor $0.01/sq. ft.
All additional floors $0.015/sq. ft.
Water/sewer disconnect deposit:
Water $400.00
Sewer $300.00
Driveway permits:
Residential $15.00
Other $20.00
Sidewalk repair and/or construction $15.00
Fence $10.00
Excavation/street cuts:
Subgrade fill $0.46/cu. ft.
Surface repair (asphalt permanent street) $4.50/sq. ft.
Non-permanent street $3.00/sq. ft.
If the City performs street cleanup and materials
removal, charge is
$88.00 per hour
Minimum charge $50.00
Investigation fee $50.00
(Added to permit application for work
performed without proper permit)
F. An electrical, plumbing, mechanical or building installation or repair
that involves total labor and materials less than one hundred fifty
Section
500.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
500.090
AO:556
Section 500.100. Payment of Permit Fees. [R.O. 2008 §500.120; Ord.
No. 5374 §1, 1-15-1996]
dollars ($150.00) shall not require a permit. However, use of this
exception to the permit requirement shall be limited to only one (1)
such use at any one (1) address within any thirty (30) day time period.
In the event a second (2nd) electrical, plumbing, mechanical or building
installation or repair shall occur at said address within a thirty (30) day
time period, a permit shall be required even if said second (2nd) repair
involves less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in total labor and
material.
A. Any individual, business, company, corporation or organization which
files for permits under the ordinances of the City of Maryville, Missouri,
shall be responsible for satisfying the applicable costs of said use as
established by the City of Maryville, Missouri. Unless the entity using
said facility has complied with the further provisions of this Section and
has been granted periodic billing status, the costs incurred shall be
satisfied at the time the permit is requested.
B. A user may apply for periodic billing status by filing an application for
periodic billing status with the City Treasurer of the City of Maryville,
Missouri.
C. Within seven (7) days of the receipt of said application, the City
Treasurer or his/her designated assistant shall notify applicant of the
granting or denial of period billing status.
D. Periodic billing status shall be granted only to applicants who meet at
least one (1) of the following:
1. The applicant has incurred charges at the City of Maryville,
Missouri, in a cumulative amount of at least two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) during the eighteen (18) months immediately
preceding the filing of the application, provided that said applicant
has satisfied the charges when incurred and does not have any
financial balance with the City of Maryville, Missouri, which is past
due; or
2. The applicant deposits with the City Treasurer an irrevocable cash
deposit, payable to the City of Maryville, Missouri, in the amount
set forth by this Section, or files an irrevocable letter of credit in
favor of the City of Maryville, Missouri, as approved by the City
Attorney, in an amount not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
E. In the event an applicant is granted periodic billing status, the debts
incurred shall be billed to the applicant by the City Treasurer or his/her
designated agent on not less than a monthly basis and shall be satisfied
by the applicant within thirty (30) days of the date of the billing
statement.
Section
500.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.100
AO:557
Chapter 505
HOUSING CODE
Section 505.010. Substandard Building — Defined. [R.O. 2008
§505.010; Ord. No. 6845 §§1 — 2, 7-10-2006]
Any building or structure which fails to meet the minimum standards as
promulgated by the International Property Maintenance Code as
established in Chapter 511 of this Code.
F. The periodic billing status granted to an applicant may be revoked,
withdrawn or terminated by the City Manager of the City of Maryville,
Missouri, upon occurrence of any of the following:
1. Failure to satisfy any billing statement for debts incurred at the
City of Maryville, Missouri, within thirty (30) days of the date of the
billing statement.
2. Incurring charges equal to or in excess of the irrevocable cash
deposit or irrevocable letter of credit.
3. Good cause as documented by the Director of Public Works, City
Treasurer or City Manager.
G. Any entity whose periodic billing status is revoked, withdrawn or
terminated shall be notified of said act by certified mail to the entity at
their last known address or the address on their application for periodic
billing status, whichever is more recent. Said notice shall be mailed
within five (5) days of the revocation, withdrawal or termination of said
status.
H. Any entity, including any individual, business, company, corporation or
organization which has been denied periodic billing status or has had
its periodic billing status revoked, withdrawn or terminated pursuant to
this Section may appeal said decision to the Council of the City of
Maryville, Missouri, by filing a Notice of Appeal with the City Clerk
within thirty (30) days of said denial, revocation, withdrawal or
termination. The Council of the City of Maryville, Missouri, shall then
hold a hearing, receive evidence under oath, and render a decision
either affirming or reversing the decision to deny, revoke, withdraw or
terminate periodic billing status. Said hearing shall be rendered within
thirty (30) days thereafter, unless said times are extended by mutual
agreement or for good cause shown.
I. Subject to limitation of Subsection (D) above, the maximum accrued
credit allowed under this Section shall be the sum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00).
Section
500.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
505.020
AO:558
Section 505.020. Substandard Buildings Declared Nuisances. [R.O.
2008 §505.020; Ord. No. 6845 §§1 — 2, 7-10-2006]
Each "substandard building" is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and
shall be repaired, vacated and/or demolished as further provided for herein.
Section 505.030. Standards for Repair, Vacation and/or Demolition.
[R.O. 2008 §505.030; Ord. No. 6845 §§1 — 2, 7-10-2006]
Section 505.040. Emergency Situations. [R.O. 2008 §505.040; Ord.
No. 6845 §§1 — 2, 7-10-2006]
In any case where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to
the health, life or safety of any person or to any adjacent property unless the
A. The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Code
Enforcement Officer and the Board of Code of Appeals in the ordering
repair, vacation and/or demolition of a substandard building:
1. If the substandard building can reasonably be repaired so that it
will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this Chapter, it shall
be ordered repaired and all design, construction and workmanship
shall conform with accepted industry standards or the Housing
Code of the City of Maryville, whichever is most stringent. The
order shall require that all required permits be secured therefor
and the work physically commenced within such time (not to
exceed thirty (30) days from the date of the order) and completed
within such time as the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine
as reasonable in all of the circumstances (not to exceed one
hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the order).
2. If the substandard building is in such condition as to make it
dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of its occupants, it shall
be ordered to be vacated and either repaired or demolished, as is
appropriate under the circumstances. The order shall require that
the building or structure shall be vacated within a certain time
from the date of the order as determined by the Code Enforcement
Officer to be reasonable, not to exceed thirty (30) days from the
date of the order.
3. If the substandard building is damaged, decayed or deteriorated by
fifty percent (50%) or more based upon value of the structure and it
cannot be restored or repaired so that it will no longer exist in
violation of the terms of this Chapter, it shall be demolished.
4. If both the owner and all other persons having an interest in the
substandard building are unwilling to restore or repair the building
or structure, it shall be demolished.
5. If the substandard building is a fire hazard existing or erected in
violation of any code or ordinance of the City or any Statute of the
State of Missouri, it shall be demolished.
Section
505.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.040
AO:559
substandard building, as defined herein, is immediately repaired, vacated
or demolished, the Code Enforcement Officer shall report such facts to
the Board of Code Appeals and such Board, by resolution, may cause the
immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such substandard building. The
costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such substandard
building shall be collected in the same manner as provided by law.
Section 505.050. Duties of Code Enforcement Officer. [R.O. 2008
§505.050; Ord. No. 6845 §§1 — 2, 7-10-2006]
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have and perform the following
duties:
1. Notice of inspection. In the event the inspection to be undertaken
by the Code Enforcement Officer is an inspection limited to the
exterior of the building or structure, prior notice to the owner of
the building of the inspection shall not be required. However, in the
event said inspection includes an inspection of the interior of the
building or structure, notice in accordance with the procedures of
this Subsection shall be provided.
a. Prior to conducting the interior inspection pursuant to this
Section, the Code Enforcement Officer shall make reasonable,
diligent efforts to provide the record owner of the building to
be inspected forty-eight (48) hours' notice in advance of the
inspection and to inform the owner of their right to accompany
the Code Enforcement Officer during the inspection. In the
event the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to provide the
notice envisioned herein, the Code Enforcement Officer may
proceed to inspect the interior premises. However, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall document all attempts to provide
notice to the owner.
b. In the event an inspection involves an "emergency situation",
wherein it reasonably appears there is immediate danger to
health, life or safety of any person or any adjacent property,
said inspection may occur without the forty-eight (48) hours'
notice in advance of the inspection to the property owner. As
used in this Section, the term "emergency situation" shall
include the following:
(1) Structural failure, including a roof, floor, stairs, foundation
having collapsed or in danger of collapse;
(2) Electrical wiring failure, including complaints of "hot"
wires, sparks, shock, repetitive failure of fuses or
repetitive failure of circuit breakers;
(3) Sewage back-ups, including chronic problems of sewage
backing up into the premises or the collection of methane
Section
505.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
505.050
AO:560
gas in the dwelling or noxious odors emanating from the
sewer system;
(4) Gas leaks, including natural gas odors in the premises or
gas appliances which are suspected of malfunction;
(5) Mechanical failures, including elevators, which have
malfunctioned or which are in danger of malfunction;
(6) Possession, maintenance or retention of hazardous
materials on the premises, including explosives and toxic
chemicals;
(7) A complaint which has been prompted by a serious injury
occurring on the premises;
(8) Excessive infestation of rodents and/or insects;
(9) Excessive accumulation of garbage or debris.
In each instance, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall document the basis for concluding the
existence of the emergency situation.
2. Inspection. The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
a. Inspect or cause to be inspected, as often as may be necessary,
all residential, commercial, industrial institution, accessory,
garage, assembly, special or miscellaneous occupancy
buildings for the purpose of determining whether any
conditions exist which render such place to be a substandard
building.
b. Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints
are filed by any person alleging that such building, wall or
structure is or may be existing in violation of this Chapter.
3. Determination and order.
a. The Code Enforcement Officer shall set forth a description of
the building or structure deemed to be dangerous and a
statement of the particulars which made the building or
structure a "substandard building".
b. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the building
or structure is a substandard building which must be repaired,
the order shall require that all required permits be secured
therefor and the work physically commenced within a specific
time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of the order
unless, in the judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer, it is
determined to be necessary to extend such time to commence
the required work. The order shall further require that the
work proceed continuously without unnecessary delay, so as to
Section
505.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.050
AO:561
complete said work within a reasonable time, but not to exceed
one hundred eighty (180) days.
c. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the building
or structure is a substandard building which must be vacated,
the order shall require that the building or structure shall be
vacated within a certain time from the date of the order as
determined to be reasonable by the Code Enforcement Officer.
d. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the building
or structure is a substandard building which must be
demolished, the order shall require that the building be
demolished within such time as the Code Enforcement Officer
shall determine reasonable, but not to exceed thirty (30) days
from the date of the order and that all required permits be
secured therefor within thirty (30) days from the date of the
order.
e. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the building
or structure is not a substandard building, then no order shall
be issued.
4. Posting of notice. Upon completion of the inspection of a building
or structure and upon making a determination that said building or
structure is a substandard building as defined in Section 505.010
herein, the Code Enforcement Officer shall post a notice on such
building or structure which shall be substantially in the following
form, but may include other information.
"This building has been found to be a substandard building by the
Code Enforcement Officer. This notice is to remain on this building
until it is repaired, vacated and repaired or vacated and demolished
in accordance with the notice which has been given the known
owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent of this building and
all other persons having an interest in such building as shown by
the land records of the Recorder of Deeds of Nodaway County. It is
unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with.
All persons are hereby notified to keep out as long as this notice
remains posted. Any persons) willfully destroying, mutilating or
removing this notice or entering this structure will be prosecuted
to the full extent of the law."
Provided however, that the posting of such notice shall not be
construed to deprive any person entitled thereto by this Chapter to
the notice and hearing as prescribed herein.
5. Service of notice and order. The notice and order, and any amended
or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record
owner of the substandard building and posted on the property.
Additionally, one (1) copy shall be served on each of the following if
known to the Code Enforcement Officer or disclosed from the land
records of the Recorder of Deeds of Nodaway County, Missouri:
Section
505.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
505.050
AO:562
a. The holder of any mortgage, deed of trust or other lien or
encumbrance of record;
b. The owner or holder of any lease of record;
c. The holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or
to the building or the land on which it is located;
d. Any tenant in possession of the premises.
6. Method of service.
a. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons
entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such
notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, to each
such person at his/her address as it appears on the last
equalized assessment roll of Nodaway County or as known to
the Code Enforcement Officer. [Ord. No. 7211 §1,
5-10-2010]
b. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the
Code Enforcement Officer, then notice shall be had by
publication in a newspaper qualified to publish legal notices at
least fourteen (14) days in advance of any hearing date,
specifically addressed to the person for whom no address is
known and all other persons having an interest in said building
that has been found to be a "substandard building" within the
standards set forth in Section 505.020 of this Chapter and shall
set forth the requirements of the determination and order of
the Code Enforcement Officer.
c. The Code Enforcement Officer shall ensure that each person
entitled to notice pursuant to this Section is advised in writing
of their right to request a hearing and shall provide
information concerning the procedure therefore.
7. Proof of service. If service is obtained by personal service, proof of
service of the notice and order shall be certified as to the time of
service by a written declaration executed by the person effecting
service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was
made. This declaration, together with any receipt verification in
acknowledgement of receipt by certified mail, shall be affixed to the
copy of the notice and order retained by the Code Enforcement
Officer. [Ord. No. 7211 §1, 5-10-2010]
8. Failure of service. The failure of the Code Enforcement Officer to
serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate
any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served, nor
shall it relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed
by the provisions of this Section.
Section
505.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.050
AO:563
Section 505.060. Appeal to the Board of Code Appeals. [R.O. 2008
§505.060; Ord. No. 6845 §§1 — 2, 7-10-2006]
9. Report. The Code Enforcement Officer shall make a report in
writing to the Board of Code Appeals for any non-compliance with
the notice and order to vacate, repair and/or demolish.
10. Appearance. The Code Enforcement Officer shall appear at all
hearings conducted by the Board of Code Appeals pursuant to this
Chapter and shall testify as to the condition of substandard
buildings.
A. Appeal. Any person entitled to service of the notice and order of the
Code Enforcement Officer may appeal from any such notice and order
or any other action of the Code Enforcement Officer under this Chapter
by filing at the office of the Department of Public Works a written
appeal containing:
1. A heading in the words: "Before the Board of Code Appeals of the
City of Maryville, Missouri. . . ".
2. A caption reading: "Appeals of. .......... " giving the names of all
appellants participating in the appeal.
3. A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the
appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and
order.
4. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of that specific
order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed
to support the contentions of the appellant. Only those matters or
issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the
hearing of the appeal.
5. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or
action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
6. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official
mailing addresses.
7. The verification by declaration under penalty of perjury of at least
one (1) appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
B. Fees. The fee for such appeal shall be one hundred twenty-five dollars
($125.00) and shall accompany the application for appeal. The
application fee shall not be refundable.
C. Timing Of Appeal. The appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days from
the date of the service of such notice and order or action of the Code
Enforcement Officer. However, if the building or structure is in such
condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the health, life or
safety of any person or any adjacent property as defined in Section
Section
505.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
505.060
AO:564
Section 505.070. Board of Code Appeals. [R.O. 2008 §505.070; Ord.
No. 6845 §§1 — 2, 7-10-2006]
The provisions of the Municipal Code of the City of Maryville, establishing
a Board of Code Appeals, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part
of this Section as completely as if fully set out herein, with the duties
and powers as set forth in Section 505.080 herein in addition to all other
powers, duties and responsibilities referred to in Chapter 110, Article III of
Title I of the Municipal Code of the City of Maryville.
Section 505.080. Duties of Board of Code Appeals. [R.O. 2008
§505.080; Ord. No. 6845 §§1 — 2, 7-10-2006]
505.020 and is ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with
Section 505.050(4), such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from
the date of the service of the notice and order of the Code Enforcement
Officer.
D. Stay Of Order. Except for orders to vacate the premises made pursuant
to Section 505.040, enforcement of any notice and order of the Code
Enforcement Officer issued under this Chapter shall be stayed during
the pendency of a properly and timely filed appeal.
E. Failure To Appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance
with the provisions of this Section shall constitute a waiver of the right
to request an administrative hearing and adjudication on the notice and
order or to any portion thereof.
A. The Board of Code Appeals shall have and perform the following duties
pursuant to this Chapter:
1. Date of hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving the written
appeal under Section 505.060 or after the receipt of the report of
the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to Section 505.050, the
Board of Code Appeals shall fix a date, time and place for the
hearing. Such date shall be not less than ten (10) days nor more
than sixty (60) days from the date the appeal was filed with the
office of the Department of Public Works or from the date the Code
Enforcement Officer filed the report with the Board, whichever is
applicable, unless continued by the Board of Code Appeals for good
cause shown.
2. Notice. The notice shall be substantially in the following form, but
may include other information:
"You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the
Board of Code Appeals at . . . on the . . . day of. . . 20. . ., at the
hour. . ., related to the property described as. . . , to show cause
why the building or structure reported to be a substandard building
should not be repaired, vacated and/or demolished in accordance
with the state of particulars set forth in the Code Enforcement
Section
505.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.080
AO:565
Officer's notice as provided for in this Chapter. You maybe present
at the hearing. You may present any relevant evidence and will
be given full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying
against you."
Said notice shall advise the recipient of the procedures involved in
the hearing pursuant to this Section.
3. Service of notice. Written notice of the time and location of the
hearing and any amended or supplemental notice shall be served
upon each appellant and/or the record owner of the substandard
building. Additionally, one (1) copy shall be served on each of the
following if known to the Board of Code Appeals or disclosed from
the land records of the Recorder of Deeds of Nodaway County,
Missouri:
a. The holder of any mortgage, deed of trust or other lien or
encumbrance of record;
b. The owner or holder of any lease of record;
c. The holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or
to the building or the land on which it is located; and
d. Any tenant in possession of the premises.
4. Method of service. [Ord. No. 7537 §1, 6-24-2013]
a. Service of the notice of the hearing shall be made upon all
persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy
of such notice by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested, to each such person at his/her address as it appears
on the last equalized assessment roll of Nodaway County or as
known to the Board of Code Appeals. If served personally,
personal service shall be made no less than fourteen (14) days
prior to the hearing date. If served by mailing a copy by
certified mail, the certified mailing shall be delivered to a
United States Post Office mailbox at least twenty-one (21) days
prior to the hearing date.
b. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the
Board of Code Appeals, then notice shall be given by
publication in a newspaper qualified to publish legal notices at
least fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing date, specifically
addressed to the person for whom no address is known and
other persons having an interest in said building, to appear
before the Board of Code Appeals on the date specified and to
show cause why the structure or building reported to be a
substandard building should not be repaired, vacated or
demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set
forth in the Code Enforcement Officer's notice or decision. Said
Section
505.080
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
505.080
AO:566
notice shall notify the recipient of the procedures involved in
the hearing pursuant to this Section.
5. Proof of service. If service is obtained by personal service, proof of
service of the notice and order shall be certified as to the time of
service by a written declaration executed by the person effecting
service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was
made. This declaration, together with any receipt card returned in
acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail, shall be affixed to the
copy of the notice and order retained by the Board of Code Appeals.
6. Failure of service. The failure of the Board of Code Appeals to serve
any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any
proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or
relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the
provisions of this Section.
7. Hearing. Upon receipt of the report of the Code Enforcement
Officer or a duly filed appeal and after having given the required
notice, the Board of Code Appeals shall hold a full and adequate
hearing and hear such relevant testimony as the Code Enforcement
Officer, any appellant, the record owner and any other person
entitled to service of notice shall offer relative to the substandard
building.
8. Decision. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Code
Appeals shall make written findings of fact based upon competent
and substantial evidence offered at the hearing as to whether or
not the building in question is a substandard building and:
a. If the evidence supports a finding that the building or structure
is a substandard building detrimental to the health, life or
safety of any person or to any adjacent property, the Board of
Code Appeals shall issue an order based upon the findings of
fact commanding the appellant and/or record owner, as well as
any other person entitled to notice of the hearing, to vacate
and ordering the demolition of the building or structure.
b. The appellant and/or the record owner, as well as any other
person entitled to notice of the hearing, shall have the privilege
of either repairing or vacating and repairing said building, if
such repair will bring such building into compliance with the
ordinances and codes of the City of Maryville, provided that
such repair is completed within sixty (60) days of the order
being entered by the Board of Code Appeals.
c. The appellant and/or the record owner, as well as any other
person entitled to notice of the hearing, shall have the privilege
of vacating and demolishing said substandard building at their
own risk to prevent the City of Maryville from acquiring a lien
against said land on which the substandard building is located,
Section
505.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.080
AO:567
Section 505.090. Recording of Certificate of Substandard Building.
[R.O. 2008 §505.090; Ord. No. 6845 §§1 — 2, 7-10-2006]
Section 505.100. Failure to Comply With Board Decision — Lien.
[R.O. 2008 §505.100; Ord. No. 6845 §§1 — 2, 7-10-2006]
provided that such demolition is completed within sixty (60)
days of the order being entered by the Board of Code Appeals.
d. If the evidence does not support a finding that the building or
structure is a substandard building, then no order shall be
issued.
e. The findings of fact shall be in writing and shall contain
findings, a determination of the issues presented and an order
as to any requirements to be satisfied. A copy of the decision
shall be personally delivered to the appellant and/or the record
owner, as well as any other person entitled to notice of the
hearing, or shall be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid,
return receipt requested to each such person. The effective
date of the decision shall be as stated therein.
A. Non-Compliance. If compliance is not had with the order of the Board of
Code Appeals within the time provided and no appeal is properly and
timely filed, a certificate shall be filed in the Recorder's office of
Nodaway County, Missouri, certifying:
1. The legal description and street address of the property;
2. The building is a substandard building;
3. The landowner and all other persons with known interests of
record in the property have been so notified;
4. The decision rendered by the Board of Code Appeals.
B. Subsequent Compliance. In the event that, subsequent to the filing of
the certificate of substandard building, the corrections ordered shall be
completed or the building demolished so that the building or structure
no longer exists as a substandard building on the property described in
the certificate, a new certificate shall be filed in the Recorder's office of
Nodaway County, Missouri, certifying that the building is no longer a
substandard building.
A. Non-Compliance. If within sixty (60) days, the record owner, appellant
or any other person entitled to service of notice pursuant to Section
505.080(3) fails to comply with the decision and order of the Board of
Code Appeals, the Code Enforcement Officer shall so advise the City
Manager who shall cause such building or structure to be repaired,
vacated and/or demolished as the facts may warrant.
B. Tax Bill.
Section
505.080
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
505.100
AO:568
Section 505.110. Appeal to Circuit Court. [R.O. 2008 §505.110; Ord.
No. 6845 §§1 — 2, 7-10-2006]
Within thirty (30) days from their receipt of the order of the Board of Code
Appeals, any person entitled to notice pursuant to Section 505.080 as to
a substandard building may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court of
Nodaway County pursuant to the procedure established in Chapter 536,
RSMo.
Section 505.120. Violations and Punishment. [R.O. 2008 §505.120;
Ord. No. 6845 §§1 — 2, 7-10-2006]
1. Whenever the City shall have caused repair or demolition work to
be completed as provided in Chapter 540 of the Municipal Code of
the City of Maryville, the Director of Public Works shall certify the
costs of the repair or demolition work to the City Clerk who shall
cause a special tax bill to be issued against the lot, tract or parcel of
land until paid and shall cause the same to be registered in the
Office of the Recorder of Nodaway County and to be mailed by
certified mail to all owners of record of the property. The tax bill
shall be collected by the official collecting taxes.
2. Upon written request of the taxpayer delivered to the City Clerk
within thirty (30) days after completion of the demolition or repair
work, a tax bill for demolition of a building or structure may be paid
in ten (10) equal, annual installments, which installments, with
interest thereon to date on the unpaid balance, shall be due
annually on the anniversary of the date of issuance of the bill.
Interest shall be paid at the maximum rate per annum allowable by
law on the unpaid balance of the special assessment computed
from the date of issuance. If any annual payment of principal or
interest shall not be paid within thirty (30) days of its due date, the
entire remaining balance of the tax bill shall immediately become
due and payable.
3. If said request for the payment plan is not made within thirty (30)
days after the completion of the repair or demolition work, then the
entire tax bill shall be payable within sixty (60) days of issuance
with interest thereon.
4. Tax bills so issued shall be prima facie evidence of the validity of
the bill, the doing of the work and the liability of the property for
the damages stated in the bill if default should occur, said amounts
shall be collected by suit brought in a court of competent
jurisdiction by the City Attorney on behalf of the City.
A. It shall be a violation of this Chapter to:
1. Fail to comply with an order to repair, vacate and/or demolish any
building or structure which has been determined to be maintained
Section
505.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.120
AO:569
Section 505.130. Duties of the City Attorney. [R.O. 2008 §505.130;
Ord. No. 6845 §§1 — 2, 7-10-2006]
The City Attorney shall prosecute all persons failing to comply with the
terms of the notices and orders provided for herein; appear at all hearings
before the Board of Code of Appeals pursuant to this Chapter; bring suit
to collect all municipal liens, assessments or costs incurred by the City in
the repairing or demolishing of substandard buildings; and take all such
other legal actions as are necessary to carry out and enforce the terms and
provisions of this Chapter.
Section 505.140. Administrative Liability. [R.O. 2008 §505.140; Ord.
No. 6845 §§1 — 2, 7-10-2006]
No officer, agent, board, commission or employee of the City shall render
themselves personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons
or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge
in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer, unless an active appeal is pending thereon; or
2. Fail to diligently and timely repair any building or structure which
has been determined to be maintained in violation of the provisions
of this Chapter, as determined by the Board of Code Appeals, unless
an active appeal is pending thereon; or
3. Fail to proceed continuously with the repair or demolition of any
building or structure determined to be in violation of this Chapter
unless an active appeal is pending thereon; or
4. Fail to comply with an order to repair, vacate or demolish any
building or structure issued by the Board of Code Appeals unless an
active appeal is pending thereon; or
5. Remove, deface or mutilate the notice placed on any building or
structure; or
6. Violate any provision of this Chapter.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter or fails to
comply with any of the provisions or requirements thereof shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be
imprisoned for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after notice has
been issued shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
City from additionally instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct
or abate a violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure
or premises, to stop an illegal act, conduct business or utilization of the
building, structure or premises or take any other act as allowed by law
in addition to the penalties prescribed herein.
Section
505.120
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
505.140
AO:570
of their duties under this Chapter. Any suit brought against any officer,
agent, board, commission or employee of the City as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of their duties under this Chapter
shall be defended by the City Attorney until the final determination of the
proceedings therein.
Chapter 510
BUILDING CODE
Section 510.010. International Building Code. [R.O. 2008 §510.010;
Ord. No. 6437 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No.
7647 §2, 7-14-201469]
Section 510.020. Building Code Insertions. [R.O. 2008 §510.020;
Ord. No. 6437 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No.
7647 §1, 7-14-201470]
A. In order to establish minimum regulations governing the conditions and
maintenance of all property, buildings and structures by providing the
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things
and conditions essential to ensure the structures are safe, sanitary and
fit for occupation and use and to provide for the condemnation of
buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the
demolition of such structures, except for such portions as are herein
modified, added, deleted or amended within this Chapter, the
International Building Code, 2012 Edition, is hereby adopted and shall
be incorporated as if fully set forth herein and shall be hereafter known
as the "Building Code of the City of Maryville, Missouri," including the
following appendixes:
1. Appendix C-Group U-Agricultural Buildings;
2. Appendix F-Rodent Proofing;
3. Appendix I-Patio Covers.
4. Appendix K-Administrative Provisions.
A. The International Building Code, 2012 Edition, as adopted as the
Building Code of the City of Maryville, Missouri, is hereby subject to the
following insertions:
1. Section 101.1. The term "City of Maryville" shall be inserted.
2. Wherever a reference is made to "jurisdiction" within the
International Building Code, 2012 Edition, it shall be understood to
mean the City of Maryville, Missouri.
69.Editor’s Note: Section 8 of this ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2014.
70.Editor’s Note: Section 8 of this ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2014.
Section
505.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.030
AO:571
Section 510.030. International Building Code — Deletions. [R.O.
2008 §510.030; Ord. No. 6437 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7647 §3, 7-14-201471]
Section 510.040. (Reserved)72
Section 510.050. Work Exempt From Permit. [R.O. 2008 §510.050;
Ord. No. 6437 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No.
7647 §4, 7-14-201473]
A. Appendix A-Employee Qualifications.
B. Appendix B-Board of Appeals.
C. Appendix D-Fire Districts.
D. Appendix E-Supplementary Accessibility Requirements.
E. Appendix G-Flood Resistant Construction.
F. Appendix H-Signs.
G. Appendix J-Grading.
H. Appendix L-Earthquake Recording Instrumentation.
I. Appendix M-Tsunami-Generated Flood Hazard.
A. That portion of Section 105.2: Work Exempt from Permit of the
International Building Code, 2012 Edition, which is the Subsection
related to buildings, is deleted in its entirety and the following building
exemptions shall be enacted:
1. Building:
a. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and
storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor
area does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
b. Oil derricks.
c. Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does
not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons and the ratio of height
to diameter or width does not exceed two (2) to one (1).
d. Platforms, decks and porches not more than thirty (30) inches
above grade at any point and not over any basement or story
below and which are not part of an accessible route.
71.Editor’s Note: Section 8 of this ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2014.
72.Editor’s Note: Former Section 510.040, Fee Schedule, adopted and amended R.O. 2008
§510.040; Ord. No. 6437 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008, was repealed
7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 7647 §7.
73.Editor’s Note: Section 8 of this ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2014.
Section
510.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
510.050
AO:572
Section 510.060. Unsafe Structures and Equipment. [R.O. 2008
§510.060; Ord. No. 6437 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7647 §5, 7-14-201474]
Specific reference is made to Section 116: Unsafe Structures and
Equipment, of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, dealing with
the foregoing subject, which remains applicable. Additionally, cross
reference is made to Chapter 505, Housing Code, of the Municipal Code
of the City of Maryville and Chapter 530, Dangerous and Unsafe Buildings,
of the Municipal Code of the City of Maryville. Any conflicts between the
International Building Code, 2012 Edition, and Chapters 505 and 530 shall
be resolved in favor of the provisions in Chapter 505 and Chapter 530 of
the Municipal Code of the City of Maryville and against the International
Building Code, 2012 Edition.
Section 510.070. Signs. [R.O. 2008 §510.070; Ord. No. 6437 §1,
12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7647 §1,
7-14-201475]
Section 3107. Signs of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, is
deleted in its entirety. The construction, installation, maintenance and
removal of signs shall be in conformity with all other provisions of the
Municipal Code of the City of Maryville applicable to signs, including
specifically Chapter 555: Signs and Advertising.
Section 510.075. Miscellaneous Building Regulations. [Ord. No.
7830 §3, 3-14-2016]
e. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and
similar finish work.
f. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets
and scenery.
g. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3
occupancy, which are less than twenty-four (24) inches deep.
h. Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural
purposes and not including service systems.
i. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one-and
two-family dwellings.
j. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of Group R-3 as
applicable in Section 101.2 and Group U occupancies.
k. Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five (5) feet
nine (9) inches in height.
74.Editor’s Note: Section 8 of this ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2014.
75.Editor’s Note: Section 8 of this ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2014.
Section
510.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.075
AO:573
A. Support structures. Unless otherwise provided by law or variance, the
following additional requirements shall apply to the construction,
alteration or maintenance of support structures as defined by Section
430.020 of the Maryville Code:
1. Safety fall zone required. All new support structures and
extensions or attachments thereto and related buildings/structures
shall be separated by a safety fall zone from any public rights-ofway,
sidewalk or street, alley, parking area, playground, or building
(except for parking and buildings dedicated solely for access to or
maintenance of the support structure), and from any property line,
a distance equal to the height of the support structure. Support
structures shall be reasonably designed to reduce the potential
damage to persons or property from falling ice or equipment from
the support structures or from wind damage or structural failure.
2. In addition to other applicable requirements, the support
structures and any appurtenances shall be safely maintained and
fenced or otherwise secured to prevent unauthorized access or
climbing of the support structures. Barbed, electrified or razor wire
is prohibited in commercial districts. Support structures' legs shall
be of monopole design without use of lattice or guy wire support
and be engineered and designed with sufficient depth, counterweight
and other mechanisms to address wind-loading and other
failure risks under all reasonably anticipated conditions and
circumstances.
3. Support structures may be lighted at the base of the structure for
security purposes but only when approved by the Director or by the
Governing Body in the case of a special use permit, after
submission of a description of the proposed lighting scheme as part
of the application to install, build, alter or modify the support
structure and a finding by the City that such lighting shall not
unreasonably shine on residential property or otherwise be
detrimental to property values or the general character of the
surrounding area. Lighting may also be approved as a consistent
component of a disguised support structure. Equipment cabinets
and shelters may have lighting only as approved by the Director or
Governing Body on the approved site plan.
4. Before any modifications or alterations to an existing support
structure may be approved, a sealed structural analysis from a
certified engineer must be submitted to the City in accordance with
Section 430.040.A of the Code.
B. Appeals. The administrative review procedures set forth in Article III of
Chapter 100 ("Board of Code Appeals") shall govern appeals by any
aggrieved person of a final action of any City Officer, employee, board,
commission, or the Board of Aldermen that are claimed by an aggrieved
person to be unlawful or an unconstitutional taking of property without
compensation. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the review
Section
510.075
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
510.075
AO:574
Section 510.080. Appeals. [R.O. 2008 §510.080; Ord. No. 6437 §1,
12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7647 §6,
7-14-201476]
Section 113. Board of Appeals of the International Building Code, 2012
Edition, is deleted in its entirety. Any person aggrieved by a decision or
action of the Code Enforcement Officer or other designee of the Department
of Public Works under this Chapter may appeal such decision or action
to the Board of Code Appeals. Such appeal shall be in accordance with
the provisions of Sections 530.070, 530.080, 530.090 and 530.110 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Maryville, all of which are adopted herein by
reference as if set forth fully herein.
Section 510.090. Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §510.090]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or any portion of
the Code adopted in this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance
violation and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in the City or
County Jail for a period of not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Chapter 511
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section 511.010. International Property Maintenance Code. [R.O.
2008 §511.010; Ord. No. 6791 §1, 10-10-2005; Ord. No. 7014 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7649 §1, 7-14-2014]
In order to establish minimum requirements and standards for premises,
structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating,
sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and
other hazards and for safe and sanitary maintenance of premises; defining
the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; and for
administration and enforcement of penalties, except for such portions as
are herein modified, added, deleted or amended within this Chapter, the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, is hereby adopted
and incorporated as if fully set forth herein and shall be known as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Maryville, Missouri.
procedures of Article III shall be exhausted before any action may be
filed in any court against the City or its officers, employees, boards,
officials or commissions.
76.Editor’s Note: Section 8 of this ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2014.
Section
510.075
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
511.020
AO:575
Section 511.020. Property Maintenance Code — Insertions. [R.O.
2008 §511.020; Ord. No. 6791 §1, 10-10-2005; Ord. No. 7014 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7649 §1, 7-14-2014]
Section 511.030. Property Maintenance Code — Deletions. [R.O.
2008 §511.030; Ord. No. 6791 §1, 10-10-2005; Ord. No. 7014 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7649 §2, 7-14-2014]
A. The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, adopted
as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Maryville, Missouri, is
subject to the following insertions:
1. Section 101.1. The term "City of Maryville, Missouri" shall be
inserted.
2. Whenever reference is made to "jurisdiction" within the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, it shall be
understood to mean the City of Maryville, Missouri.
3. Section 304.14. Dates shall be inserted into this Section so as to be
effective during the period from April first (1st) to November first
(1st) each year.
4. Section 602.3. Dates shall be inserted into this Section so as to be
effective during the period from October first (1st) to May first (1st)
each year.
5. Section 602.4. Dates shall be inserted into this Section so as to be
effective during the period from October first (1st) to May first (1st)
each year.
A. The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, adopted
as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Maryville, Missouri, is
subject to the following deletions:
1. Section 102.6: Historic Buildings.
2. Section 103: Department of Property Maintenance Inspection.
3. Section 104.5: Notices and Orders.
4. Section 106: Violations.
5. Section 107: Notices and Orders.
6. Section 108: Unsafe Structures and Equipment.
7. Section 109: Emergency Measures.
8. Section 110: Demolition.
9. Section 111: Means of Appeals.
10. Section 302.4: Weeds.
Section
511.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
511.030
AO:576
Section 511.040. Property Maintenance Code — Modifications.
[R.O. 2008 §511.040; Ord. No. 6791 §1, 10-10-2005; Ord. No. 7014
§1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7649 §3, 7-14-2014]
11. Section 308: Rubbish and Garbage.
A. The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, adopted
as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Maryville, Missouri, is
subject to the following modifications:
1. Section 102.3. The reference to the ICC Electrical Code is deleted
and the term "National Electrical Code" shall be inserted therefor.
This code shall be construed to secure in its express intent, which
is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are
affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures
and premises. Repairs, alterations and additions to and change of
occupancy in existing buildings shall comply with the International
Building Code as adopted by the City of Maryville.
2. Section 102.8. The phrase "shall be determined by the Code
Official" is deleted, and the phrase "shall be determined by the City
Manager or his or her designee" shall be inserted.
3. Section 104.2. This Section is modified to read as follows:
The Code Official shall have authority as necessary in the interest
of public health, safety and welfare to interpret and implement the
provisions of this code and to secure the intent thereof. Such rule
shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance
requirements specifically provided for in this code or of violating
accepted engineering methods involving public safety.
4. Section 104.6. The reference to "Code Official" within this Section
is deleted and the term "City of Maryville, Missouri" inserted
therefor.
5. Section 201.3. This Section shall be modified to read as follows:
Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined by
codes accepted by the City of Maryville, including the International
Building Code, International Residential Code, International Fire
Code, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code
or the National Electrical Code, such terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them as in those codes as accepted by the
City of Maryville.
6. Section 304.3. The requirement that numbers shall be a minimum
of four (4) inches (102 mm) high is deleted, and the requirement
that numbers be a minimum of three (3) inches (77 mm) high is
inserted therefor.
7. Section 304.18.1. This Section is modified to read as follows:
Section
511.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
511.040
AO:577
Section 511.050. Property Maintenance Code — Cross References.
[R.O. 2008 §511.050; Ord. No. 6791 §1, 10-10-2005; Ord. No. 7014
§1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7649 §4, 7-14-2014]
Section 511.060. Violations and Punishment. [R.O. 2008 §511.060;
Ord. No. 6791 §1, 10-10-2005; Ord. No. 6843 §§1 — 2, 6-26-2006;
Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008]
Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped
with an operable lock. Such lock shall be installed according to
manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good working
order.
8. Section 403.2. The last sentence of this Section beginning with the
phrase "Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system" is
deleted in its entirety.
A. The following provisions of the Maryville Municipal Code are
referenced herein and made part of the Maryville Property
Maintenance Code by reference:
1. Chapter 215: Nuisances.
2. Chapter 505: Housing Code.
3. Chapter 530: Dangerous and Unsafe Buildings.
A. It shall be a violation of this Chapter to:
1. Fail to comply with an order to repair, vacate and/or demolish any
building or structure which has been determined to be maintained
in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer, unless an active appeal is pending thereon; or
2. Fail to diligently and timely repair any building or structure which
has been determined to be maintained in violation of the provisions
of this Chapter, as determined by the Board of Code Appeals, unless
an active appeal is pending thereon; or
3. Fail to proceed continuously with the repair or demolition of any
building or structure determined to be in violation of this Chapter,
unless an active appeal is pending thereon; or
4. Fail to comply with an order to repair, vacate or demolish any
building or structure issued by the Board of Code Appeals, unless
an active appeal is pending thereon; or
5. Remove, deface or mutilate the notice placed on any building or
structure; or
6. Violate any provision of this Chapter.
Section
511.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
511.060
AO:578
Chapter 512
RESIDENTIAL CODE
Section 512.010. International Residential Code. [R.O. 2008
§512.010; Ord. No. 6438 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7648 §2, 7-14-2014]
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or any portion
of the Code adopted in this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an
ordinance violation and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an
amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned
in the City or County Jail for a period of not exceeding ninety (90) days,
or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
C. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
City from additionally instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct
or abate a violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure
or premises, to stop an illegal act, conduct business or utilization of the
building, structure or premises or take any other act as allowed by law
in addition to the penalties prescribed herein.
A. In order to regulate and control the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family
dwellings and townhouses, except for such portions as are herein
modified, added, deleted or amended within this Chapter, the
International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, is hereby adopted and
shall be incorporated as if fully set forth herein and shall be hereafter
known as the "Residential Code" of the City of Maryville, Missouri,
including the following appendixes:
1. Appendix A — Sizing and Capabilities of Gas Piping;
2. Appendix B — Sizing and Venting Systems Serving Appliances
Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category One Appliances and
Appliances Listed for Use in Type B Vents;
3. Appendix C — Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent
Venting Systems;
4. Appendix D — Recommended Procedure for Safety Inspection of an
Existing Appliance Installation;
5. Appendix E — Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings;
6. Appendix F — Radon Control Method;
7. Appendix G — Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs;
Section
511.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
512.010
AO:579
Section 512.020. Residential Code Insertions. [R.O. 2008 §512.020;
Ord. No. 6438 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No.
7648 §3, 7-14-2014]
Section 512.030. International Residential Code — Deletions. [R.O.
2008 §512.030; Ord. No. 6438 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7648 §4, 7-14-2014]
8. Appendix H — Patio Covers;
9. Appendix J — Existing Buildings and Structures;
10. Appendix M — Home Day Care — R-3 Occupancy;
11. Appendix N — Venting Methods;
12. Appendix O — Automatic Vehicular Gates;
13. Appendix P — Sizing of Water Piping System;
14. Appendix Q — ICC International Residential Code Electrical
Provisions/National Electrical Code Cross-Reference.
A. The International Building Code, 2012 Edition, as adopted as the
Residential Code of the City of Maryville, is hereby subject to the
following insertions:
1. Section R101.1. The term "City of Maryville" shall be inserted.
2. Wherever a reference is made to "jurisdiction" within the
International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, it shall be understood
to mean the City of Maryville, Missouri.
3. Table R301.2(1). The following insertions shall be made in the chart
which is contained in the foregoing Section of the International
Residential Code, 2012 Edition:
Ground Snow Load — 20 lb./ft.2
Wind Speed — 90 miles per hour
Seismic Design Category — A
Weathering — Severe
Frost Line Depth — 36 inches
Termite — Moderate to heavy
Ice Barrier Underlayment Required — Yes
Winter Design Temperature — 0 degrees to 10 degrees
Fahrenheit
Flood Hazards — September 18, 1985
Air Freezing Index — 1,000 to 2,000
Mean Annual Temperature — 45° to 50°
Section
512.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
512.030
AO:580
Section 512.040. (Reserved)77
Section 512.050. Work Exempt From Permit. [R.O. 2008 §512.050;
Ord. No. 6438 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No.
7648 §5, 7-14-2014]
A. The following portions as set forth in the International Residential
Code, 2012 Edition, shall be deleted in their entirety:
1. Chapter 11 — Energy Efficiency;
2. Appendix I — Private Sewage Disposal;
3. Appendix K — Sound Transmission;
4. Appendix L — Permit Fees;
5. Section R313 — Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems;
6. Section R313.2.1 — Alterations, Repairs and Additions;
7. Section AE503 — Skirting and Perimeter Enclosure;
8. Section R105.2: Work Exempt from Permit.
A. Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does
not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
2. Oil derricks.
3. Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not
exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons and the ratio of height to
diameter or width does not exceed two (2) to one (1).
4. Platforms, decks and porches not more than thirty (30) inches
above grade at any point and not over any basement or story below
and which are not part of an accessible route.
5. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and
similar finish work.
6. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery.
7. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy,
which are less than twenty-four (24) inches deep.
77.Editor’s Note: Former Section 512.040, Fee Schedule, adopted and amended R.O. 2008
§512.040; Ord. No. 6438 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008, was repealed
6-14-2014 by Ord. No. 7648 §8.
Section
512.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
512.050
AO:581
Section 512.060. Additional Amendments. [R.O. 2008 §512.060;
Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7648 §6, 7-14-2014]
Section M1501.1 Outdoor discharge shall be adopted except that the
sentence, "Air shall not be exhausted into an attic, soffit, ridge vent or crawl
space" shall be deleted thereof.
Section 512.070. Water Service. [R.O. 2008 §512.070; Ord. No. 6438
§1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7648 §7,
7-14-2014]
Section 512.080. Appeals. [R.O. 2008 §512.080; Ord. No. 6438 §1,
12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7648 §1,
7-14-2014]
Section R112: Board of Appeals of the International Residential Code, 2012
Edition, is deleted in its entirety. Any person aggrieved by a decision or
action of the Code Enforcement Officer or other designee of the Department
of Public Works under this Chapter may appeal such decision or action
to the Board of Code Appeals. Such appeal shall be in accordance with
8. Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural
purposes and not including service systems.
9. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and twofamily
dwellings.
10. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of Group R-3 as
applicable in Section 101.2 and Group U occupancies.
11. Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five (5) feet nine
(9) inches in height.
A. Section P2905.4 Water Service Pipe of the International Residential
Code, 2012 Edition, is deleted in its entirety.
B. Table P2905.4. Water Service Supply and Distribution Piping shall be
adopted except that the term "water service" shall be deleted
therefrom, and the Table shall not be applicable to water service
installations.
C. Water Service Pipe. Water service pipe shall be only type K soft drawn
copper pipe or Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) plastic pipe of one and onefourth
(1 1/4) inches and larger; SDR-21 two hundred (200) psi shall be
utilized for any underground installation of water piping. Two hundred
(200) psi high-density polyethylene pipe and tubing may be used as a
water service pipe on the customer side of the water meter or valve. All
plastic pipe and tubing shall be installed with a single strand No. 12
AWG solid copper tracer wire. Any installation of water service pipe
shall comply with this Subsection and not the standards listed in Table
P2905.4 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition.
Section
512.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
512.080
AO:582
the provisions of Sections 530.070, 530.080 and 530.090 and 530.110 of
the Municipal Code of the City of Maryville and with Chapter 110 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Maryville, all of which are adopted herein by
reference as if set forth fully herein.
Section 512.090. Punishment. [R.O. 2008 §512.090]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or any portion of
the Code adopted in this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance
violation and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in the City or
County Jail for a period of not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Chapter 515
PLUMBING CODE
Section 515.010. International Plumbing Code. [R.O. 2008
§515.010; Ord. No. 6439 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7644 §2, 7-14-2014]
Section 515.020. Plumbing Code Insertions. [R.O. 2008 §515.020;
Ord. No. 6439 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No.
7644 §3, 7-14-2014]
A. In order to regulate the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems,
and to provide for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees
therefor, except for such portions as are herein modified, added,
deleted or amended within this Chapter, the International Plumbing
Code, 2012 Edition, is hereby adopted and shall be incorporated as if
fully set forth herein and shall be hereafter known as the "Plumbing
Code of the City of Maryville, Missouri," including:
1. Appendix B — Rates of Rainfall for Various Cities;
2. Appendix C — Vacuum Drainage System;
3. Appendix D — Degree Day and Design Temperatures;
4. Appendix E — Sizing of Water Piping Systems;
5. Appendix F — Structural Safety;
A. The International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, as adopted as the
Plumbing Code of the City of Maryville, is hereby subject to the
following insertions:
Section
512.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.020
AO:583
Section 515.030. International Plumbing Code — Deletions. [R.O.
2008 §515.030; Ord. No. 6439 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7644 §4, 7-14-2014]
Section 515.040. Backflow Prevention. [R.O. 2008 §515.040; Ord.
No. 6439 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No.
7644 §1, 7-14-2014]
Specific reference is made to Section 705.430 of the Municipal Code of the
City of Maryville dealing with backflow prevention. In the event that Section
should conflict with any provision of the International Plumbing Code, 2012
Edition, the requirements of Section 705.430 of the Municipal Code of the
City of Maryville shall prevail.
Section 515.050. Water Service Pipe. [R.O. 2008 §515.050; Ord. No.
6439 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 6916 §1, 6-25-2007; Ord. No. 7014 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7644 §5, 7-14-2014]
1. Section 101.1. The term "City of Maryville" shall be inserted.
2. Wherever a reference is made to "jurisdiction" within the
International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, it shall be understood
to mean the City of Maryville, Missouri.
3. Section 903.1. The measurement "twelve (12) inches" is inserted.
A. The following portions as set forth in the International Plumbing Code,
2012 Edition, shall be deleted in their entirety:
1. Section 305.4.1: Sewer Depth.
2. Appendix A — Plumbing Permit Fee Schedule.
3. Section 312.3 shall be retained, except that plastic piping shall not
be tested using air, which shall be deleted.
A. Table 605.3 — Water Service Pipe of the International Plumbing Code,
2012 Edition, is deleted in its entirety.
B. Section 605.3 — Water Service Pipe International Plumbing Code, 2012
Edition, is deleted in its entirety.
C. Water Service Pipe. Water service pipe shall be only type K soft drawn
copper pipe or Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) plastic pipe of one and onefourth
(1 1/4) inches and larger; SDR-21 two hundred (200) psi shall be
utilized for any underground installation of water piping. Two hundred
(200) psi high-density polyethylene pipe and tubing may be used as a
water service pipe on the customer side of the water meter or valve. All
plastic pipe and tubing shall be installed with a single strand No. 12
AWG solid copper tracer wire. Any installation of water service pipe
shall comply with this paragraph and not the standards listed in Table
605.3 of the International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition.
Section
515.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
515.060
AO:584
Section 515.060. Building Drain and Sewers. [R.O. 2008 §515.060;
Ord. No. 6439 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008]
Section 515.070. Fee Schedule. [R.O. 2008 §515.070; Ord. No. 6439
§1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7644 §6,
7-14-2014]
Section 106.6.2: Fee Schedule and Section 106.6.3: Fee Refunds of the
International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, are deleted in their entirety and
in lieu thereof Section 500.090, Building Permit Fees, of the Municipal Code
of the City of Maryville is hereby adopted by reference, as if set forth fully
herein, as the fee schedule for the Plumbing Code of the City of Maryville,
Missouri.
Section 515.080. Appeals. [R.O. 2008 §515.080; Ord. No. 6439 §1,
12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7644 §1,
7-14-2014]
Section 109: Means of Appeal of the International Plumbing Code, 2012
Edition, is deleted in its entirety. Any person aggrieved by a decision or
action of the Code Enforcement Officer or other designee of the Department
of Public Works under this Chapter may appeal such decision or action
to the Board of Code Appeals. Such appeal shall be in accordance with
the provisions of Sections 530.070, 530.080, 530.090 and 530.110 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Maryville and with Chapter 110 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Maryville, all of which are adopted herein by
reference as if set forth fully herein.
Section 515.090. Stop Work Order. [R.O. 2008 §515.090; Ord. No.
6439 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7644 §1,
7-14-2014]
Section 108.5 of the International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, is retained
except that any reference to penalty contained therein is deleted and the
Section shall be enforced in accordance with any penalty available under
civil law, including injunction, and/or the penalty provisions of this Chapter.
Section 515.100. Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §515.100]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or any portion of
the Code adopted in this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance
violation and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not
A. Section 710.1: Maximum Fixture Unit Load of the International
Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, is modified to include the following
additional limitation. [Ord. No. 7644 §1, 7-14-2014]
B. Any building sewer leaving the building shall have a minimum pipe
diameter of four (4) inches, unless it contains a grinder pump which is
installed in accordance with all applicable manufacturer's installation
instructions.
Section
515.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.100
AO:585
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in the City or
County Jail for a period of not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Chapter 520
MECHANICAL CODE
Section 520.010. International Mechanical Code. [R.O. 2008
§520.010; Ord. No. 6440 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7645 §2, 7-14-2014]
Section 520.020. Mechanical Code Insertions. [R.O. 2008 §520.020;
Ord. No. 6440 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No.
7645 §3, 7-14-2014]
Section 520.030. International Mechanical Code — Deletions. [R.O.
2008 §520.030; Ord. No. 6440 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1,
5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7645 §1, 7-14-2014]
A. In order to regulate the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems
and to provide for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees
therefor, except for such portions as are herein modified, added,
deleted or amended within this Chapter, the International Mechanical
Code, 2012 Edition, is hereby adopted and shall be incorporated as if
fully set forth herein and shall be hereafter known as the "Mechanical
Code of the City of Maryville, Missouri," including:
1. Appendix A — Chimney Connector Pass Through.
A. The International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, as adopted as the
Mechanical Code of the City of Maryville, is hereby subject to the
following insertions:
1. Section 101.1. The term "City of Maryville" shall be inserted.
2. Wherever a reference is made to "jurisdiction" within the
International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, it shall be
understood to mean the City of Maryville, Missouri.
A. The following portions as set forth in the International Mechanical
Code, 2012 Edition, shall be deleted in their entirety:
1. Appendix B — Recommended Permit Fee Schedule.
Section
515.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
520.040
AO:586
Section 520.040. Fee Schedule. [R.O. 2008 §520.040; Ord. No. 6440
§1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7645 §4,
7-14-2014]
Section 106.5: Fees, of the International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, is
deleted in its entirety and in lieu thereof Section 500.090, Building Permit
Fees, of the Municipal Code of the City of Maryville is hereby adopted by
reference, as if set forth fully herein, as the fee schedule for the Mechanical
Code of the City of Maryville, Missouri.
Section 520.050. Appeals. [R.O. 2008 §520.050; Ord. No. 6440 §1,
12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7645 §1,
7-14-2014]
Section 109: Means of Appeal of the International Mechanical Code, 2012
Edition, is deleted in its entirety. Any person aggrieved by a decision or
action of the Code Enforcement Officer or other designee of the Department
of Public Works under this Chapter may appeal such decision or action
to the Board of Code Appeals. Such appeal shall be in accordance with
the provisions of Sections 530.070, 530.080, 530.090 and 530.110 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Maryville and with Chapter 110 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Maryville, all of which are adopted herein by
reference as if set forth fully herein.
Section 520.060. Stop Work Order. [R.O. 2008 §520.060; Ord. No.
6440 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7645 §1,
7-14-2014]
Section 108.5 of the International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, is
retained except that the reference to penalty contained therein is deleted,
and the Section shall be enforced in accordance with any penalty available
under civil law, including injunction, and/or the penalty provisions of this
Chapter.
Section 520.070. Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §520.070]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or any portion of
the Code adopted in this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance
violation and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in the City or
County Jail for a period of not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Chapter 522
FUEL GAS CODE
Section
520.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
522.010
AO:587
Section 522.010. International Fuel Gas Code. [R.O. 2008 §522.010;
Ord. No. 6441 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No.
7643 §1, 7-14-2014]
Section 522.020. Fuel Gas Code Insertions. [R.O. 2008 §522.020;
Ord. No. 6441 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No.
7643 §1, 7-14-2014]
Section 522.030. Fee Schedule. [R.O. 2008 §522.030; Ord. No. 6441
§1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7643 §2,
7-14-2014]
Section 106.6.2: Fee Schedule and Section 106.6.3: Fee Refunds of the
International Fuel and Gas Code, 2012 Edition, are deleted in their entirety
and in lieu thereof Section 500.090, Building Permit Fees, of the Municipal
Code of the City of Maryville is hereby adopted by reference, as if set
A. In order to establish the minimum regulations governing the conditions
and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures, to provide
the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical
things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and to provide for the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy
and use and the demolition of such structures, except for such portions
as are herein modified, added, deleted or amended within this Chapter,
the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, is hereby adopted and
shall be incorporated as if fully set forth herein and shall be hereafter
known as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Maryville, Missouri, including
the following Appendices:
1. Appendix A — Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping (IFGS);
2. Appendix B — Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances
Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category 1 Appliances and Appliances
Listed for Use and Type B Vents (IFGS);
3. Appendix C — Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent
Venting Systems (IFGS);
4. Appendix D — Recommended Procedure for Safety Inspection of an
Existing Appliance Installation (IFGS).
A. The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, as adopted as the Fuel
Gas Code of the City of Maryville, is hereby subject to the following
insertions:
1. Section 101.1. The term "City of Maryville" shall be inserted.
2. Wherever a reference is made to "jurisdiction" within the
International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, it shall be understood to
mean the City of Maryville, Missouri.
Section
522.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
522.030
AO:588
forth fully herein, as the fee schedule for the Fuel Gas Code of the City of
Maryville, Missouri.
Section 522.040. Appeals. [R.O. 2008 §522.040; Ord. No. 6441 §1,
12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7643 §1,
7-14-2014]
Section 109: Means of Appeal of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012
Edition, is deleted in its entirety. Any person aggrieved by a decision or
action of the Code Enforcement Officer or other designee of the Department
of Public Works under this Chapter may appeal such decision or action
to the Board of Code Appeals. Such appeal shall be in accordance with
the provisions of Sections 530.070, 530.080, 530.090 and 530.110 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Maryville and with Chapter 110 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Maryville, all of which are adopted herein by
reference as if set forth fully herein.
Section 522.050. Stop Work Order. [R.O. 2008 §522.050; Ord. No.
6441 §1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 7643 §1,
7-14-2014]
Section 108.5 of the International Fuel and Gas Code, 2012 Edition, is
retained except that any reference to penalty contained therein is deleted,
and the Section shall be enforced in accordance with any penalty available
under civil law, including injunction, and/or the penalty provisions of this
Chapter.
Section 522.060. Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §522.060]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or any portion of
the Code adopted in this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance
violation and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in the City or
County Jail for a period of not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Chapter 525
ELECTRICAL CODE
Section 525.010. Electrical Code of the City of Maryville. [R.O. 2008
§525.010; Ord. No. 6190 §1, 5-10-1999; Ord. No. 7014 §1, 5-12-2008;
Ord. No. 7646 §§1 — 2, 7-14-2014]
The National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition, as adopted by the National Fire
and Protection Association, Inc., is hereby adopted and shall hereafter be
known as the Electrical Code of the City of Maryville, Missouri. Said code is
Section
522.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
525.010
AO:589
adopted in its entirety except as hereinafter modified, deleted or amended
and shall be incorporated as if fully set out herein.
Section 525.020. Electrical Wiring Installation Central Business
District. [R.O. 2008 §525.020; Ord. No. 6191 §1, 5-10-1999; Ord. No.
7014 §1, 5-12-2008]
Section 525.030. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or any portion of
the Code adopted in this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance
violation and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in the City or
County Jail for a period of not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Chapter 530
DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Section 530.010. Dangerous Buildings Defined. [R.O. 2008
§530.010; Ord. No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995]
A. For the purposes of this Chapter, there is hereby established a Central
Business District which shall be that area of the City of Maryville which
is bounded on the north by Sixth Street, bounded on the west by
Fillmore Street, bounded on the south by First Street and bounded on
the east by Vine Street.
B. All of the electrical wiring installed within the Central Business District,
except for wiring installed in a single-family dwelling, shall comply with
one (1) of the following:
1. The electrical wiring shall be installed in a metal raceway;
2. The electrical wiring shall be installed in a non-metallic raceway;
3. The electrical wiring shall be installed with type M-I cable; or
4. The electrical wiring shall be installed with type M-C cable.
A. For the purpose of this Code, any building or structure which is
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public or the
residents of the City of Maryville, Missouri, and that has any or all of
the following defects shall be deemed a "dangerous building":
1. Those with interior walls or other vertical structural members that
list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity falls outside the middle one-third (?)
of its base.
Section
525.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
530.010
AO:590
Section 530.020. Dangerous Buildings Declared Nuisances. [R.O.
2008 §530.020; Ord. No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995]
Each "dangerous building", as defined in Section 530.010 of this Chapter, is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be repaired, vacated and/
or demolished as further provided for herein.
Section 530.030. Standards for Repair, Vacation and/or Demolition.
[R.O. 2008 §530.030; Ord. No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995; Ord. No. 6579
§§1 — 2, 8-18-2003]
2. Those that, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three percent
(33%) or more damage or deterioration of the supporting member
or members, or fifty percent (50%) or more damage or
deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or
coverage.
3. Those that have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or
roofs or in which the same are overloaded or that have insufficient
strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
4. Those that have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as
to become dangerous to life, safety or the general health and
welfare of the occupants or the people of this City.
5. Those that are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or that
so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living
that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause
sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, safety or
welfare of those occupying such building or structure.
6. Those having light, air and sanitation facilities that are inadequate
to protect the health, safety or general welfare of human beings
who live or may live therein.
7. Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or
panic, or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes
or other adequate means of evacuation.
8. Those that have parts thereof that are attached so that they may
fall and injure members of the public or property.
9. Any portion of a building or structure, remaining on a site after the
demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever
any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of
ninety (90) days so as to constitute such building or portion thereof
to be an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
10. Those that because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the people of
this City.
Section
530.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
530.030
AO:591
Section 530.040. Emergency Situations. [R.O. 2008 §530.040; Ord.
No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995]
In any case where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to
the health, life or safety of any person or to any adjacent property unless the
"dangerous building", as defined herein, is immediately repaired, vacated
or demolished, the Code Enforcement Officer shall report such facts to
the Board of Code Appeals, and such Board, by resolution, may cause the
immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building. The
cost of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous
building shall be collected in the same manner as provided in Section
530.100 herein.
Section 530.050. Insurance Proceeds. [R.O. 2008 §530.050; Ord.
No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995]
A. The following standards shall be followed by the Code Enforcement
Officer and the Board of Code of Appeals in ordering repair, vacation
and/or demolition of a dangerous building:
1. If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will
no longer exist in violation of the terms of this Chapter, it shall be
ordered repaired and all design, construction and workmanship
shall conform with accepted industry standards or the
International Residential Code, 2006 Edition and the International
Building Code, 2006 Edition.
2. If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it
dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of its occupants, it shall
be ordered to be vacated and either repaired or demolished, as is
appropriate under the circumstances.
3. If the dangerous building is damaged, decayed or deteriorated by
fifty percent (50%) or more based upon value of the structure, and
it cannot reasonably be restored or repaired so that it will no longer
exist in violation of the terms of this Chapter, it shall be
demolished.
4. If both the owner and any other persons having an interest in the
dangerous building are unwilling to restore or repair the building
or structure, it shall be demolished.
5. If the dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in
violation of any code or ordinance of the City or any Statute of the
State of Missouri, it shall be demolished.
A. If there are any insurance proceeds based upon a covered claim where
payment is made for damage or loss to a building or other structure
caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion, or other casualty loss,
and if the covered claim payment is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of
Section
530.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
530.050
AO:592
Section 530.060. Duties of Code Enforcement Officer. [R.O. 2008
§530.060; Ord. No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995; Ord. No. 5493 §1,
1-13-1997]
the face value of the policy covering the building or other structure,
then the following procedure shall apply:
1. The insurer shall withhold from the covered claim payment twentyfive
percent (25%) of the covered claim payment, and shall pay that
amount to the City for deposit into an interest-bearing account.
2. As to said monies, any mortgagee or lienholder named on the
insurance policy shall maintain priority superior to any obligation
under this Chapter.
3. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of such insurance monies, the
City shall release the proceeds and any interest which has accrued
on such proceeds to the insured, or as the terms of the policy,
including any endorsements thereto, provide, unless the City has
instituted proceedings under the provisions of Section 530.060. In
the event the City has proceeded under the provisions of Section
530.060, all monies in excess of that necessary to comply with the
provisions of this Chapter for the removal of the building or
structure, less salvage value, shall be paid to the insured, subject to
the limitations of this Section.
4. If a special tax bill or assessment is issued by the City for the
expenses of demolition of such building as a dangerous building,
the monies held by the City shall be applied toward payment of a
special tax bill or assessment. If there is any excess, it shall be paid
by the City to the insured or as the terms of the policy, including
any endorsements thereto, provide.
5. In lieu of payment of all or part of the covered claim payment under
this Subsection, the City may certify that it has obtained
satisfactory proof that the insured has or will remove debris and
repair, rebuild or otherwise make the premises safe and secure. In
this event and subject to the limitations of Subsection (2), the City
may issue a certificate within thirty (30) days after receipt of said
proof, allowing payment of the insurance monies to the insured
without deduction. It shall be the obligation of the insured or other
person making claim to the monies to provide the insurance
company with the written certificate provided for in this
Subsection.
6. No provision of this Section shall be construed to make the City a
party to any insurance contract.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have and perform the following
duties.
1. Notice of inspection.
Section
530.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
530.060
AO:593
a. Prior to conducting the inspection pursuant to this Section, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall make reasonable, diligent
efforts to provide the record owner of the building to be
inspected, forty-eight (48) hours' notice in advance of the
inspection, and to inform the owner of their right to accompany
the Code Enforcement Officer during the inspection. In the
event the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to provide the
notice envisioned herein, the Code Enforcement Officer may
proceed to inspect the premises. However, in such event, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall document all attempts to
provide notice to the owner.
b. In the event an inspection involves an "emergency situation",
wherein it reasonably appears there is immediate danger to
health, life or safety of any person or any adjacent property,
said inspection may occur without the forty-eight (48) hours'
notice in advance of the inspection to the property owner. As
used in this Section, the term "emergency situation" shall
include the following:
(1) Structural failure, including a roof, floor, stairs, foundation
have collapsed or in danger of collapse;
(2) Electrical wiring failure, including complaints of "hot"
wires, sparks, shock, repetitive failure of fuses or
repetitive failure of circuit breakers;
(3) Sewage backups, including chronic problems of sewage
backing up into the premises, or the collection of methane
gas in the dwelling or noxious odors emanating from the
sewer system;
(4) Gas leaks, including natural gas odors in the premises of
gas appliances which are suspected of malfunction;
(5) Mechanical failures, including elevators, which have
malfunctioned or which are in danger of malfunction;
(6) Possession, maintenance or retention of hazardous
materials on the premises, including explosives and toxic
chemicals;
(7) A complaint which has been prompted by a serious injury
occurring on the premises;
(8) Excessive infestation of rodents and/or insects;
(9) Excessive accumulation of garbage or debris.
In each instance the Code Enforcement Officer
shall document the basis for concluding the
existence of the emergency situation.
Section
530.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
530.060
AO:594
2. Inspection. The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
a. Inspect or cause to be inspected as often as may be necessary,
all residential, commercial, institutional, accessory, garage,
assembly, special or miscellaneous occupancy buildings for the
purpose of determining whether any condition exists which
render such places to be a dangerous building within the terms
of Section 530.010 of this Chapter.
b. Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints
are filed by any person alleging that such building, wall or
structure is or may be existing in violation of this Chapter.
3. Determination and order.
a. The Code Enforcement Officer shall set forth a description of
the building or structure deemed to be dangerous, and a
statement of the particulars which made the building or
structure a dangerous building.
b. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the building
or structure is a dangerous building which must be repaired,
the order shall require that all required permits be secured
therefor and the work physically commenced within a specific
time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of the order
unless, in the judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer, it is
determined to be necessary to extend such time to commence
the required work. The order shall further require that the
work proceed continuously without unnecessary delay, so as to
complete said work within a reasonable time, but not to exceed
one hundred eighty (180) days.
c. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the building
or structure is a dangerous building which must be vacated,
the order shall require that the building or structure shall be
vacated within a certain time from the date of the order as
determined to be reasonable by the Code Enforcement Officer.
d. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the building
or structure is a dangerous building which must be
demolished, the order shall require that the building be
demolished within such time as the Code Enforcement Officer
shall determine reasonable, but not to exceed thirty (30) days
from the date of the order and that all required permits be
secured therefor within thirty (30) days from the date of the
order.
e. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the building
or structure is not a dangerous building, then no order shall be
issued.
Section
530.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
530.060
AO:595
4. Posting of notice. Upon completion of the inspection of a building
or structure and upon making a determination that said building or
structure is a dangerous building as defined in Section 530.010
herein, the Code Enforcement Officer shall post a notice on such
building or structure which shall be substantially in the following
form, but may include other information:
"This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the
Code Enforcement Officer. This notice is to remain on this building
until it is repaired, vacated and repaired, or vacated and
demolished, in accordance with the notice which has been given
the known owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent of this
building, and all other persons having an interest in such building
as shown by the land records of the Recorder of Deeds of Nodaway
County. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is
complied with. All persons are hereby notified to keep out as long
as this notice remains posted. Any person(s) willfully destroying,
mutilating and removing this notice or entering this structure will
be prosecuted to the full extent of the law."
Provided however, that the posting of such notice shall not be
construed to deprive any person, entitled thereto by this Chapter,
to the notice and hearing as prescribed herein.
5. Service of notice and order. The notice and order, and any amended
or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record
owner of the dangerous building and posted on the property.
Additionally, one (1) copy shall be served on each of the following if
known to the Code Enforcement Office or disclosed from the land
records of the Recorder of Deeds of Nodaway County, Missouri:
a. The holder of any mortgage, deed of trust or other lien or
encumbrance of record;
b. The owner or holder of any lease of record;
c. The holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or
to the building or the land on which it is located;
d. Any tenant in possession of the premises.
6. Method of service.
a. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons
entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such
notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return
receipt requested, to each such person at their address as it
appears on the last equalized assessment roll of Nodaway
County or as known to the Code Enforcement Officer.
b. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the
Code Enforcement Officer, then notice shall be had by
Section
530.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
530.060
AO:596
Section 530.070. Appeal to the Board of Code Appeals. [R.O. 2008
§530.070; Ord. No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995]
publication in a newspaper qualified to publish legal notices
at least fourteen (14) days in advance of any hearing date,
specifically addressed to the person for whom no address is
known and all other persons having an interest in said building
that has been found to be a dangerous building within the
standards set forth in Section 530.010 of this Chapter and shall
set forth the requirements of the determination and order of
the Code Enforcement Officer.
c. The Code Enforcement Officer shall ensure that each person
entitled to notice pursuant to this Section is advised in writing
of their right to request a hearing pursuant to Section 530.070
and shall provide information concerning the procedures
therefore.
7. Proof of service. If service is obtained by personal service, proof of
service of the notice and order shall be certified as to the time of
service by a written declaration executed by the person effecting
service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was
made. This declaration, together with any receipt card returned in
acknowledgement of receipt by certified mail, shall be affixed to the
copy of the notice and order retained by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
8. Failure of service. The failure of the Code Enforcement Officer to
serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate
any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served, nor
shall it relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed
by the provisions of this Section.
9. Report. The Code Enforcement Officer shall made a report in
writing to the Board of Code Appeals for any non-compliance with
the notice and order to vacate, repair and/or demolish.
10. Appearance. The Code Enforcement Officer shall appear at all
hearings conducted by the Board of Code Appeals pursuant to this
Chapter and shall testify as to the condition of dangerous buildings.
A. Appeal. Any person entitled to service of the notice and order of the
Code Enforcement Officer may appeal from any such notice and order,
or any other action of the Code Enforcement Officer under this Chapter
by filing at the Office of the Department of Public Works a written
appeal containing:
1. A heading in the words: "Before the Board of Code Appeals of the
City of Maryville, Missouri . . ."
2. A caption reading: "Appeals of . . ." giving the names of all
appellants participating in the appeal.
Section
530.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
530.070
AO:597
Section 530.080. Board of Code Appeals. [R.O. 2008 §530.080; Ord.
No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995]
Chapter 110, Article III of Title I of the Municipal Code of the City of
Maryville, establishing a Board of Code Appeals, is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this Section as completely as if fully set out
herein, with the duties and powers as set forth in Section 530.090 herein
to be in addition to all other powers, duties and responsibilities referred to
3. A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the
appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and
order.
4. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of that specific
order or action protested, together with any material fact claimed
to support the contentions of the appellant. Only those matters or
issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the
hearing of the appeal.
5. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or
action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
6. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official
mailing addresses.
7. The verification by declaration under penalty of perjury of at least
one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
B. Fees. The fee for such appeal shall be one hundred twenty-five dollars
($125.00) and shall accompany the application for appeal. The
application fee shall not be refundable.
C. Timing Of Appeal. The appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days from
the date of the service of such notice and order or action of the Code
Enforcement Officer. However, if the building or structure is in such
condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the health, life, or
safety of any person, or any adjacent property as defined in Section
530.040, and is ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with
Section 530.060, such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from the
date of the service of the notice and order of the Code Enforcement
Officer.
D. Stay Of Order. Except for orders to vacate the premises made pursuant
to Section 530.040, enforcement of any notice and order of the Code
Enforcement Officer issued under this Chapter shall be stayed during
the pendency of a properly and timely filed appeal.
E. Failure To Appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance
with the provisions of this Section shall constitute a waiver of the right
to request an administrative hearing and adjudication on the notice and
order or to any portion thereof.
Section
530.070
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
530.080
AO:598
in Chapter 110, Article III of Title I of the Municipal Code of the City of
Maryville.
Section 530.090. Duties of Board of Code Appeals. [R.O. 2008
§530.090; Ord. No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995]
A. The Board of Code Appeals shall have and perform the following duties
pursuant to this Chapter:
1. Date of hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving the written
appeal under Section 530.070, or after the receipt of the report of
the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to Section 530.060, the
Board of Code Appeals shall fix a date, time and place for the
hearing. Such date shall be not less than ten (10) days nor more
than sixty (60) days from the date the appeal was filed with the
Office of the Department of Public Works or from the date the Code
Enforcement Officer filed the report with the Board, whichever is
applicable, unless continued by the Board of Code Appeals for good
cause shown.
2. Notice. The notice shall be substantially in the following form, but
may include other information:
"You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the
Board of Code Appeals at . . . on the . . . day of . . . 19. . ., at the
hour. . . , related to the property described as. . . , to show cause
why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building
should not be repaired, vacated and/or demolished in accordance
with the state of particulars set forth in the Code Enforcement
Officer's notice as provided for in this Chapter. You may be present
at the hearing. You may present any relevant evidence and will
be given full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying
against you."
Said notice shall advise the recipient of the procedures involved in
the hearing pursuant to this Section.
3. Service of notice. Written notice of the time and location of the
hearing and any amended or supplemental notice, shall be served
upon each appellant, and/or the record owner of the dangerous
building. Additionally, one (1) copy shall be served on each of the
following if known to the Board of Code Appeals or disclosed from
the land records of the Recorder of Deeds of Nodaway County,
Missouri:
a. The holder of any mortgage, deed of trust or other lien or
encumbrance of record;
b. The owner or holder of any lease of record; and
c. The holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or
to the building or the land on which it is located; and
Section
530.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
530.090
AO:599
d. Any tenant in possession of the premises.
4. Method of service. [Ord. No. 7211 §1, 5-10-2010; Ord. No. 7537
§1, 6-24-2013]
a. Service of the notice of the hearing shall be made upon all
persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy
of such notice by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested, to each such person at his/her address as it appears
on the last equalized assessment roll of Nodaway County or as
known to the Board of Code Appeals. If served personally,
personal service shall be made no less than fourteen (14) days
prior to the hearing date. If served by mailing a copy by
certified mail, the certified mailing shall be delivered to a
United States Post Office mailbox at least twenty-one (21) days
prior to the hearing date.
b. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the
Board of Code Appeals, then notice shall be given by
publication in a newspaper qualified to publish legal notices at
least fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing date, specifically
addressed to the person for whom no address is known and all
other persons having an interest in said building, to appear
before the Board of Code Appeals on the date specified and to
show cause why the structure or building reported to be a
dangerous building should not be repaired, vacated or
demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set
forth in the Code Enforcement Officer's notice or decision. Said
notice shall notify the recipient of the procedures involved in
the hearing pursuant to this Section.
5. Proof of service. If service is obtained by personal service, proof of
service of the notice and order shall be certified as to the time of
service by a written declaration executed by the person effecting
service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was
made. This declaration, together with any receipt verification in
acknowledgement of receipt by certified mail, shall be affixed to the
copy of the notice and order retained by the Board of Code Appeals.
[Ord. No. 7211 §1, 5-10-2010]
6. Failure of service. The failure of the Board of Code Appeals to serve
any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any
proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or
relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the
provisions of this Section.
7. Hearing. Upon receipt of the report of the Code Enforcement
Officer or a duly filed appeal, and after having given the required
notice, the Board of Code Appeals shall hold a full and adequate
hearing, and hear such relevant testimony as the Code
Enforcement Officer, any appellant, the record owner, and any
Section
530.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
530.090
AO:600
Section 530.095. Recording of Certificate of Dangerous Building.
[R.O. 2008 §530.095; Ord. No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995]
other person entitled to service of notice, shall offer relative to the
dangerous building.
8. Decision. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Code
Appeals shall make written Findings of Fact based upon competent
and substantial evidence offered at the hearing as to whether or
not the building in question is a "dangerous building" as defined by
Section 530.010 herein, and:
a. If the evidence supports a finding that the building or structure
is a dangerous building, detrimental to the health, life or safety
of any person or to any adjacent property the Board of Code
Appeals shall issue an order based upon the Findings of Fact,
commanding the appellant and/or the record owner, as well as
any other person entitled to notice of the hearing to vacate and
ordering the demolition of the building or structure.
b. It is further provided that the appellant and/or the record
owner as well as any other person entitled to notice of the
hearing shall have the privilege of either repairing or vacating
and repairing said building, if such repair will bring such
building into compliance with the ordinances and codes of the
City of Maryville, provided that such repair is completed within
sixty (60) days of the order being entered by the Board of Code
Appeals.
c. The appellant and/or the record owner, as well as any other
person entitled to notice of the hearing, shall have the privilege
of vacating and demolishing said dangerous building at their
own risk, to prevent the City of Maryville from acquiring a lien
against said land on which the dangerous building is located,
provided that such demolition is completed within sixty (60)
days of the order being entered by the Board of Code Appeals.
d. If the evidence does not support a finding that the building or
structure is a dangerous building, then no order shall be
issued.
e. The findings of fact shall be in writing and shall contain
findings, a determination of the issues presented, and an order
as to any requirements to be satisfied. A copy of the decision
shall be personally delivered to the appellant and/or the record
owner, as well as any other person entitled to notice of the
hearing, or shall be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, to
each such person. The effective date of the decision shall be as
stated therein. [Ord. No. 7211 §1, 5-10-2010]
Section
530.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
530.095
AO:601
Section 530.100. Failure to Comply With Board Decision — Lien.
[R.O. 2008 §530.100; Ord. No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995]
A. Non-Compliance. If compliance is not had with the Order of the Board
of Code Appeals within the time provided, and no appeal is properly and
timely filed, a certificate shall be filed in the Recorder's Office of
Nodaway County, Missouri, certifying:
1. The legal description and street address of the property;
2. The building is a dangerous building;
3. The landowner and all other persons with known interests of
record in the property have been so notified; the decision rendered
by the Board of Code Appeals.
B. Subsequent Compliance. In the event that subsequent to the filing of
the certificate of dangerous building, the corrections ordered shall be
completed or the building demolished, so that the building or structure
no longer exists as a dangerous building on the property described in
the certificate, a new certificate shall be filed in the Recorder's Office of
Nodaway County, Missouri, certifying that the building is no longer a
dangerous building.
A. Non-Compliance. If within sixty (60) days, the record owner, appellant,
or any other person entitled to service of notice pursuant to Section
530.090 fails to comply with the decision and Order of the Board of
Code Appeals, the Board of Code Appeals or the Code Enforcement
Officer shall so advise the City Manager who shall cause such building
or structure to be repaired, vacated and/or demolished as the facts may
warrant.
B. Tax Bill.
1. Whenever the City shall have caused repair or demolition work to
be completed as provided in Chapter 540 of the Municipal Code of
the City of Maryville, the Director of Public Works shall certify the
costs of the repair or demolition work to the City Clerk who shall
cause a special tax bill to be issued against the lot, tract or parcel of
land until paid, and shall cause the same to be registered in the
Office of the Recorder of Nodaway County and to be mailed by
certified mail to all owners of record of the property. The tax bill
shall be collected by the official collecting taxes.
2. Upon written request of the taxpayer delivered to the City Clerk
within thirty (30) days after completion of the demolition or repair
work, a tax bill for repair or demolition of a building or structure
may be paid in ten (10) equal, annual installments, which
installments with interest thereon to date on the unpaid balance
shall be due annually on the anniversary of the date of issuance of
the bill. Interest shall be paid at the maximum rate per annum
allowable by law on the unpaid balance of the special assessment
Section
530.095
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
530.100
AO:602
Section 530.110. Appeal to Circuit Court. [R.O. 2008 §530.110; Ord.
No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995]
Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the decision of the Board of Code
Appeals, any person entitled to notice pursuant to Section 530.090 as to
a dangerous building, may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court of
Nodaway County pursuant to the procedure established in Chapter 536,
RSMo.
Section 530.120. Violations and Punishment. [R.O. 2008 §530.120;
Ord. No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995; Ord. No. 6842 §§1 — 2, 6-26-2006]
computed from the date of issuance. If any annual payment of
principal or interest shall not be paid within thirty (30) days of
its due date, the entire remaining balance of the tax bill shall
immediately become due and payable.
3. If said request for the payment plan is not made within thirty (30)
days after the completion of the repair or demolition work, then the
entire tax bill shall be payable within sixty (60) days of issuance,
with interest thereon.
4. Tax bills so issued shall be prima facie evidence of the validity of
the bill, the doing of the work and the liability of the property for
the damages stated in the bill. If default should occur, said amounts
shall be collected by suit brought in a court of competent
jurisdiction by the City Attorney on behalf of the City.
A. It is a violation of this Chapter to:
1. Fail to comply with an order to repair, vacate and/or demolish any
building or structure which has been determined to be maintained
in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer, unless an active appeal is pending thereon; or
2. Fail to diligently and timely repair any building or structure which
has been determined to be maintained in violation of the provisions
of this Chapter, as determined by the Board of Code Appeals, unless
an active appeal is pending thereon;
3. Fail to proceed continuously with the repair or demolition of any
building or structure determined to be in violation of this Chapter
unless an active appeal is pending thereon; or
4. Fail to comply with an order to repair, vacate or demolish any
building or structure issued by the Board of Code Appeals unless an
active appeal is pending thereon; or
5. Remove, deface or mutilate the notice placed on any building or
structure; or
6. Violate any provision of this Chapter.
Section
530.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
530.120
AO:603
Section 530.130. Duties of the City Attorney. [R.O. 2008 §530.130;
Ord. No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995]
The City Attorney shall prosecute all persons failing to comply with the
terms of the notices and orders provided for herein; appear at all hearings
before the Board of Code Appeals pursuant to this Chapter; bring suit to
collect all municipal liens, assessments or costs incurred by the City in the
repairing or demolishing of dangerous buildings; and take all such other
legal actions as are necessary to carry out and enforce the terms and
provisions of this Chapter.
Section 530.140. Administrative Liability. [R.O. 2008 §530.140; Ord.
No. 5336 §1, 8-14-1995]
No officer, agent, Board, Commission or employee of the City shall render
themselves personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons
or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge
of their duties under this Chapter. Any suit brought against any officer,
agent, Board, Commission or employee of the City as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of their duties under this Chapter
shall be defended by the City Attorney until the final determination of the
proceedings therein.
Chapter 535
MOVING OF BUILDINGS
Section 535.010. Legislative Intent. [R.O. 2008 §535.010; Ord. No.
4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the City Council, in the exercise of
its police powers to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to regulate
the moving of buildings over the public streets and ways of the City.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter or fails to
comply with any of the provisions or requirements thereof shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be
imprisoned for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after notice has
been issued shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
City from additionally instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct
or abate a violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure
or premises, to stop an illegal act, conduct business or utilization of the
building, structure or premises or take any other act as allowed by law
in addition to the penalties prescribed herein.
Section
530.120
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
535.020
AO:604
Section 535.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §535.020; Ord. No. 4959
§1, 3-11-1991]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words, terms and phrases and
their derivatives shall have the meanings given herein unless the context
otherwise indicates:
BUILDING — A house, commercial building, industrial building, garage,
or any structure of a width exceeding fourteen (14) feet, or which would
require a permit from the State for its movement over State highways or
which otherwise is of a size or type, the moving of which over a public street
or way would cause hazard or inconvenience to any person. A "building"
does not include the movement of a structure by a person operating under
a State permit for such movement solely over State roads or highways.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Building Official for the City of
Maryville.
INTERFERING STRUCTURE — Any wire, cable, conduit, pipe, tree, pole,
curb, sidewalk, pavement, or other structure or device located in or about a
street which must be temporarily relocated or otherwise altered in order to
facilitate the passage of a building.
PERMITTEE — The person or entity to which a permit is issued pursuant to
the provisions of this Chapter.
PERSON — Any one (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, firms or enterprises.
STREET — Any public right-of-way in the City, including but not limited to
streets, avenues, alleys, easements, and any and all public property owned
or controlled by the City or public entities.
Section 535.030. Permit Required. [R.O. 2008 §535.030; Ord. No.
4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 535.040. Application for Permit. [R.O. 2008 §535.040; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved any
building in, into, through or from the City over any street without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Such permit shall be known as a "Permit for Moving Work" and shall not
be assignable or transferable nor shall it be used by any person other
than the permittee or his/her employees, contractors, or designated
representatives.
C. If the moving work does not involve the use of a street, as defined in this
Chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer may suspend, waive or modify
certain requirements of this Chapter, but in no event shall waiver,
suspension or modification jeopardize or be detrimental to adequate
protection of private property rights or the public health, safety,
welfare, convenience or comfort of the public.
Section
535.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
535.040
AO:605
Section 535.050. Investigation. [R.O. 2008 §535.050; Ord. No. 4959
§1, 3-11-1991]
Upon the filing of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
investigate the proposed destination, route, length of time estimated for
moving work, type of equipment to be used, and any and all other relevant
factors and formulate a recommendation with respect to issuance of the
permit.
Section 535.060. Denial of Permit. [R.O. 2008 §535.060; Ord. No.
4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
A. Any person desiring a permit for moving work shall file with the City
Clerk an application therefor in writing on a form to be furnished by the
City for said purpose. Such application shall specify the following:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The present location of the building to be moved;
3. The proposed new location of the building;
4. The character and size of the building to be moved, including its
length, width and height;
5. The principal materials of construction of the building;
6. The reason for such moving;
7. The type of equipment to be used for the proposed work;
8. The estimated length of time required to do the proposed work;
9. The proposed route over which the building is to be moved;
10. The use, purpose and occupancy for which said building is to be
used;
11. A plot plan showing the proposed location of the building upon the
property to which said building is to be moved;
12. The necessity for the partial or complete removal or alteration of
any actual or potentially interfering structure; and
13. The date and time proposed for the move.
A. No permit shall be issued to move any building which, in the opinion of
the Code Enforcement Officer, is:
1. So constructed or in such condition as to render its movement
hazardous to any person or to public or private property;
2. Infested with pests or unsanitary;
3. If a dwelling, unfit for human habitation;
Section
535.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
535.060
AO:606
Section 535.070. Terms and Conditions of Permit. [R.O. 2008
§535.070; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
4. So dilapidated, defective, unsightly, or in such a condition of
deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed site
would cause appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to
the property or improvements in the district within a radius of one
thousand (1,000) feet from the proposed site;
5. Prohibited at the proposed location by the zoning laws of the City;
6. Prohibited at the proposed location or otherwise not in
conformance with any or all applicable ordinances or regulations of
the City or of applicable State or Federal laws or regulations;
7. Likely to cause unreasonable damage, during or incident to its
movement, to trees, plants, shrubs, curbs, sidewalks, or other City
property, structures or appurtenances;
8. Likely to cause unreasonable damage, during or incident to its
movement, to public or private utility lines, equipment or property,
or disrupt such utility service to other persons as to be an
unreasonable interference; or
9. Likely to cause unreasonable damage, during or incident to its
movement, to private persons or property or otherwise interfere
with the reasonable use and enjoyment of such property.
B. Provided however, that if the conditions or circumstances delineated
above, in the judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer, admit of
practicable and effective repair, resolution or accommodation which
will adequately protect the public health, safety, welfare, reasonable
terms and conditions as may be set forth on such permit.
A. The issuance of a permit may be granted subject to such terms and
conditions as may be deemed reasonable and proper to the end that
such moving will not be materially detrimental or injurious to the public
health, safety or welfare or to public or private property and
improvements or to the district to which the building will be moved.
Such terms and conditions may include:
1. Measures to protect the public street or other public property in
the City on, over or through which the building will be moved
pursuant to Section 535.080 herein;
2. Measures to protect private persons or property pursuant to
Section 535.080 herein;
3. Requirements of changes, alterations, repairs or additions to be
made to or upon the building or the sites from or to which it will be
moved;
Section
535.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
535.070
AO:607
Section 535.080. Protective Measures. [R.O. 2008 §535.080; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 535.090. Bonding Requirements and/or Cash Deposits.
[R.O. 2008 §535.090; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
4. Requirement that the permittee post a cash deposit and/or bond
with the City of an amount pursuant to Section 535.090 herein;
5. Requirement that the permittee show evidence of liability
insurance meeting the conditions set forth in Section 535.100
herein;
6. Requirement that the permittee show approvals in writing from any
public or private utility that may be affected by such move in
accordance with Section 535.110 herein; and
7. Other terms and conditions as may be deemed appropriate by the
City Manager.
B. Such terms and conditions shall be written upon the permit or
appended in writing thereto. Each such term or condition must be
satisfactorily complied with by the permittee and the method of such
compliance must be approved by the Code Enforcement Officer prior to
initiating the proposed move.
A. The City may require:
1. That warning signs be conspicuously posted on or around the sites
from or to which the building may be moved and along public
streets over which the building may be moved;
2. That warning lights be attached to the building being moved and/or
to the vehicle or vehicles involved in such move;
3. That public and private property be kept free of rubbish, waste or
other loose materials that may result from such move;
4. That any excavations resulting from such move at the site from or
to which the building is moved are filled in, fenced or otherwise
restricted so as not to create a hazardous or dangerous condition;
5. That property owners adjoining the site from or to which the
building is to be moved and property owners along the route of
movement be notified of the move, and that the Public Safety
Department of the City be notified of the move so that an escort can
be provided or so that traffic control can be facilitated.
A. Owner's Completion Bond. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner
or lessee of the property upon which the building is to be located shall
file with the City Clerk a bond or other form of security or a cash
deposit, conditioned as follows:
Section
535.070
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
535.090
AO:608
1. That all of the work required to be done to complete the relocation,
alteration and reconstruction of the building pursuant to the
conditions of the permit shall be fully performed and completed
within a reasonable time, to be specified by the Code Enforcement
Officer in the permit.
2. Such bond or security or cash deposit shall be in principal amount
equal to the estimated cost of the work proposed to be done plus
ten percent (10%) thereof, and shall name the City as obligee, and
shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney.
3. An extension of time for said completions may be granted in writing
by the Code Enforcement Officer when, in his/her discretion,
circumstances shall so justify, but no such extension shall release
any bond, security or cash deposit.
B. Site Clearance And Safety Bond. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the
owner or lessee of the property from which the building is to be moved
shall file with the City Clerk a bond or other form of security or a cash
deposit in favor of the City, conditioned as follows:
1. That before any moving of a building, the owner thereof shall notify
the appropriate utilities in order that all gas and oil pipelines that
are to be disconnected from the building may be securely capped
and sealed.
2. That the water service is abandoned in accordance with Sections
705.870 through 705.890 of this Code.
3. That any excavation or opening resulting from such move is filled in
or securely barricaded.
4. That within ten (10) days after moving said building, the owner or
permittee shall complete or cause to be completed the following
work:
a. Closing and sealing of sanitary pipings.
b. Filling of septic tanks or cesspools.
c. Removal of any buried underground tanks formerly used to
store flammable liquids.
d. Removal of all refuse, debris and waste materials from the
property.
5. Such bond, other security or cash deposit shall be in principal
amount equal to the cost of the work proposed to be done, as
estimated by the City Manager, and shall name the City as obligee,
and shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney.
6. An extension of time for completion of the work required by this
Section may be granted by the Code Enforcement Officer when, in
Section
535.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
535.090
AO:609
Section 535.100. Insurance Requirement. [R.O. 2008 §535.100;
Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 535.110. Utilities Approval Requirement. [R.O. 2008
§535.110; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
his/her discretion, circumstances shall so justify, but no such
extension shall release any bond, security or cash deposit.
C. Cash Deposit For Public Costs. The applicant shall also deposit with the
City Clerk a cash deposit to cover the cost to the City, as estimated by
the Code Enforcement Officer, of trimming, moving, removing, or
replacing or replacement of trees or shrubs, and of moving, removing
or displacing any pole or other structure or equipment belonging to the
City or the cutting, displacing or changing of the location of any
structure or equipment belonging to the City.
A. Every person moving a building in the City shall file with the City Clerk
one (1) of the following:
1. A liability insurance policy issued by a solvent corporation holding
a Certificate of Authority to do insurance business in Missouri; or
2. A Certificate of Insurance issued by an insurance corporation; or
3. Other evidence of liability and property damage insurance.
B. In any case, the insurance required under this Section shall insure the
person moving the building against loss from the liability imposed by
law for injury to, or death of, any person, or damage to any property
growing out of the moving of such building to the amount or limit of five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) exclusive of interest and costs,
on account of moving any one (1) building resulting in injury to or death
of a person, and of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for
damage to property of others resulting from moving any one (1)
building.
C. Such insurance coverage shall indemnify the City and save it harmless
against any and all claims, demands or causes of action whatsoever
which might arise or accrue against it by reason of the granting of such
permit or the exercise of any privilege thereby conferred, and to repay
all damages which may be suffered by the City or by any other person
by reason of the exercise of the permit, including by way of illustration,
but not of limitation, injury or damage to pavements, curbs, sidewalks,
poles, wires, or trees.
A. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall obtain written
approval from any public or private utility whose property will be
moved or disturbed during the moving process to the effect that such
moving should be permitted, what conditions should be attached to
such permit to insure that the utility will be protected and that its
customers and the public will be safely and adequately served, and
Section
535.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
535.110
AO:610
Section 535.120. Issuance, Expiration, Suspension or Revocation of
Permit. [R.O. 2008 §535.120; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 535.130. Application and Permit Fees. [R.O. 2008 §535.130;
Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
An application fee, as designated by resolution of the City Council, shall
be paid to the City Clerk upon the filing of an application for a permit for
moving work. A permit fee, as designated by resolution of the City Council,
shall be paid to the City Clerk upon the issuance of each permit for moving
work.
Section 535.140. Approval of Route — Notice and Supervision. [R.O.
2008 §535.140; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
what costs will be incurred by the utility in accommodating the
proposed move.
B. The City shall review and approve said written approvals and the
applicant shall furnish to the appropriate utility a bond, surety or cash
deposit equal to the estimated cost that will be incurred by the utilities
involved.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall authorize the issuance of a permit
when all of the necessary requirements and conditions of this Chapter
have been complied with.
B. The work authorized by such permit shall be commenced within one (1)
month following the date of issuance of the permit and shall be
concluded within two (2) months of the date of issuance of the permit;
provided however, that the actual time permitted for moving the
building shall not exceed three (3) calendar days.
C. If the work is suspended or abandoned after commencement or if the
time limits set forth herein are not complied with, the permit shall be
deemed to have expired; provided however, that an extension may be
granted by the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement
Officer may, at any time, for good and sufficient cause, suspend or
revoke any permit.
A. The permit issued hereunder shall designate the route over which the
permittee shall move the building. The route shall not be changed
unless the permit is amended.
B. Should part of such route be over a State highway, the permit shall not
be issued unless approvals or permits required by the State Highway
Department are first obtained and supplied to the Code Enforcement
Officer.
C. Notice must be given by the permittee to the City Manager and to the
Public Safety Department not less than thirty-six (36) nor more than
Section
535.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
535.140
AO:611
Section 535.150. Default in Performance of Conditions. [R.O. 2008
§535.150; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 535.160. Refunding of Deposits. [R.O. 2008 §535.160; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
When the moving of any building for which a permit has been granted is
completed and any damage to public or private property has been repaired
to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer and all terms and
conditions of the permit and this Chapter have been complied with, the City
Clerk shall refund the remaining unused portion of any cash deposits and
release any bonds or other forms of security. Should the cost, however, of
repairing damages and/or performing other work required by this Chapter
exceed the total amount of money deposited, the permittee shall be held
liable for such excess costs and same shall be recoverable by the City from
the permittee.
Section 535.170. Violation and Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §535.170; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Chapter shall
be guilty of a ordinance violation and fined no more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
forty-eight (48) hours before the actual work of moving the building is
to commence.
D. Said notice in no way, however, relieves the permittee or person having
charge of the moving of any building of his/her obligation to furnish
proper supervision.
E. In no event shall a building being moved remain in any one (1) location
on any street for a period longer than twenty-four (24) hours except by
written permission of the City Manager.
A. Whenever a default has occurred in the performance of any term or
condition of a permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the
permittee by the Code Enforcement Officer; said notice to state the
nature of the default, the work to be done to correct the default, the
estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed to be reasonably
necessary to complete such work or perform the term or condition.
B. After a receipt of such notice, the permittee must, within the time
therein specified, either cause the work to be done or make payment to
the City Clerk in the amount of the estimated cost of such work as set
forth in the notice plus ten percent (10%) of said estimated cost.
C. If the permittee chooses to make payment, the City Clerk shall inform
the Code Enforcement Officer upon deposit of said payment and the
City Manager shall cause the required work to be performed and
completed.
Section
535.140
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
535.170
AO:612
committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. In
addition to the penalty described above, the City may take any appropriate
action including but not limited to instituting action in law or in equity to
prevent, restrain, abate, enjoin or correct any violation of this Chapter.
Section 535.180. Rules and Regulations. [R.O. 2008 §535.180; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Chapter 540
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
Section 540.010. Legislative Intent. [R.O. 2008 §540.010; Ord. No.
4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the City Council, in the exercise of
its police powers to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to regulate
the demolition of buildings in the City.
Section 540.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §540.020; Ord. No. 4959
§1, 3-11-1991]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words, terms and phrases
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the
context otherwise indicates:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building less than one thousand (1,000) square
feet in floor area and less than fifteen (15) feet high having no basement
and not used as a dwelling, the use of which is incidental and appurtenant
to the principal use of the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof or partial roof and enclosed
within exterior walls or fire walls built, erected and framed of component
structural parts, designed for housing, shelter, enclosure and support of
persons, animals or property of any kind, including an accessory building.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Code Enforcement Officer or his/her duly
authorized representative.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Building Official of the City of
Maryville.
DEMOLITION WORK — The dismantling, tearing down, wrecking or razing
of any building or portion of a building for any reason whatsoever, whether
A. The City Manager may make rules and regulations governing the
movement of buildings not inconsistent with this Chapter.
B. Pursuant to such authority, the City Manager may suspend or waive or
modify requirements of this Chapter in order to implement the
provisions of Section 535.030, without undue hardship or unnecessary
requirements being imposed on applicants for permits for moving of
buildings.
Section
535.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
540.020
AO:613
accomplished by mechanical methods, physical labor or any combination
thereof; however, demolition work shall not be construed to include the
removal or alteration of a non-bearing wall or partition of a building.
LICENSEE — The person or entity to which a license is issued pursuant to
the provisions of this Chapter.
PERMITTEE — The person or entity to which a permit is issued pursuant to
the provisions of this Chapter.
PERSON — Any one (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, firms or enterprises.
STREET — Any public right-of-way in the City, including but not limited to
streets, avenues, alleys, easements and any and all public property owned
or controlled by the City or public entities.
Section 540.030. License Required. [R.O. 2008 §540.030; Ord. No.
4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 540.040. Permit Required. [R.O. 2008 §540.040; Ord. No.
4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to demolish or cause to be
demolished any building or portion of a building in the City without first
registering as a wrecking contractor with the City Clerk and obtaining a
license for demolition work from the City.
B. Said license shall be known as a License for Demolition Work and shall
not be assignable or transferable nor shall it be used by any person
other than the licensee or his/her employees, contractors or designated
representatives. Provided however, that this licensing requirement
shall not apply to the demolition of any one (1) story residential building
not of masonry construction or any accessory building, and provided
that said demolition work shall be done by the owner of record of said
building or accessory building, or by his/her family or employees.
C. Upon issuance of a license for demolition work, the applicant shall pay a
licensing fee, as designated by resolution of the City Council, to the City
Clerk. Said license shall be for a term of one (1) year from the date of
issuance.
D. No license shall be issued until the applicant has provided to the Code
Enforcement Officer sufficient evidence, as delineated in rules and
regulations adopted by the City, of the applicant's qualifications for and
experience in the demolition of buildings or in related work or
activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to demolish or cause to be
demolished any building or portion of a building in the City without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Code Enforcement Officer;
provided however, that this permit requirement shall not apply to the
Section
540.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
540.040
AO:614
Section 540.050. Application for Permit. [R.O. 2008 §540.050; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
demolition of any accessory building which is not connected to electric,
gas, water, sanitary sewer or other utility service lines.
B. Such permit shall be known as a "Permit for Demolition Work" and shall
not be assignable or transferable nor shall it be used by any person
other than the permittee or his/her employees, contractors, or
designated representatives.
C. Permits shall be issued only to those holding a valid, current license for
demolition work issued by the City or to those who are exempt from the
license requirement pursuant to this Section.
D. A person who has made arrangements for the demolition of a building
by burning by the Public Safety Department for training purposes shall
not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this Section.
A. Any person desiring a permit for demolition work shall file with the
Code Enforcement Officer an application therefor in writing on a form
to be furnished by the City for said purpose. Such application shall
specify the following:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The name and address of the owner of the building to be
demolished;
3. The exact location of the building to be demolished;
4. The character and size of the building to be demolished, including
its length, width and height;
5. The principal materials of construction of the building;
6. The type of equipment to be used for the proposed work, including
the use of explosives and the method of demolition;
7. The estimated length of time required to do the proposed work;
8. The necessity for any safety or other precautions to protect
adjacent properties, buildings or streets, including warning signs,
lights or structures to protect persons or property; and
9. The date and time proposed for the initiation and completion of the
demolition work.
B. Exception. The Code Enforcement Officer may require in addition to the
above information the following:
1. Proof of permission by the owner to do the proposed work;
Section
540.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
540.050
AO:615
Section 540.060. Investigation. [R.O. 2008 §540.060; Ord. No. 4959
§1, 3-11-1991]
Upon the filing of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
an investigation to be made of the building to be demolished and formulate
a recommendation with respect to issuance of the permit.
Section 540.070. Denial of Permit. [R.O. 2008 §540.070; Ord. No.
4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
No permit shall be issued to demolish any building or portion thereof
which, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer after investigation,
is so located and is of such size or constructed of such materials that its
demolition will be likely to cause unreasonable damage to public or private
property; provided however, that if such conditions or circumstances admit
of practicable and effective resolution which will adequately protect the
public health and safety, the permit may be issued upon the inclusion of
such reasonable terms and conditions on the permit.
Section 540.080. Terms and Conditions of Permit. [R.O. 2008
§540.080; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
2. A plot plan showing the location of the building on the property, the
lot lines of said property, all adjacent buildings, structures and lots,
all adjacent streets, and any structures in proximity to the building
to be demolished that may be affected by such demolition;
3. Certification by an engineer certified by the State of Missouri that
demolition of the structure will not adversely affect the structural
integrity of adjacent structures or facilities.
A. The issuance of a permit may be granted subject to such terms and
conditions as may be deemed reasonable and proper to the end that
such demolition will not be materially detrimental or injurious to the
public health, safety or welfare or to public or private property and
improvements. Such terms and conditions may include:
1. Measures to protect private property and persons, public property,
streets and improvements which may be affected by such
demolition pursuant to Section 540.090 herein;
2. Measures to assure that any device or equipment such as scaffolds,
ladders, derricks, hoists or similar items, or explosives if they are to
be used, shall be constructed, operated or used in accordance with
City regulations, with adequate protection, and by adequately
trained personnel.
3. Requirement that the permittee post a cash deposit and/or bond
with the City of an amount pursuant to Sections 540.110, 540.120
and 540.130 herein;
Section
540.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
540.080
AO:616
Section 540.090. Protective Measures. [R.O. 2008 §540.090; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
4. Requirement that the permitted show evidence of liability
insurance meeting the conditions set forth in Section 540.130
herein;
5. Requirement that the permittee show approvals and/or releases in
writing from any public or private utility that may be affected by
such move in accordance with Section 540.140 herein;
6. Such other terms and conditions as may be deemed appropriate by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Each such condition must be satisfactorily complied with by the
permittee and the method of such compliance must be approved by the
Code Enforcement Officer, prior to the initiating (of) the proposed
demolition.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer may require:
1. That warning signs be conspicuously posted on or around the site
on which the building is to be demolished;
2. That between sunset and sunrise adequate lights be provided to
properly protect persons and property from hazards of pits,
excavations, fences, barriers, equipment, building materials, or
rubbish in, upon or near a street or adjacent to private property;
3. That public and private property be kept free of rubbish, waste or
other loose materials that may result from demolition;
4. That any excavation or opening resulting from such demolition be
filled in, securely barricaded or fenced so as not to create a
hazardous or dangerous condition and properly and permanently
drained so that no water is left standing or likely to stand;
5. That all material to be removed shall be wet sufficiently to lay the
dust incidental to its removal;
6. That proof of extermination of any building at least ten (10) days
prior to its demolition be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer.
7. That property owners adjoining or in the vicinity of the building to
be demolished and who may be affected by such demolition be
notified at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to such demolition;
8. That the Public Safety Department be notified at least thirty-six
(36) but not more than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the demolition
so that adequate safety precautions can be provided and so that
traffic control and movement on adjacent streets can be facilitated
or temporarily restricted as necessary;
Section
540.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
540.090
AO:617
Section 540.100. Methods of Demolition. [R.O. 2008 §540.100; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 540.110. Bonding Requirements. [R.O. 2008 §540.110; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
9. That adequate, safe and protected walkways be provided around
the building demolition site if sidewalk use by the public will be
restricted or dangerous;
10. That in cases of buildings of two (2) stories or more, a shed
covering shall be provided adjacent to such building for its full
frontage on any street over the area from the building line to the
curb line, except where such building is set back at least ten (10)
feet from the building line, such shed shall have an inside clearance
of not less than seven (7) feet and shall be properly lighted at night.
A. Except for the cutting of holes in floors for chutes through which to
drop materials, preparation of storage space, and other necessary
preparatory work, demolition of exterior walls and floor construction
shall begin at the top of the building and proceed, exterior walls and
floor construction shall begin at the top of the building and proceed
downward and each story of exterior wall and floor construction shall
be removed or dropped into the storage space before commencing
demolition work on the next lower story. This requirement shall not
prohibit the demolition of a structure in sections or in total by other
methods, if after review by the Code Enforcement Officer it is
determined that such other method is safe and that positive means are
taken to prevent injury to persons or damage to public or private
property.
B. No materials shall be placed upon the floor of any building during
demolition, but shall be lowered to the ground or storage space
immediately upon displacement. Materials shall not be dropped by
gravity to any point lying outside the exterior walls of the building
except through enclosed chutes, unless there is sufficient distance to
the property line so that no adverse effect on such other property can
occur. All floor openings and shafts not used for material chutes shall be
floored over or enclosed with guardrails and toe boards. At least one (1)
stairway, however, shall be accessible as each floor is demolished.
A. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of the property and building
which is to be demolished shall file with the City Clerk a bond or other
form of security or a cash deposit in favor of the City, conditioned as
follows:
1. Such bond, other security or cash deposit shall be in principal
amount equal to the cost of the work proposed to be done, plus ten
percent (10%) thereof, and shall name the City as obligee, and shall
be in a form approved by the City Attorney.
Section
540.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
540.110
AO:618
Section 540.120. Cash Deposit for Public Costs. [R.O. 2008
§540.120; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
The applicant shall also deposit with the City Clerk a cash deposit to
cover the cost to the City, as estimated by the Code Enforcement Officer,
of trimming, moving, removing, or replanting or replacement of trees or
shrubs, and of moving, removing or displacing any pole or other structure
or equipment belonging to the City or the cutting, displacing or changing
of the location of any structure or equipment belonging to the City as
occasioned by the building demolition.
Section 540.130. Insurance Requirement. [R.O. 2008 §540.130;
Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 540.140. Utilities Approval Requirement. [R.O. 2008
§540.140; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
2. An extension of time for completion of the work required by this
Section may be granted by the Code Enforcement Officer when, in
his/her discretion, circumstances shall so justify, but no such
extension shall release any bond, security or cash deposit.
A. Every person demolishing a building or portion of a building except a
one (1) story building not of masonry construction or an accessory
building in the City shall file with the City Clerk one (1) of the following:
1. A liability insurance policy issued by a solvent corporation holding
a Certificate of Authority to do insurance business in Missouri; or
2. A Certificate of Insurance issued by an insurance corporation; or
3. Other evidence of liability and property damage insurance.
B. In any case, the insurance required under this Section shall insure the
person demolishing the building against loss from the liability imposed
by law for injury to, or death of, any person, or damage to any property
growing out of the demolition of such building to the amount or limit of
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) exclusive of interest and
costs, on account of injury to, or death of, any one (1) person, and of one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for damage to property of
others resulting from demolishing any one (1) building.
C. Such insurance coverage shall indemnify the City and save it harmless
against any and all claims, demands or causes of action whatsoever
which might arise or accrue against it by reason of the granting of such
permit or the exercise of any privilege thereby conferred, and to repay
all damages which may be suffered by the City or by any other person
by reason of the exercise of the permit, including by way of illustration,
but not of limitation to, injury or damage to pavements, curbs,
sidewalks, poles, wires or trees.
Section
540.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
540.140
AO:619
Section 540.150. Disconnection of Services. [R.O. 2008 §540.160;
Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 540.160. Issuance — Expiration — Suspension or
Revocation of Permit. [R.O. 2008 §540.170; Ord. No. 4959 §1,
3-11-1991]
The Code Enforcement Officer shall approve the issuance of a permit when
all of the necessary requirements and conditions of this Chapter have been
complied with. The work authorized by date of issuance of the permit
shall be commenced within one (1) month following the date of issuance
of the permit and shall be concluded within one (1) month of the date of
issuance of the permit; provided however, that the actual time permitted
for demolishing the building shall not exceed three (3) calendar days. If the
work is suspended or abandoned after commencement or if the time limits
set forth herein are not complied with, the permit shall be deemed to have
expired; provided however, that an extension may be granted by the Code
Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer may, at any time, for
good and sufficient cause, suspend or revoke any permit.
Section 540.170. Waivers and Appeals. [R.O. 2008 §540.190; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
The Board of Code Appeals may suspend or waive or modify requirements
of this Chapter in order to implement its intent and purpose without undue
hardship or unnecessary requirements being imposed on applicants for
permits for the demolition of buildings, so long as the public health, safety
A. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall obtain written
approval from any public or private utility whose property will be
moved or distributed during the demolition process to the effect that
such demolition should be permitted, what conditions should be
attached to such permit to insure that the utility will be protected and
that its customers and the public will be safely and adequately served,
and what costs will be incurred by the utility in accommodating the
proposed demolition.
B. The City shall review and approve said written approvals and the
permittee shall be required to furnish the appropriate utilities with a
bond, surety or cash deposit equal to the estimated cost that will be
incurred by the utilities involved.
A. All electric, gas, water, steam, storm and sanitary sewers or other utility
service lines shall be shutoff and all such lines shall be either cut,
capped and/or disconnected outside the building line or property line,
as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, prior to demolition.
B. If it is necessary to maintain any power, water or other utility lines
during demolition, such lines shall be temporarily relocated or
protected to the satisfaction of the utility involved and the Code
Enforcement Officer, and written approval for same shall be required.
Section
540.140
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
540.170
AO:620
and welfare is guaranteed. A permittee or other person having an interest
in the demolition of a building pursuant to this Chapter may request the
suspension waiver or modification of the requirements of this Chapter to, or
may appeal any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer to, the Board of
Code Appeals pursuant to Title I, Chapter 110, Article III of the Municipal
Code.
Chapter 545
STREETS, ALLEYS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
540.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
540.170
AO:621

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 545.010. Hauling Garbage Through Streets. [R.O. 2008
§545.010; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
No person shall haul any garbage or offensive material through any street of
the City where there is an alley parallel with said street and within a block
of said street.
Section 545.020. Solicitations From or Distributions to Occupants
With Motor Vehicles. [R.O. 2008 §545.020; Ord. No. 4959 §1,
3-11-1991; Ord. No. 6631 §1, 3-8-2004]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any public solicitation or
gratuitous distribution from or to the occupants of any motor vehicle that
shall be upon the public streets or ways of the City unless the vehicle shall
be lawfully parked at the time of the solicitation. As used in this Section,
the term public street or streets or ways shall include streets, roadways,
roadway shoulders, medians and any area within the public right-of-way.
Section 545.030. Building Materials, Etc. — in Streets or Alleys at
Night Time — Warning Lights — Flares. [R.O. 2008 §545.030; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
No person shall place or leave any ashes, dirt, fuel, junk, building materials
or other materials and/or articles upon or in any public street or alley,
and leave the same thereon during the night time, unless such materials
or articles be adequately marked and designated by warning lights and/or
flares.
Section 545.040. Marking of Streets and Erection of Signs. [R.O.
2008 §545.040; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
A. The City Manager may cause to be marked and designate parking
spaces upon the streets and alleys as provided for in this Code.
1. Such space shall be of such length and size as shall be convenient
and practical at the discretion of the City Manager. Parking space
and/or space wherein parking is restricted or prohibited may be
marked and indicated on the streets, curbing or parkway by
appropriate signs or markings therefor in such manner as the City
Manager may select.
2. "Stop" signs, "No Parking" signs and other appropriate signs may
be erected by the City Manager's discretion. All signs, markings
and/or signals shall be erected and placed in conformity with the
provisions of this Code.
Section
545.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
545.040
AO:623
3. Whenever any street, alley or other public place shall be marked or
designated for parking purposes, all parking shall be in conformity
with such marking and/or signs.
4. It shall not be necessary to the enforcement of this Code that signs,
signals or marking be erected, or that parking space be designated.
The absence of any warning sign or marking for parking shall be no
defense for any prosecution for the violations of this Code.
5. No person shall erect any sign or mark any street or alley for
parking purposes or alter or mar any sign or marking erected or
made under the provisions of this Code, or require or prohibit, by
sign or marking, any parking different from that. Any person may
limit or prohibit parking within specified limits upon any street or
alley, by securing a permit therefor. Such permits shall be granted
by the City Manager upon application. No permits shall be granted
except upon proof that the public convenience, safety and welfare
shall be promoted thereby. Such permits may be revoked by the
City Manager at any time without notice, and shall be valid until so
revoked. The City Clerk shall keep a record of all applications and
permits. All signs and/or markings shall be erected or made by the
permittee at his/her own cost, and under the supervision of the City
Manager as to the location, type and character thereof.
6. No person shall remove, destroy, deface, mutilate, or in any manner
interfere or tamper with any traffic sign, parking meter, parking
sign or any marking placed upon the streets, alleys, curbings or
parkways under the provisions of this Code.
Section
545.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
545.040
AO:624
ARTICLE II
Street Openings — Driveways
Section 545.050. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §545.050; Ord. No. 4959
§1, 3-11-1991]
For the purpose of Sections 545.060 through 545.190, the following terms,
words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
ALLEY — The entire width of a public way which extends only secondary
means of access to abutting property.
CONTRACTOR — An independent contractor employed by a private
property owner to construct, reconstruct, alter, remove or replace a
driveway approach.
CORNER — The point of intersection of lines of two (2) street curb faces
extended into the street intersection.
CURB RETURN — That portion of curb at the beginning of a driveway
approach which serves as a transition from the height of the curb to the
level of the approach.
DRIVEWAY APPROACH — An area intended for the operation of
automobiles and other vehicles giving access between a roadway and
abutting property.
GUTTER — That portion of the driving surface of an improved street,
driveway approach or other public way which abuts the curb and provides
for the runoff of surface drainage.
IMPROVED STREET — A public street having concrete curbs or curb and
gutters, or other such equivalent physical features which serve to establish
a permanent street grade.
INTERSECTION — The general area where two (2) or more roadways meet,
join or cross at a common point establishing an area within which vehicles
traveling different roadways may come in conflict.
PARCEL OF LAND — A lot, or lots, or a tract under a single ownership.
PARKWAY — That portion of the street right-of-way of the roadway and the
adjacent property line, or lines, on the same side of the street, except any
portion used for sidewalks.
PERMITTEE — An owner or contractor holding a permit.
PLOT PLAN — A drawing showing all of the important physical features;
both existing and proposed, of a given parcel of land.
PROPERTY LINE — The boundary between two (2) or more parcels of land.
RESIDENTIAL — Pertaining to the use of any area, structure or other
facility primarily for dwellings, either single-family or two (2) family.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A general term denoting public ownership or interest in
land, usually in a strip, which has been acquired for or devoted to the use of
a street or alley.
Section
545.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
545.050
AO:625
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE or STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The boundary
between any public street or alley and one (1) or more parcels of private
property.
ROADWAY — That area of a street intended and used for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK — That paved portion of a parkway intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STREET — The entire width of a public right-of-way which extends primary
means of access to abutting properties.
UNIMPROVED STREET — A street not having concrete curbs, or curbs and
gutters, or other such equivalent physical features which serve to establish
a permanent street grade.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Section 545.060. Motor Vehicles Entering Private Property From
Public Streets. [R.O. 2008 §545.060; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
No person shall operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to enter private
property from a public street or leave private property and enter a public
street except at clearly defined curb openings and approved driveway
approaches.
Section 545.070. Unlawful to Construct Driveway Approach Without
Permit. [R.O. 2008 §545.070; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct, alter, remove
or replace any driveway approach, or any curb, guttering or sidewalk in
connection with any such driveway approach work, without first applying
for and receiving a permit for such work.
Section 545.080. Application for Permit to Construct Driveway
Approach. [R.O. 2008 §545.080; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Applications for permit to construct, reconstruct, alter, remove or replace
any driveway approach, or any curb, guttering or sidewalk in connection
with such driveway approach work, shall be made to the Code Enforcement
Officer. Applications shall contain such information as the Code
Enforcement Officer shall deem necessary or desirable in order to
determine whether or not application is for work acceptable and in
conformity with the provisions of Sections 545.060 through 545.190 of
this Chapter. An application for work other than residential shall include a
complete plot plan, which shall show the specific application of all standards
and regulations of Section 545.120. No application shall be accepted unless
it be made by the owner of the property to be served by the driveway
approach, or the owner's contractor.
Section
545.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
545.090
AO:626
Section 545.090. Existing Driveways. [R.O. 2008 §545.090; Ord. No.
4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
The distances, widths or measurements set forth as a requirement in this
Article governing the location and width of driveway approaches shall not
apply to work performed under a permit involving the replacement or repair
of an existing driveway approach, provided such repair or replacement
shall not increase the degree of non-conformance of the location and width
of the driveway approach, and, provided further, that when such repair
or replacement of a driveway approach is being performed in connection
with new construction of a building on the parcel of land served by said
connection with new construction of a building on the parcel of land served
by said driveway approach, then all distances, widths or measurements set
forth in this Article for driveway approaches shall apply to such repair or
replacement.
Section 545.100. General Requirements and Regulations Governing
All Driveway Approach Work. [R.O. 2008 §545.100; Ord. No. 4959 §1,
3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7053 §1, 9-22-2008]
A. The following provisions, requirements and regulations shall apply to
all driveway approach construction, reconstruction, alteration, removal
or replacement:
1. There shall be no continuous or unbroken opening from the street
along the entire length of the abutting parcel of property.
2. No new curb shall be built or any existing curb removed for any
purpose except in conformity with the requirements of Sections
545.060 through 545.180 of this Chapter.
3. There shall be no curb opening on the curb return at any street
intersection.
4. (Reserved.)
5. A minimum of twelve (12) inch, fourteen (14) gauge corrugated
metal pipe, concrete pipe, reinforced concrete pipe, or similar
materials approved by the Maryville Street Superintendent shall be
used for storm drains underneath driveway approaches. The design
of all such drainage structures shall be subject to the approval of
the City.
6. All materials used in the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
removal or replacement of driveway approaches to improved
streets shall conform to concrete paving specifications on file in the
office of the Code Enforcement Officer.
7. During the construction, reconstruction, alteration, removal or
replacement of driveway approaches, warning lights and barriers
and other necessary similar devices shall be maintained by the
Section
545.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
545.100
AO:627
permittee sufficient to reasonably protect the traveling public from
harm.
8. No concrete shall be placed until the necessary form work and
excavations have been inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer
or his/her authorized representatives. It shall be the duty of the
permittee to arrange for such inspections prior to the placing of
concrete.
9. No driveway approach shall be permitted which will interfere with
any existing parking meters, signs, traffic control devices,
plantings, cables, poles, guys, water mains, gas mains or other
public utilities. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
inform the Code Enforcement Officer, or such person unauthorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer to issue permits required by this
Chapter, that the proposed construction will interfere with one (1)
or more of the facilities indicated above. The City may, where it
deems appropriate, allow the property owner to relocate any
interfering utilities, signs, and other obstacles within the control of
the City at the property owner's expense. All modifications and
relocations must meet existing City specifications.
10. It shall be the duty of the permittee, after all work has been
completed, to remove all rubbish, waste and excess materials and
to restore immediately the street right-of-way area to a neat, clean
and safe condition.
11. All distances, widths or measurements set forth or required in this
Article governing the location and width of driveway approaches
shall be computed by measuring along the abutting street right-ofway
line unless otherwise specifically provided.
12. A permittee shall, prior thereto, notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of the date work is to commence. If work is not commenced
within thirty (30) days from the date of permit issuance, the permit
shall become void. All work shall be completed within sixty (60)
days from the day it begins.
13. Type of surfacing. Driveway approaches from improved streets
shall be paved with six inches (6) of plain concrete. When such an
approach crosses an existing sidewalk, the area of the sidewalk
within the driveway approach, and for a distance of eighteen inches
(18) to either side of the driveway approach, shall be paved with six
inches (6) of plain concrete. Where existing curb removal is
necessary, the curb and a portion of the roadway to extend to two
(2) feet from behind the curb shall be removed and replaced with
materials equal to or greater than the existing roadway.
14. Grade. The grade of driveway approaches from the gutter line of
improved streets shall rise on a constant grade to the nearer edge
of an existing sidewalk. If there is no sidewalk existing, driveway
approaches shall rise from the edge of the roadway to the elevation
Section
545.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
545.100
AO:628
Section 545.110. Specific Standards for Residential Driveway
Approach Work. [R.O. 2008 §545.110; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 545.120. Specific Standards for Driveway Approach Work
Other Than Residential. [R.O. 2008 §545.120; Ord. No. 4959 §1,
3-11-1991]
of the center grade of the street or from the gutter line of an
improved street to the elevation of the top of the curb.
A. In addition to the requirements of Section 545.100 of this Chapter, and
except as otherwise provided by Section 545.090, the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, removal or replacement of all residential
driveway approaches shall conform to the following regulations.
1. A minimum of twenty (20) feet shall exist between the interior lines
of any two (2) driveway approaches serving the same parcel of
property.
2. Residential driveway approach grades shall conform with the
provisions of Subsection (14) of Section 545.100.
3. Driveway approaches on corner lots shall be no closer than twenty
(20) feet from the nearest right-of-way line of an intersecting
street.
4. Residential driveway approaches shall not exceed a maximum
width of thirty (30) feet, measured at the property line. The
maximum width of a curb opening for a residential driveway shall
not exceed forty (40) feet.
5. A five (5) foot radius curb return shall be provided for all driveway
approaches to permanent streets. A smaller radius return may be
authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer for driveways wider
than twenty (20) feet. In no instance shall the curb return radii
extend beyond the sidewalk line on the roadway side.
6. Due to the lack of a defined radius return on driveway approaches
to an unimproved street, the minimum width of such driveway
approaches at the grader ditch line shall be twenty-four (24) feet
and the minimum length of drainage tube shall be the same.
7. Residential driveway approaches giving access from an improved
street shall be surfaced as provided in Subsection (13) of Section
545.100.
A. In addition to the requirements of Section 545.100 of this Chapter, the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, removal or replacement of all
driveway approaches other than residential shall conform to the
following regulations:
Section
545.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
545.120
AO:629
Section 545.130. Responsibility of Code Enforcement Officer for
Driveway Approach Work. [R.O. 2008 §545.130; Ord. No. 4959 §1,
3-11-1991]
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for providing all
inspections required to determine that driveway approaches are
constructed, reconstructed, altered, removed or replaced in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 545.050 through 545.130 of this Chapter,
and he/she is hereby granted authority to make and adopt such rules and
regulations and such standard plans and specifications as he/she deems
necessary to implement and carry out the true meaning and purpose of
Sections 545.050 through 545.180 or the applicable regulations or standard
plans and specifications adopted by the Code Enforcement Officer under
the provisions of this Section. Any person served with a stop work order
who shall fail to stop work or who shall continue such work shall be guilty
of a ordinance violation. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer or his/
her authorized agent shall issue a stop work order he/she shall, as soon as
reasonably possible, advise the permittee of his/her reasons for doing so.
Section 545.140. Removal and Correction Orders. [R.O. 2008
§545.140; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
1. Driveway approach location. All driveway approaches shall be
located to provide the following minimum clearances:
Nearest edge of driveway approach to nearest
edge of another driveway approach serving the
same parcel of land
20 feet
Nearest edge of driveway approach to
property line
5 feet
On corner lots, nearest edge of driveway
approach to nearest right-of-way line of an
intersecting street
20 feet
2. Radius of returns (radius at back of curb in feet). The maximum
radius return radius shall be twenty (20) feet.
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any driveway
approach or related work has been hereafter constructed,
reconstructed, altered, removed or replaced in violation of the
requirements of Sections 545.060 through Section 545.160 of this
Chapter, or the applicable regulations or standard plans and
specifications adopted under the provisions of Section 545.130, he/she
shall by written order, direct the owner of the premises to correct the
violation thereon, setting forth in said order the nature of the violation
within the time provided in the order.
B. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that a driveway
approach heretofore in existence is contrary to the standards for
driveway approaches set forth, in that such driveway approach
Section
545.120
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
545.140
AO:630
Section 545.150. Removal of Abandoned Driveway Approaches.
[R.O. 2008 §545.160; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Whenever a driveway approach has been abandoned, either by closing the
entrance to the property served or by changing the use of the property
served so that the driveway approach is no longer necessary or usable, it
shall be the duty of the owner of the property served by said approach to
remove the driveway approach, restore sidewalk, curb, gutter and parkway
to the line and grade of the adjoining sidewalk, curb, gutter and parkway
within twenty (20) days after receiving a notice ordering such removal from
the Code Enforcement Officer.
Section 545.160. Curb Bridging Ramps Unlawful. [R.O. 2008
§545.170; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or permit the erection of any
wooden or metal ramp from the gutter line to the top of the curb of any
public street, and it shall be unlawful to place dirt, ashes, drain pipes,
asphalt, concrete or other materials in the gutter of a public street in
order to make an approach to a driveway, parking lot or entrance way
to a building upon private property, except that nothing contained in this
Section shall be taken to prohibit temporary driveway approaches or curb
bridging ramps necessary or reasonable to construction projects, household
moving activities or other related activities, if done in such a manner as to
protect public improvements and rights-of-way.
presents a clear and present danger to persons traveling upon the
abutting roadway, he/she shall by written order direct the owner of the
property upon which such driveway approach is located to remove the
approach and restore the curb or alter the approach if it might thereby
be rendered safe. The order shall set forth the reasons for its issuance
and shall clearly advise the owner as to the nature of the work he/she
should perform, giving a reasonable time for the completion thereof. It
shall be unlawful for the owner to fail to comply with such order within
the time specified herein.
C. Any order required or given under the provisions of this Section or
Section 545.150 may be served on the owner of record by personally
delivering a copy thereof to such owner or by mailing a copy thereof by
registered mail to the owner's last known address; and if there should
be more than one (1) owner, then by such service upon any one of them.
In the event the owner is unknown, or his/her whereabouts unknown,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall post the order on the premises
where the violation occurs or where the approach is to be removed or
altered.
Section
545.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
545.170
AO:631
Section 545.170. Penalties for Violation of Sections 545.060
Through 545.150. [R.O. 2008 §545.180; Ord. No. 4959 §1,
3-11-1991]
Any permittee or other person who shall construct, reconstruct, alter,
remove or replace any driveway approach or related work except in
conformity with Sections 545.060 through 545.150 of this Chapter; or who
shall otherwise violate or refuse to obey any of the rules, regulations or
standard plans and specifications adopted by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to Section 545.130 of this Chapter; or who shall refuse to obey
any lawful order given by the Code Enforcement Officer, shall be guilty of a
ordinance violation.
Section 545.180. Changing, Improving Parkways — Restriction.
[R.O. 2008 §545.190; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
No change or improvement shall be made on parkways without first
obtaining a permit and the application shall be of the type referred to in
Section 545.080. No trees, shrubbery or other vegetation shall be planted
on the parkway without first obtaining a permit. No drainage tube shall be
placed on the parkway except as permitted above.
Section 545.190. Standards for Issuance of Permits for Plantings
on Parkways. [R.O. 2008 §545.200; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit for the planting of trees,
shrubbery and other vegetation on parkways where the same will not, in
the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, interfere with the visibility of
motor vehicles or be otherwise undesirable. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the planting of blue grass or other type grass on the parkways.
Section
545.170
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
545.190
AO:632
ARTICLE III
Sidewalks
Section 545.200. Certain Animals and Vehicles — Prohibited. [R.O.
2008 §545.220; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
No person shall ride, drive, lead or place any beast of burden or vehicle on
any sidewalk or footway otherwise than going into or out of premises over
properly constructed places of ingress and egress.
Section 545.210. Removal of Snow and Ice. [R.O. 2008 §545.230;
Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner, tenant or in charge,
dominion or control of a lot of land or other tenement abutting on any
street, avenue or alley with a sidewalk in or along such street, avenue
or alley adjacent to such property, to suffer or permit snow or ice to be
or remain upon such sidewalk so abutting or adjacent to such property
for a period in excess of twelve (12) hours, and it shall be the duty of
such owner, tenant, or person in charge, dominion or control of any
such property to remove, or cause to be removed, snow and ice from all
such sidewalks so abutting or adjacent to property so owned or
occupied by such person within said time so that such sidewalk shall be
within such time placed in reasonably safe and proper condition for
public travel thereof by the usual and ordinary mode. Each and every
person violating the provisions of this Subsection shall be adjudged
guilty of a ordinance violation and, on conviction, punished by a fine of
not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than ten dollars ($10.00) for
each offense, and each and every day such sidewalk shall be obstructed
by snow or ice shall be and constitute a separate offense, punishable by
a separate penalty.
B. Snow and/or ice upon sidewalks in the City, left to be or remain thereon
so as to impede or interfere with public travel on such sidewalk or foot
walk, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated as
such. It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or person occupying the
premises adjacent or abutting upon each such sidewalk, or person in
charge or control of any such premises, at his/her own expense, to
remove from any such sidewalk all the snow and ice or other like
obstructions so that such sidewalk will be placed in proper and safe
condition for public travel within twelve (12) hours after the same shall
become obstructed or traffic thereon impeded by snow, ice or like
obstructions; and if such owner, tenant or person in possession, charge
or control of any such property so abutting or adjacent to any sidewalk
obstructed by snow or ice shall fail or neglect to so remove such snow,
or cause the same to be removed, within such time, then it shall be the
duty of the City Manager, or other proper officer at his/her direction to
cause such snow and ice to be immediately removed from such sidewalk
or foot walk, and for that purpose may hire the same to be done,
keeping accurate account thereof, and the costs and expenses
Section
545.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
545.210
AO:633
reasonably incurred in so removing such snow, ice or obstruction from
such sidewalk or foot walk shall be paid by such owner, tenant or
person in possession, charge or control of such property; that is to say,
if said property is in charge of a tenant, or a person having the physical
dominion thereof in the manner of a tenant, then such person shall pay
such costs and charges, but if said property is vacant or unoccupied, or
no one in the City is in the actual physical dominion thereof, then all
such costs and charges for removing snow and ice shall be charged to
and paid by the owner of such property.
C. It shall be the duty of any officer of the City who shall cause any snow or
ice to be removed from any sidewalk, under any of the provisions of this
Section, to report the reasonable and actual cost thereof to the City
Council, and the City shall cause such person that may be employed to
remove such snow or ice to be paid a reasonable charge therefor, and
the owner or the person liable to pay the same shall be notified of such
charge, if in the City, in person, by notice to be delivered to such person
or left with some member of his/her family over the age of fifteen (15)
years, at his/her usual place of abode. If a non-resident of the City, such
notice may be given by mail, properly addressed, postage prepaid, to
the last known post office address of such person. If the person or
persons liable to pay the same shall not pay the City such costs and
charges within ten (10) days after delivering or posting such notice,
then all such costs and charges shall be and are hereby made liens and
charges upon and against the property and real estate so adjacent to or
abutting on such sidewalk or foot walk, which lien and charge shall
continue until the same shall be paid and shall be enforced by civil
action.
D. Any prosecution to recover penalty under any of the preceding
Subsections (A-C) for failure to remove snow or ice from any sidewalk
shall not be construed to in any manner relieve any person liable, under
any of such preceding Subsections (A-C), from paying the reasonable
costs and charges of removing such snow and ice, if the same shall be
removed by the City or any of its officers; and the fact that the City or
any of its officers or agents shall cause snow or ice to be removed from
any sidewalk or foot walk abutting on or adjacent to any property or
tenement, and if any person shall be prosecuted and a penalty
recovered against him, such prosecution and penalty shall not in any
manner relieve any such person from the civil liability created by such
preceding Subsections (A-C) to pay the reasonable costs and charges of
removing any such snow or ice, if removed by the City, its officers,
agents or employees, or if such officer, agent or employee shall cause
the same to be so removed at the expense of the City.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove snow or ice from private
property onto public property unless specific permission so to do has
been granted by the appropriate authorities of the City. Each and every
person violating the provisions of this Subsection shall be adjudged
guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction, shall be punished
Section
545.210
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
545.210
AO:634
Section 545.220. Building Eave Pipes. [R.O. 2008 §545.240; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
No person owning or occupying any building in the City shall cause the
pipes conducting the water from the eaves of the building to be so
constructed or altered as to spread the water over the sidewalk.
Section 545.230. Sidewalk Repair. [R.O. 2008 §545.250; Ord. No.
4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each offense.
A. The City shall have and is hereby given and granted the right, power
and authority to immediately repair and cause to be repaired any
sidewalk in the City that is in an unsafe or dangerous condition for
public travel thereon by the usual and ordinary mode, it being
understood by this Section that such repairs shall not go to the extent of
rebuilding and reconstructing such sidewalk, which shall be done when
required under other City ordinances, but extends to the making of
such repairs immediately upon the discovery of an unsafe condition
existing upon any sidewalk to the extent and in the manner necessary
or required to make such sidewalk reasonably safe for public travel by
the usual and ordinary mode.
B. The City Manager shall, when any sidewalk becomes dangerous or
unsafe for public travel by the ordinary mode, cause the same to be
immediately repaired so as to make the same reasonably safe for public
travel by ordinary mode, and for that purpose is given power and
authority to purchase material, employ men, and to cause to be had,
done and performed such work and such construction as may be
reasonably necessary and proper to so restore such sidewalk to a
condition reasonably safe for public travel by the usual and ordinary
mode, keeping an itemized account of all work, labor or material or
other things necessary therefor, and to report the same to the City
Council.
C. The Council shall examine such report and if the same is found to be
correct and reasonable and that said work was reasonably necessary to
be had, done or performed, shall cause the same to be paid by the City
out of the General Fund, and when any such bill shall be paid, there
shall be assessed and levied upon and against the abutting property a
tax bill duly issued and signed by the City Clerk against said property
and requiring the owner thereof to pay to the City the cost of such
necessary repairs, if so found by the City Council; the City Clerk shall
keep a record of such tax bills in the same way and manner as other tax
bills for improvements issued by the City; the same shall be due and
payable when issued and the amount thereof shall bear interest at the
rate of six percent (6%) per annum from and after thirty (30) days after
the date of issuance until paid, and if the same be not paid in thirty (30)
Section
545.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
545.230
AO:635
Section 545.240. Sidewalk Construction. [R.O. 2008 §545.260; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 5186 §1, 2-14-1994]
days, suit may be brought thereon to collect the same in any court of
competent jurisdiction, and said tax bill shall be and is hereby made
a lien and charge upon the lot, tract or parcel of land abutting on
said improvement and liable therefor, and said lien may be enforced by
judgment and execution, and said property sold for the payment thereof
in the same manner and to the same extent as said property would be
liable for the original construction of a new sidewalk as provided by law.
D. When any repairs shall be made upon any sidewalk in the City, under
the provisions of this Section, the owner of such property if known and
residing in the City, or the person occupying such property if occupied
at the time, shall be entitled to notice of such repair and the amount
thereof, together with the time when the same will be acted upon by the
Council, and said special assessment and tax bill ordered and directed
by the Council, and shall be permitted to be heard on the subject at the
time and place designated in such notice, which notice shall be given at
least five (5) days prior to the time of making such special assessment.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to build, rebuild, repair or replace or
cause to be built, rebuilt, repaired or replaced any sidewalk in the City
of any other material or in any other manner than as provided in the
specifications for sidewalks as hereinafter provided.
B. Specifications for cement sidewalks within the City shall be as follows:
1. Sub-grade. After the grade stakes have been set indicating the
grade for the finished surface of the walk, the earth shall be
excavated for the depth of four inches (4) for a four (4) foot walk
and six (6) inches for a twelve (12) foot walk, after tamping, below
the proposed finished surface of the walk, and if any rubbish,
manure or other suitable material shall be found, the same shall be
removed and replaced with firm solid earth or suitable material
firmly tamped as aforesaid. If at any point a fill shall be necessary
to bring the surface of said street at said point up to the subgrades,
such fill shall be made for a distance of two (2) feet outside
the outside line of the top of said walk and one (1) foot outside of
the inside of said walk, or side next to property line. Said dirt shall
be put on in layers of not to exceed six inches (6) in thickness, and
each layer shall be firmly tamped or rolled to the satisfaction of the
Code Enforcement Officer.
2. Forms. Upon the foundation thus prepared, shall be set forms of
two by four (2 x 4) or two by six (2 x 6) timbers, or equivalent metal
forms, whichever may be required by the finished height of the
walk, and the same shall be set parallel to each other and at such
distance apart as the stated width of the said walk in the permit
issued therefor, and the tops of said forms shall be even with the
grade line, which is to be the top of the finished walk. And said
Section
545.230
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
545.240
AO:636
forms shall be securely held in place by stakes driven back of them
or such other device as may hold them firmly in place and prevent
spreading.
3. Concrete. This concrete shall be made of one (1) part of best
portland cement of any brand which will comply with the standard
specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials, and
shall be fresh and free from lumps and dirt, to which shall be added
two (2) parts of clean sharp coarse sand free from dirt or quicksand
and three and one-half (3½) parts of crushed rock or coarse gravel
which will pass through a one (1) inch diamond screen. Or, clean
sand and gravel known as fifty-fifty (50-50) mixed ingredients, free
from all clay, silt or other foreign matter, which when used shall be
proportioned as one (1) part best portland cement and four (4)
parts sand and gravel and the measurements shall be by volume
and materials shall be thoroughly mixed dry before water is added.
The ingredients shall be turned at least two (2) times dry and twice
wet and then water shall be added in sufficient quantity to make
good and sufficient concrete. Ready-mixed concrete of equivalent
grade may be used in lieu of the ingredients described in this
Subsection. The concrete bed thus prepared shall be struck off to
an even surface at the grade of the finished sidewalk.
4. Finishing. The sidewalks shall be laid off in lengths not to exceed
four (4) feet in a four (4) foot walk or eight (8) feet in any other
walk, and the said sections shall be cut through the entire depth of
the concrete. The groover shall be drawn across the surface of the
concrete at the points indicated, in such a manner as to open the
joint through to the space made in the concrete bed. All cuts and
outside edges to be well grooved by the use of proper groovers. The
sidewalk, as fast as completed, shall be covered with canvas,
boards or other suitable covering when necessary so to do to
protect same from heat or cold, and if it is drying weather, the walk
shall be wet thoroughly at least twice a day for two (2) days after its
completion, the surface of such sidewalk to be finished by floating
with a wooden float until smooth and uniform.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to build, rebuild, repair or replace or
cause to be built, rebuilt, repaired or replaced any sidewalk within the
City without first having obtained a written permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer. Fee for such permit shall be in the sum of ten
dollars ($10.00) which shall be paid to the Clerk of the Public Works
Department by such applicant at the time of the issuance and delivery
of said permit, which fee shall be turned over to the City Treasurer and
become a part of the General Fund. Upon the issuance of said permit,
the Clerk will direct the Code Enforcement Officer to establish the
grade for said sidewalk and the lines for same, and it shall be unlawful
to construct in the City any sidewalk upon any other grade or location
as to lines.
Section
545.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
545.240
AO:637
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense.
Section
545.240
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
545.240
AO:638
ARTICLE IV
Special Events — Permits
Section 545.250. Special Events Permitted Upon Public Streets —
When. [R.O. 2008 §545.270; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Upon compliance with the provisions of this Article, special neighborhood
events, including games, parades, street dances, block parties, sledding,
skateboarding, and garage sales, but not including the racing of motorized
vehicles, may be held upon any public streets in the City in an area zoned
"Residential" and not designated as an emergency snow route.
Section 545.260. Permit Required. [R.O. 2008 §545.280; Ord. No.
4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
No person shall engage in any of the activities designated in Section
545.250 upon any public street in the City unless a special events permit
has been obtained from the City Manager as herein set forth.
Section 545.270. Application. [R.O. 2008 §545.290; Ord. No. 4959
§1, 3-11-1991]
A. A person seeking issuance of a special events permit shall file an
application in the office of the City Clerk on forms provided by such
officer.
1. Filing period. An application for a special events permit shall be
filed not less than five (5) working days nor more than thirty (30)
calendar days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct
the special event; and
2. Contents. The application shall contain the following information:
a. The signature of at least one (1) adult member of every
household abutting the street upon which the special event is
to be held;
b. The name, address and telephone number of the person
responsible for the event, who shall be an adult residing in a
household abutting said street;
c. The date(s) when the special event is to be conducted, and the
hours when it will start and terminate;
d. A designation of the street upon which the special event is to
be held;
e. The nature of the proposed special event.
3. Late applications. The City Manager may, in his/her discretion
consider an application filed less than five (5) working days before
the special event.
Section
545.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
545.280
AO:639
Section 545.280. Standards for Issuance. [R.O. 2008 §545.300; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 545.290. Notice of Rejection. [R.O. 2008 §545.310; Ord. No.
4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
The City Manager shall act upon the application for a special events permit
within three (3) working days after the filing thereof. If the City Manager
disapproves the application he/she shall mail to the person designated in
the application as being responsible for the special event within three (3)
working days after the filing thereof, a notice of his/her action, stating the
reasons for his/her denial of the application.
Section 545.300. Appeal Procedure. [R.O. 2008 §545.320; Ord. No.
4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a special
events permit to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken within ten (10)
working days after notice of denial.
Section 545.310. Notice of Issuance. [R.O. 2008 §545.330; Ord. No.
4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Immediately upon the issuance of a special events permit, the City Manager
shall send a copy thereof to the Director of Public Safety of the City.
A. The City Manager shall issue a special events permit when, from a
consideration of the application and from such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, he/she finds that:
1. The proposed event and its location are permitted by this Article;
2. The application complies in all respects with this Article;
3. The special event will not last more than eighteen (18) hours, and
will not be held after 12:00 Midnight and before 6:00 A.M. in any
day;
4. The concentration of persons and vehicles will not unduly interfere
with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to,
the area;
5. The conduct of the special event is not likely to cause injury to
persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct, or to create a
disturbance;
6. The special event is not held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods, or event, and is not designated to be held for profit
except such profit as may result from casual sales of household
items at a garage sale.
Section
545.280
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
545.320
AO:640
Section 545.320. Contents of Permit. [R.O. 2008 §545.340; Ord. No.
4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 545.330. Duties of Responsible Person. [R.O. 2008
§545.350; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 545.340. Public Conduct During Special Events. [R.O. 2008
§545.360; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
A. Each special events permit shall state the following information:
1. The nature and location of the special event.
2. The date(s) upon which the special event is to be held and the hours
when it will start and terminate.
3. Such other information as the City Manager shall find necessary to
the enforcement of this Article.
A. This person designated in the application as being responsible for the
special event shall:
1. During the time the event is conducted, place barricades and signs
stating "Closed to Through Traffic" at each end of the street, clearly
visible by day and with illuminating flares from one-half (½) hour
after sunset.
2. Carry the special events permit upon his/her person during the
conduct of the special event.
3. Return the street and parkway to substantially the same condition
they were in immediately before the special event.
A. Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede,
or interfere with any person participating in a special event.
B. Through Traffic Prohibited. During the conduct of a special event, no
person shall drive any motorized vehicle on the street where the event
is being held except while participating in said event or traveling to or
from his/her residence located on said street.
C. Parking On Street. The City Manager shall have the authority, when
reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles
along a street where a special event is being held. The City Manager
shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
park or leave unattended any vehicles in violation thereof. No person
shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this
Article.
Section
545.320
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
545.350
AO:641
Section 545.350. Revocation of Permit. [R.O. 2008 §545.370; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
The City Manager shall have the authority to revoke a special events permit
issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as herein
set forth.
Section 545.360. Violations. [R.O. 2008 §545.380; Ord. No. 4959 §1,
3-11-1991]
Any person violating any provision of this Article is guilty of an ordinance
violation. Each occurrence of the violation is a separate offense.
Section 545.370. Compliance With This Article — Effect of. [R.O.
2008 §545.390; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Holding of or participation in a special event in compliance with this Article
shall not constitute a violation of any other provision of the Maryville
Municipal Code.
Section
545.350
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
545.370
AO:642
ARTICLE V
Abandonment of City Streets, Alleys, Easements and Rights-Of-Way
Section 545.380. Eligibility for Filing Requests for Abandonment of
City Streets, Alleys, Easements or Rights-Of-Way. [R.O. 2008
§545.400; Ord. No. 6582 §§1 — 2, 8-18-2003]
To be eligible to file a request for the abandonment of any City street,
alley, easement or right-of-way, the applicant must own real estate adjoining
a portion of the street, alley, easement or right-of-way proposed to be
abandoned. Such ownership shall be determined on the basis of recorded
deeds filed in the Recorder's office, Nodaway County, Missouri.
Section 545.390. Requests for Abandonment to Be Made in Writing.
[R.O. 2008 §545.410; Ord. No. 6582 §§1 — 2, 8-18-2003]
Section 545.400. Review by the Director of Public Works. [R.O.
2008 §545.420; Ord. No. 6582 §§1 — 2, 8-18-2003]
The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall receive all written
requests for abandonment and shall review each such request to verify that
all required information is complete. Incomplete requests shall be returned
to the applicant with a written explanation of all reasons for rejection. All
complete requests shall be forwarded to the City Council within sixty (60)
days of receipt of the completed request and shall be accompanied by the
recommendation of the Director of Public Works, the original application
and any submitted documentation.
Section 545.410. Recommendation of the City Council. [R.O. 2008
§545.430; Ord. No. 6582 §§1 — 2, 8-18-2003]
A. All requests for the abandonment of any City street, alley, easement or
right-of-way shall be made to the office of the Public Works Director
upon forms developed by the City for such purposes. As a minimum,
such forms shall require the following information of the applicant(s):
1. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all persons
requesting such abandonment.
2. A complete legal description of the property to be abandoned.
3. The names of the owners of all properties which adjoin the area of
the proposed abandonment.
4. A plat of the property to be abandoned, bearing the seal of a
surveyor, architect or engineer license of the State of Missouri.
5. The reasons for requesting the abandonment.
6. A statement in which the applicant certifies that all information
contained in the application is true and accurate.
Section
545.380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
545.410
AO:643
Section 545.420. City Council Review. [R.O. 2008 §545.440; Ord. No.
6582 §§1 — 2, 8-18-2003]
A. After reviewing the request for abandonment made pursuant to this
Article, the Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall make one
(1) of the following recommendations in writing to the City Council
concerning the abandonment of the street, alley, easement or right-ofway,
which recommendation shall be accompanied with any explanatory
information the Director deems appropriate:
1. Approve the abandonment requested.
2. Deny the abandonment requested.
3. Approve the abandonment with specific enumerated changes to the
abandonment application.
A. The City Council shall have the sole power to vacate any street, alley,
easement or right-of-way. The procedure for such review shall be as
follows:
1. City Clerk duties. Upon receipt of the documentation associated
with the application for abandonment, the City Clerk shall schedule
a public hearing before the City Council on the issue. Said public
hearing shall be in compliance with all applicable Statutes and
ordinances. In addition, notice of the public hearing shall be given
to all owners of real property which adjoins the area sought to be
abandoned. Said notice may be given by mail mailed to the last
known address of the owner as reflected by the records of the
Nodaway County Recorder's office and shall be mailed at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing.
2. Public hearing and decision. Within sixty (60) days of the receipt of
the recommendation of the Director by the City Clerk and in
compliance with all applicable Statutes and ordinances, the City
Council shall hold a public hearing on the abandonment
application. The City Council shall have the right to deny the
abandonment or approve the abandonment with specific
enumerated changes.
3. Surplus property declaration. Prior to any action to abandon, the
City Council shall first declare the subject property to be surplus to
the City's needs, finding that the property has no present or future
value to the City of Maryville and can be abandoned without
detrimental effects to the City.
4. Abandonment ordinance. In the event the City Council desires to
approve abandonment of any property, said abandonment may be
effected only through enactment of an ordinance approved by the
City Council. Said ordinance shall then be recorded by the City
Clerk in the Recorder's office, Nodaway County, Missouri.
Section
545.410
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
545.430
AO:644
Section 545.430. Prohibited Abandonments. [R.O. 2008 §545.450;
Ord. No. 6582 §§1 — 2, 8-18-2003]
Section 545.440. Transfer of Ownership. [R.O. 2008 §545.460; Ord.
No. 6582 §§1 — 2, 8-18-2003]
In the event of abandonment the property ownership shall be transferred
in compliance with all applicable Statutes including Section 88.637, RSMo.,
whereby the same shall revert to the owners of the adjacent lots in
proportion it was taken from them.
A. Abandonment of any street, alley, easement or right-of-way shall be
prohibited in the following instances:
1. Where such abandonment shall result in the denial of access to
private or public property.
2. Where abandonment will result in the transfer of property to a
member of the City Council, a member's relatives or any business
in which a Council member has an ownership interest of greater
than ten percent (10%).
Section
545.430
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
545.440
AO:645
Chapter 550
EXCAVATIONS
Section
545.440
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
545.440
AO:646
ARTICLE I
Excavations in Rights-of-Way78
Section 550.010. Permit Required — Application and Fee. [R.O.
2008 §550.010; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 550.020. Deposit. [R.O. 2008 §550.030; Ord. No. 4959 §1,
3-11-1991]
Before any permit under this Chapter shall be issued for making any cut
or excavation in, through or under any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or
public place in the City, the applicant for such permit shall have deposited
with the City Clerk a sum of lawful money of the United States to cover
the cost of refiling, repaving and resurfacing such cuts and excavations, as
based on the estimate in said application for a permit, and the charges for
refilling, resurfacing and repaving any street, alley or sidewalk as set forth
in Section 550.050.
A. No person shall make, or cause to be made, any cuts or excavations in,
through or under any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, boulevard or
public place in the City, for any purpose whatsoever, without a permit
therefor being first obtained from the City Clerk, as the case may be,
which permit shall not be issued until the application has complied with
Section 550.020. A separate permit shall be obtained for each cut or
excavation to be made. Said cut or excavation shall be begun within ten
(10) days from the date of the issuance of the permit therefor, and in the
event of default thereof, a new permit or extension of the original
permit shall be required before the cut or excavation is made.
B. The sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged for each and
every permit issued. All applications for such permits shall be signed by
the person, or his/her duly authorized agent, who desires to do the work
designated in said application. Said application shall not be assignable,
and no person shall allow his/her name to be used to obtain a permit for
any other person. The application for said permit shall designate on the
map or diagram to be filed in connection with the application, the
location of the proposed cut or excavation to be made in such a manner
that the house number or lot number in front of which and the side of
the street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, boulevard, or public place on which
the same is to be made shall be plainly indicated. The map or diagram
shall also show the dimensions and character of the proposed cut or
excavation. The application for said permit shall set forth the type of
surface through which the cut or excavation is to be made and the
number of square feet of street, alley or sidewalk which must be
resurfaced as a result of said excavation or cut.
78.Editor’s Note: Former Sections 550.010 through 550. 080 were designated as Art. I by §1
of Ord. No. 7516, adopted 4-8-2013.
Section
550.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
550.030
AO:647
Section 550.030. Cutting Pavement and Excavating. [R.O. 2008
§550.040; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 550.040. Refilling of Excavations. [R.O. 2008 §550.050; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
A. The person making a cut or excavation as herein provided shall make it
in the manner designated on the permit obtained for that purpose.
B. The person making a cut or excavation shall cause the same to be done
with the least possible injury to the street, alley, sidewalk, parkway,
boulevard or public place, and shall remove the paving material and
excavated earth therefor in such a manner as to cause the least possible
inconvenience to the public and to permit uninterrupted passage of
water along the gutters. The width of the cut or excavation shall be no
greater than is necessary for doing the work.
A. The person making a cut or excavation in, through or under any
parkway shall refill the same as soon as practicable after the excavation
is ready for refilling. It shall be by one (1) of the following methods:
1. Refilling with clean unfrozen earth free from trash, rubbish or
rocks over three inches (3) in maximum dimension, in layers not
exceeding six inches (6) in height, and compacting each layer
thoroughly; or
2. Refilling with sand to a point eight (8) inches below the surface
with clean unfrozen earth for the top eight (8) inches, said earth
refilled to be thoroughly compacted.
B. The person making such refill shall be required to clean up and haul
away all surplus earth, rock or rubbish immediately after said refill has
been completed, and in the event of default thereof the City shall have
the right to remove such earth, rock or rubbish and charge the cost of
such removal to the person who received the permit. Such person shall
not be issued another permit until said charge has been paid.
C. In the event of settlement due to defective refill, the City shall have the
right to make whatever repairs are required to restore the excavation
to a proper condition and to charge the cost thereof to the person to
whom the permit was issued, and such person shall not be issued
another permit until said cost has been paid.
D. In the event said excavation is not refilled within a reasonable time
after it is ready for refilling, the City Clerk shall notify the person
making the excavation that if the same is not filled within four (4) days,
it will be filled by the City and charge for the cost of the same shall be
paid by the permit holder within ten (10) days after completion and no
additional permit shall be issued to that person after that time unless
that charge has been paid.
Section
550.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
550.050
AO:648
Section 550.050. Repaving, Resurfacing — Charges. [R.O. 2008
§550.060; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 550.060. Protective Measures. [R.O. 2008 §550.070; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
A. The repaving and resurfacing of said cuts or excavations made in the
City streets and alleys shall be the responsibility of the permit holder.
B. Street cuts shall be made in such a manner to minimize damage to the
street and other immediate areas. The person making the excavation
shall refill the trench as soon as possible with materials accepted by the
City. Surfaces of street cuts shall be replaced as soon as possible to
meet City specifications. The permittee shall be responsible for
removing any residual materials and clean site. If surface repair is
performed by City personnel, the costs of such work as outlined in the
Uniform Administrative Code, will be assessed to the permit holder.
A. Every person who shall for any purpose make, or cause to be made, any
cut or excavation in, upon, through, under or adjoining any street, alley,
sidewalk, parkway, boulevard or other public place, and shall leave any
part or portion thereof open, or shall leave any part or portion thereof
obstructed with rubbish, building or other material during the time said
work is being done, he/she shall cause the same to be enclosed with
good, substantial, and sufficient barriers not less than three (3) feet
high, and at nighttime he/she shall cause one (1) red light or flare to be
securely and conspicuously posted in or near such cut or excavation,
building material or obstruction, provided such obstruction does not
extend more than eight (8) feet in length; and if over eight (8) feet and
less than sixteen (16) feet in length, two (2) red lights or flares, one (1)
at each end, shall be so placed; and if exceeding sixteen (16) feet in
length, an intermediate red light or flare shall be placed between the
two (2) end lights, and an additional intermediate red light or flare shall
be placed for each eight (8) feet of additional length of the cut or
excavation, building material or obstruction; and when the cut,
excavation, building material or obstruction is made or placed in the
direction of travel, a red light shall be placed at each end of the same,
when as much as twenty (20) feet and less than fifty (50) feet in length,
and when exceeding fifty (50) feet in length, one (1) intermediate light
shall be placed for each additional fifty (50) feet, or fraction thereof,
and shall keep such lights burning from sunset to sunrise.
B. The making of said cut or excavation, the placing or repairing of
facilities therein, and the refilling parkway way of a cut or excavation
shall be done as expeditiously as possible, consistent with good
construction practice, and if same is not done, in the opinion of the
Code Enforcement Officer, said Code Enforcement Officer shall have
the right to perform, or cause to be performed, the remaining work and
charge the cost thereof against the deposit of the person to whom the
permit was issued.
Section
550.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
550.060
AO:649
Section 550.070. Sidewalk Excavations by Property Owners. [R.O.
2008 §550.080; Ord. No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
Whenever any property owner or any person representing him/her shall
have stated in his/her application for a permit to excavate through or under
said sidewalk, that he/she desires to repair said sidewalk, himself or by his/
her representative, and that he/she will guard said excavation or defective
sidewalk until such repairs are made, by barricades and lights as provided
in this Chapter, and that such sidewalk shall be repaired immediately after
the excavation through or under said sidewalk has been completed, then
such property owner or his/her representative shall have the right to repair
said sidewalk, provided such repair is made under the supervision and
inspection of the Code Enforcement Officer.
Section 550.080. Rules and Regulations. [R.O. 2008 §550.090; Ord.
No. 4959 §1, 3-11-1991]
The City may prescribe such rules and regulations to be followed and
performed by any person engaged in excavating streets, alleys, sidewalks,
boulevards, parkways and public places, as may be necessary for the safety
and convenience of the public and the proper handling and dispatch of the
work; provided however, that no rules or regulations shall be contrary to the
provisions of this Chapter.
Section 550.090. (Reserved)
C. Whenever a person shall excavate the full width of any street, sidewalk,
alley, parkway, boulevard or public place, it shall be his/her duty to
maintain a substantial walkway or driveway across said excavation until
it is refilled.
Section
550.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
550.090
AO:650
ARTICLE II
Rights-of-Way Management
Section 550.100. Policy. [Ord. No. 7516 §2, 4-8-2013]
Section 550.110. Definitions. [Ord. No. 7516 §2, 4-8-2013]
The following definitions shall apply to this Section, except that where the
definitions set forth in §67.1830, RSMo., as may be amended, are required
by law to apply to specific uses of the rights-of-way, such definitions shall
apply to such circumstances:
CITY — The City of Maryville, Missouri, a municipal corporation and any
duly authorized representative.
COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Maryville, Missouri.
EXCAVATION PERMIT — The authorization required to make excavations
for the construction, installation, repair or maintenance of any type of
facility within the rights-of-way.
FACILITIES MAINTENANCE — Any significant work for the construction,
installation, repair or maintenance of any type of facility within the rightsof-
way that does not involve excavation but will require any traffic lanes
to be obstructed for more than four (4) hours, manhole covers or safety
barriers removed or altered, or temporary or other barricades to be
installed.
FACILITIES MAINTENANCE PERMIT — The authorization required to do
facilities maintenance.
FACILITY — All/any lines, pipes, irrigation systems, wires, cables, conduit
facilities, poles, towers, vaults, pedestals, boxes, or other equipment owned
or controlled by an entity other than the City.
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY — Any subdivision of the governments within the
United States of America.
A. It shall be the policy of the City to authorize use of the rights-of-way in a
manner that minimizes interference to the public use and minimizes the
burden on the rights-of-way physically and aesthetically to the full
extent permitted by law. Any use of the rights-of-way by any person
shall be subject to the terms and conditions hereof, in addition to all
applicable Federal, State or local requirements, and nothing herein
shall be enforced or interpreted to contravene any superseding law,
including but not limited to §67.1830 et seq., RSMo., to the extent
applicable to any given circumstance.
B. The right granted to a person to use the rights-of-way is limited to the
use that the person has filed with the City and approved in accordance
with this Article. These rights shall grant non-exclusive use only to that
person except where otherwise provided herein or when expressly
authorized by the City.
Section
550.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
550.110
AO:651
PERMIT — An excavation permit or a facilities maintenance permit.
PERSON — An individual, person or body natural or corporate.
PSC — The Missouri Public Service Commission.
PUBLIC EASEMENT — Any easement for utilities, access, or other use
dedicated to the City or in the name of the City irrespective of whether
the easement is held in trust by the City for private and public users and
regardless of whether private utilities or others in addition to or other than
the City are actually using the easements.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any public project undertaken by the City for
the public good.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any real property owned by the City not used as rightsof-
way or considered to be rights-of-way.
RESELLER SERVICE PROVIDER — A person providing service within the
City that does not have its own facilities in the rights-of-way, but instead
uses the rights-of-way by interconnecting with or using the network
elements of another ROW user utilizing the rights-of-way, and/or by leasing
excess capacity from a ROW user.
RESTORATION — Returning the rights-of-way surface to its original
condition, or better.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY or ROW — The area on, below or above a public roadway,
highway, street or alleyway in which the City has an ownership interest, and
including such adjacent areas of such public ways within such ownership
interest as made available by the City for rights-of-way use herein, but not
including:[Ord. No. 7830 §4, 3-14-2016]
RIGHTS-OF-WAY USER OR ROW USER — Such persons and entities
maintaining, constructing or installing facilities in the public rights-of-way
of the City unless otherwise expressly exempted by law. The term shall not
include persons only using the rights-of-way for incidental uses authorized
pursuant to Section 550.120(A)(3) to the extent as may be exempted or
limited by the terms of such approval. The term also shall not include
the City; provided that the City shall nevertheless comply with all such
Easements obtained by utilities or private easements in platted
subdivisions or tracts;
1.
Railroad rights-of-way and ground utilized or acquired for railroad
facilities;
2.
Poles, pipes, cables, conduits, wires, optical cables, or other means of
transmission, collection or exchange of communications, information,
substances, data, or electronic or electrical current or impulses utilized
by a utility owned or operated by a governmental entity pursuant to
Chapter 91, RSMo., or pursuant to a charter form of government; or
3.
Use of the airwaves above the public rights-of-way with regard to
cellular or other non-wire telecommunications or broadband service.
4.
Section
550.110
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
550.110
AO:652
requirements applicable to ROW users to the extent such compliance is
otherwise required by applicable State or Federal law.
ROW ADMINISTRATOR — The Director of Public Works of the City of
Maryville, who shall be the principal City official responsible for
administration of this Article, or his/her designee.
Section 550.120. Franchise or Rights-of-Way Agreement Required.
[Ord. No. 7516 §2, 4-8-2013]
A. Agreement Or Franchise Required. Except when otherwise authorized
by applicable law, no ROW user may construct, maintain, own, control,
or use facilities in the rights-of-way without a franchise or ROW
agreement with the City as provided herein. All such franchises and
agreements shall be approved by ordinance of the Council on a nondiscriminatory
basis, provided that the applicant is in compliance with
all applicable requirements. Such franchises and agreements shall be
deemed to incorporate the terms of this Article and other applicable
laws of the City, except as may be expressly stated in such agreements
and franchises. Reseller service providers shall not be required to
obtain a franchise or agreement but shall be required to register with
the City on forms provided by the City prior to providing service.
1. Franchise. A franchise shall be required from the City in
conformance with all applicable franchise procedures for any ROW
user seeking to use the rights-of-way for purposes of providing or
distribution of electricity, gas, water, steam, lighting, or sewer
public utility service in the City, except where otherwise provided
by law. Such franchise may be granted only after satisfaction of all
applicable procedural or substantive requirements established by
City Code or other law.
2. ROW agreement. A ROW agreement shall be required with the City
for all ROW users not set forth in Subsection (A)(1), irrespective of
any State licensing, franchise or certificate that may also be held by
the ROW user, except as otherwise required herein or by law. Such
agreements shall conform to all applicable law, but shall not be
subject to procedures applicable to franchises, and the City may, if
appropriate, approve form agreements that may be executed by the
ROW Administrator after approval by the Council.
3. Incidental uses. Incidental uses of the public rights-of-way may be
permitted without a franchise or ROW agreement pursuant to a
permit or license issued by the ROW Administrator. The ROW
Administrator may establish such application, requirements and
conditions applicable to such uses consistent with the purposes of
this Article or as otherwise established by law. All persons shall
comply with the provisions and requirements of Chapter 545, if
applicable.
Section
550.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
550.120
AO:653
B. Franchises and Agreements Non-Exclusive. The authority granted by
the City in any agreement or franchise shall be for non-exclusive use of
the rights-of-way. The City specifically reserves the right to grant, at
any time, such additional agreements or other rights to use the rightsof-
way for any purpose and to any other person, including itself, as it
deems appropriate, subject to all applicable law. The granting of an
agreement or franchise shall not be deemed to create any property
interest of any kind in favor of the ROW user.
C. Lease Required For Public Lands. Unless otherwise provided, use or
installation of any facilities in, on or over public lands of the City not
constituting rights-of-way shall be permitted only if a lease agreement
or other separate written approval has been negotiated and approved
by the City with such reasonable terms and conditions as the City may
require.
D. Transferability. Except as provided in this Article or as otherwise
required by law, no franchise, agreement or permit may be transferred
without a written application for transfer consistent with the
application provided in Subsection (E) below, and consent of the City
based on the requirements and policies of this Article and only after
satisfaction of all applicable procedural or substantive requirements
established by City Code or other law. The City shall not unreasonably
withhold its consent to transfer as provided herein, but any costs
incurred by the City in excess of the application fee provided in
Subsection (E) below shall be paid by the applicant.
E. Application For Franchise Or Agreement Required.
1. Application. An application for franchise or ROW agreement shall
be presented to the ROW Administrator in writing and shall include
all such information as is required by this Section. The ROW user
shall be responsible for accurately maintaining the information in
the application during the term of any franchise or agreement and
shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City due to the
failure to provide or maintain as accurate any application
information required herein.
2. Application fee. An application fee for such agreement or franchise
shall be submitted to the City in the amount of two thousand five
hundred ($2,500.00) or as otherwise established by the ROW
Administrator to recover any actual costs anticipated and incurred
by the City in reviewing, documenting, or negotiating such
agreement or franchise, including reasonable legal fees and costs
to review compliance of the applicant and any initial proposed
facilities and uses, provided that no costs, if any, of litigation or
interpretation of RSMo., §67.1830 or 67.1832, RSMo., shall be
included if such inclusion is prohibited by law as to that applicant.
If the actual costs are thereafter determined to be less than the
application fee, such amount shall be returned to the applicant
after written request therefrom; if the actual costs reasonably
Section
550.120
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
550.120
AO:654
Section 550.130. Permits Required. [Ord. No. 7516 §2, 4-8-2013]
exceed the application fee, the applicant shall, after written notice
from the City, pay such additional amount prior to issuance by the
City of any final approval. Nothing herein shall be construed to
prohibit the City from also charging reasonable compensation for
use of the public rights-of-way where such a fee is not contrary to
applicable law.
3. Application form. A ROW user shall submit a completed application
for franchise or ROW agreement on such forms provided by the
City, which shall include information necessary to determine
compliance with this Article.
4. Approval process. After submission by the ROW user of a duly
executed and completed application and application fee, and
executed franchise or ROW agreement as may be provided by the
ROW Administrator, or as modified by the ROW Administrator in
review of the specific circumstances of the application, all in
conformity with the requirements of this Article and all applicable
law, the ROW Administrator shall submit such franchise or
agreement to the Council for approval. Upon determining
compliance with this Article, the Council shall authorize execution
of the franchise or agreement (or a modified agreement otherwise
acceptable to the City consistent with the purposes of this Article),
and such executed franchise or agreement shall constitute consent
to use the public rights-of-way; provided that nothing herein shall
preclude the rejection or modification of any executed franchise or
agreement submitted to the City to the extent such applicable law
does not prohibit such rejection or modification, including where
necessary to reasonably and in a uniform or non-discriminatory
manner reflect the distinct engineering, construction, operation,
maintenance, public works or safety requirements applicable to the
applicant.
F. No Cause Of Action. A ROW user shall have no damages remedy or
monetary recourse whatsoever against the City for any loss, cost,
expense, or damage arising from any of the provisions or requirements
of any franchise or agreement, or from the use of the rights-of-way, and
any use of the rights-of-way shall be deemed subordinate to the primary
public use by the City. Nothing herein shall preclude injunctive or
declaratory judgment relief where such relief is otherwise entitled
under law and the requirements therefor are otherwise satisfied;
provided, however, that the validity of an executed franchise or
agreement shall not be subject to challenge. All franchises and ROW
agreements shall be deemed to incorporate and accept all provisions of
this Article unless as expressly provided to the contrary.
A. Excavation Permit. No person shall make an excavation within the
rights-of-way without first obtaining an excavation permit pursuant to
Article I of this Chapter. All excavation permits shall expire after sixty
Section
550.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
550.130
AO:655
(60) days from the date of issuance, unless otherwise specified in the
permit.
B. Facilities Maintenance Permit (ROW Obstruction In Excess Of Four (4)
Hours). No person shall perform facilities maintenance within the
rights-of-way without first obtaining a facilities maintenance permit
from the ROW Administrator, except where such facilities maintenance
is expressly authorized by an existing valid excavation permit for the
applicable maintenance location. In addition to the conditions set forth
in Section 550.140 below, conditions of a facilities maintenance permit
shall be as established in the permit. The ROW Administrator may
establish a facilities maintenance permit fee to recover the City's cost in
issuing and administering a facilities maintenance permit. All facilities
maintenance permits shall expire after (60) sixty days from the date of
issuance, unless otherwise specified in the permit.
C. Emergencies. In case of emergency requiring immediate attention to
remedy defects, and in order to prevent loss or damage to persons or
property, it shall be sufficient that the person making such excavation
or facilities maintenance obtain the necessary permit as soon as
possible and may proceed without a permit when such permit cannot be
obtained before starting such excavation or facilities maintenance.
Notice to the City of the emergency shall be provided at the earliest
possible time, and a permit shall be obtained as soon as reasonably
possible, or as otherwise directed by the City. Notwithstanding any
other time frame or provision herein, a ROW user shall comply with any
order of the City relating to an emergency as may be reasonably
deemed necessary for the City to address the emergency situation.
D. Applicable Regulations. All ROW users and persons obtaining an
excavation permit shall be subject to the permit conditions in Section
550.140 herein and all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions, and
ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City in the
reasonable exercise of its police power and are subject to all applicable
laws, orders, rules and regulations adopted by governmental entities
now or hereafter having jurisdiction. In addition, the ROW users shall
be subject to all technical specifications, design criteria, policies,
resolutions and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated
by the City in the reasonable exercise of its police power relating to
permits and fees, sidewalk and pavement cuts, utility location,
construction coordination, surface restoration, and other requirements
on the use of the rights-of-way. All persons obtaining a permit shall
provide the ROW Administrator certificates of insurance showing proof
of liability coverage, as required herein.
E. Stop Work Orders. Any ROW user found to be working without a permit,
failing to provide for required safety and traffic control measures, or
otherwise violating any requirements herein, may be directed to stop
work until the necessary permit is obtained, the appropriate measures
are implemented, or violations are discontinued or remedied in
accordance with this Article.
Section
550.130
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
550.140
AO:656
Section 550.140. Permit Conditions. [Ord. No. 7516 §2, 4-8-2013]
A. The following conditions shall apply to all excavations and to all permits
issued under this Chapter unless specifically stated otherwise in the
permit:
1. City specification; applicable codes. All excavations shall comply
with the provisions of Article I of this Chapter 550, and Articles II
and III of Chapter 545 if applicable, as may be amended from time
to time. A ROW user shall perform all excavations in full
compliance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations
adopted or approved by the City pursuant to Section 550.080 of
this Chapter, and in accordance with applicable statutes of the
State of Missouri, and the rules and regulations of the PSC and any
other local, State or Federal agency having jurisdiction over the
parties. A ROW user shall be responsible for all excavations and
facilities maintenance done in the rights-of-way pursuant to its
permit, regardless of by whom work is done.
2. Permit-specific conditions. Each permit shall be deemed to
incorporate the provisions of this Chapter as permit conditions. The
ROW Administrator may also impose reasonable conditions upon
the issuance of a permit and the performance of the ROW user in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to ensure the
structural integrity of the rights-of-way, to protect the property and
safety of other users of the rights-of-way, and to minimize the
disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public.
3. Responsible for costs. A ROW user shall be responsible for all
reasonable costs borne by the City that are directly associated with
a ROW user's permit or use of the rights-of-way thereunder.
4. Stop work orders. Except in cases of an emergency or with
approval of the ROW Administrator, no excavation or facilities
maintenance may be done in violation of a stop work order issued
by the ROW Administrator if in his or her determination conditions
are unreasonable based on standard engineering and construction
practices.
5. Responsible for contractors. If excavation or facilities maintenance
is being done for the ROW user by another person, a general
contractor, subcontractor or otherwise, the ROW user shall be
responsible for ensuring that the work of said person is performed
consistent with its permit and applicable law and shall be
responsible for promptly correcting acts or omissions by said
person.
6. Minimum impact required; no interference. The ROW user shall, in
the performance of any excavation or facilities maintenance
required for the installation, repair, maintenance, relocation and/or
removal of any of its facilities, limit all excavations or facilities
maintenance to that necessary for efficient operation and so as not
Section
550.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
550.140
AO:657
to interfere with other users of the rights-of-way. A ROW user
shall not disrupt rights-of-way such that the natural free and clear
passage of water through the gutters or other waterways is
interfered with. No person may park private vehicles within or
next to the excavation area, except for such areas which may
be designated and marked as safe areas for vehicle parking in
accordance with an approved traffic control plan.
7. Barricades and safety devices. The ROW user assumes the sole
responsibility for maintaining proper barricades, plates, safety
fencing and/or lights as required from the time of opening of the
excavation until the excavation is surfaced and opened for travel or
during any facilities maintenance as provided in Section 550.060 of
this Chapter. All traffic control devices shall be in compliance with
the current version of the Manual of Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD), unless otherwise agreed to by the City. All surplus
excavation materials, tools or supplies at the site shall be
barricaded and lighted at night in the manner described in this
Section and Section 550.060. No open excavation may be left in the
pavement area without placing street plates over the opening.
8. Traffic control. The ROW user shall be responsible for providing
adequate traffic control to the surrounding excavation or facilities
maintenance area as determined by the ROW Administrator. In the
event work under a permit is not completed in a reasonable period
of time, the ROW user may be liable for actual damages to the City
for delay caused by the ROW user pursuant to this Article.
9. Hours of activity. The ROW user shall perform excavations and
facilities maintenance on the rights-of-way at such times that will
allow the least interference with the normal flow of traffic and the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood, and shall not work between
the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M., unless expressly authorized
in a permit.
10. Location of facilities; undergrounding. Except as provided herein,
all facilities constructed after the date of this Article shall be placed
underground, except facilities may be located above ground if
approved by the ROW Administrator for good cause or as may
otherwise be specifically authorized in a franchise or ROW
agreement consistent with law. Aboveground facilities may be
installed if approved by the ROW Administrator where alternative
underground facilities are not technically or economically feasible,
or where the imposition of such additional costs of undergrounding
on the ROW user are precluded by applicable law.
11. Guarantee of work. Every person to whom an excavation permit
has been granted shall guarantee for a period of four (4) years the
restoration of the rights-of-way in the area where such person
conducted an excavation and performed the restoration. Such
person shall guarantee and pay for the restoration of the rights-of-
Section
550.140
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
550.140
AO:658
Section 550.150. Permit Displayed. [Ord. No. 7516 §2, 4-8-2013]
Permits issued shall be available by the ROW user at all times at the
indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the ROW
Administrator, other City employees and the public.
Section 550.160. Liability Insurance, Performance and
Maintenance Bond Requirement. [Ord. No. 7516 §2, 4-8-2013]
way against sagging, buckling, deterioration and other premature
failures of the restoration.
12. Tree trimming. A ROW user shall neither remove, cut, nor damage
any trees, or their roots, in and along the rights-of-way of the City
except as authorized by the City pursuant to an approved tree
trimming plan authorized by a permit. Tree trimming and pruning
may be permitted to occur only after prior written notice to the City
of the extent of trimming and pruning to be performed and the
prior written approval thereof by the City.
A. Except as provided in this Section, each ROW user shall provide, at its
sole expense, and maintain during the term of an agreement or
franchise, commercial general liability insurance with a reputable,
qualified, and financially sound company licensed to do business in the
State of Missouri, and unless otherwise approved by the City, with a
rating by Best of not less than "A," that shall protect the ROW user, the
City, and the City's officials, officers, and employees from claims which
may arise from operations under an agreement or franchise, whether
such operations are by the ROW user, its officers, directors, employees
and agents, or any subcontractors of the ROW user. This liability
insurance shall include, but shall not be limited to, protection against
claims arising from bodily and personal injury and damage to property,
resulting from all ROW user operations, products, services or use of
automobiles, or construction equipment. The amount of insurance for
single limit coverage applying to bodily and personal injury and
property damage shall be in no event less than the individual and
combined sovereign immunity limits established by §537.610, RSMo.,
for political subdivisions; provided that nothing herein shall be deemed
to waive the City's sovereign immunity. An endorsement shall be
provided which states that the City is listed as an additional insured and
stating that the policy shall not be canceled or materially modified so as
to be out of compliance with the requirements of this Section, or not
renewed without thirty (30) days' advance written notice of such event
being given to the ROW Administrator. If the person is self-insured, it
shall provide the City proof of compliance regarding its ability to selfinsure
and proof of its ability to provide coverage in the above amounts.
B. A ROW user shall at all times during the term of an excavation permit,
and for four (4) years thereafter, maintain a performance and
maintenance bond in a form approved by the City Attorney. The amount
Section
550.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
550.160
AO:659
Section 550.170. Facility Relocation. [Ord. No. 7516 §2, 4-8-2013]
of the bond will be $5,000.00 or the value of the restoration as
determined by the ROW Administrator, whichever is greater, for a term
consistent with the term of the permit plus four (4) additional years,
conditioned upon the person's faithful performance of the provisions,
terms and conditions conferred by this Chapter. Alternatively, unless
otherwise established in the excavation permit, an annual bond in an
amount of fifty thousand ($50,000.00) automatically renewed yearly
during this period shall satisfy the requirement of this Section. The
City shall be entitled to recover under the terms of such bond the full
amount of any loss and damage occasioned from violation of the permit
or provisions of this Chapter. Bonds acquired under this Section will be
deemed to satisfy the deposit requirements of Section 550.020 of this
Chapter.
C. A copy of the liability insurance certificate and performance and
maintenance bond must be on file with the City Clerk. The insurance
and bond requirements in this Section or otherwise shall not apply to a
ROW user to the extent and for such period during an agreement or
franchise as ROW user is exempted from such requirements pursuant
to §67.1830(6)(a), RSMo., and has on file with the City Clerk an affidavit
certifying that the ROW user has twenty-five million dollars
($25,000,000.00) in net assets and is otherwise therefore so exempted
unless otherwise provided by agreement or franchise. The City reserves
the right to waive any and all requirements under this Section when
deemed to be in the public interest.
A. A ROW user shall promptly remove, relocate or adjust any facilities
located in the rights-of-way or in public easements as directed by the
ROW Administrator for a public improvement or as necessary to
eliminate a threat to public safety. Such removal, relocation or
adjustment shall be performed by the ROW user at the ROW user's sole
expense without expense to the City, its employees, agents, or
authorized contractors and shall be specifically subject to rules,
regulations and schedules of the City pertaining to such. The ROW user
shall proceed with the removal, relocation, or adjustment of facilities
with due diligence upon notice by the ROW Administrator to begin
removal, relocation, or adjustment. Where the ROW user facilities are
located in whole or in part in private easements outside the rights-ofway,
the ROW user shall promptly relocate the facilities if the City has
agreed to compensate the ROW user, through the condemnation,
purchase process, or other reasonable means for the cost of relocation
of the ROW user's facilities.
B. The City shall provide the ROW user with written notice of required
relocations or adjustments, the anticipated bid letting date, if any, of the
public improvement, and notice of the deadline for completion of the
relocations or adjustments. The ROW user shall respond within ten (10)
days with any conflicts and a proposed construction schedule for
Section
550.160
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
550.170
AO:660
Section 550.180. Abandoned and Unusable Facilities. [Ord. No.
7516 §2, 4-8-2013]
relocation to be completed in not more than sixty (60) days from date of
the notice to the ROW user, unless such other schedule is requested and
reasonably approved by the ROW Administrator. If facilities cannot be
fully relocated within rights-of-way, the ROW user shall be responsible
at its own cost to obtain alternative locations to timely relocate its
facilities.
C. If any facilities are not relocated in accordance with this Section, the
City or its contractors may relocate the facilities after notice to the
ROW user. The ROW user and its surety shall be liable to the City for
any and all costs incurred by the City. In the event the ROW user is
required to move its facilities in accordance with this Section, any
ordinary permit fee shall be waived. Failure to comply with the
relocation schedule set by the ROW Administrator shall be a separate
violation for each day subject to penalties as provided for violation of
this Article.
A. A person owning abandoned equipment or facilities in the rights-of-way
must remove its facilities and replace or restore any damage or
disturbance caused by the removal at its own expense. The ROW
Administrator may allow underground facilities or portions thereof to
remain in place if the ROW Administrator determines that it is in the
best interest of public health, safety, and general welfare to do so.
B. Abandoned equipment or facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The
City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity,
including, but not limited to:
1. Abating the nuisance,
2. Taking possession and ownership of the facility and restoring it to a
usable function; or
3. Requiring the removal of the facility by the person.
C. The City may send a written notice to the owner of abandoned
equipment or facilities, requesting such owner to remove the
abandoned equipment or facilities within thirty (30) days of date of the
written notice. If the owner of the abandoned equipment or facilities
does not remove the abandoned equipment or facilities as requested in
the written notice, the Council may conduct a public hearing at which
all interested parties shall be entitled to be heard. If the Council finds
that the facilities are in fact abandoned equipment or facilities, the
Council may at its sole discretion avail itself of any such remedy
provided in Subsection (B) above.
Section
550.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
550.190
AO:661
Section 550.190. Appeals. [Ord. No. 7516 §2, 4-8-2013]
Unless otherwise provided herein or by any other governing ordinance or
law, any person aggrieved by a decision, fee or requirement established or
made pursuant to this Article shall, prior to seeking any judicial or statutory
relief, if any, file a written appeal of any such decision, fee or requirement
with the Council within fifteen (15) days of such decision or imposition of
such fee or requirement, specifying this provision and including specific
details of the alleged claim or grievance, and an evidentiary hearing shall
be held on such appeal by the Council or its designee to render a final
decision. Nothing herein shall deny or preclude any additional applicable
appeal remedy that may be granted by Federal or State law after such final
decision.
Section 550.200. Indemnification. [Ord. No. 7516 §2, 4-8-2013]
As a condition of use of the rights-of-way, the ROW user at its sole cost
and expense shall indemnify, protect, defend (with counsel acceptable to
the City) and hold harmless the City, its elected officials, officers, employees
and agents from and against any and all claims, demands, losses, damages,
liabilities, fines, charges, penalties, administrative and judicial proceedings
and orders, judgments, remedial actions of any kind and all costs and
expenses of any kind, including, without limitation, reasonable attorneys'
fees and costs of defense arising, directly or indirectly, in whole or in part,
out of the fact that the City approved an agreement or franchise with the
ROW user, the rights granted to the ROW user or the activities performed
or failed to be performed by the ROW user under the agreement or use of
the rights-of-way or otherwise, except to the extent arising from or caused
by the sole or gross negligence or willful misconduct of the City, its elected
officials, officers, employees, agents or contractors. This indemnification
shall survive the expiration or termination of any agreement or use of
the rights-of-way for a period of five (5) years after the effective date of
expiration or termination.
Section 550.210. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 7516 §2, 4-8-2013]
In addition to any other penalties and remedies for violations that may exist
in law or equity, any person that violates any provision of this Article shall
be subject to such penalties as set forth in Section 100.120 of the City Code
and including a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each
and every day the violation exists or continues.
Section
550.190
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
550.210
AO:662
Chapter 555
SIGNS AND ADVERTISING
Section 555.010. Purpose. [R.O. 2008 §555.010; Ord. No. 5252 §1,
11-14-1994]
Section 555.020. Authority. [R.O. 2008 §555.020; Ord. No. 5252 §1,
11-14-1994]
A. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide minimum standards to
safeguard life, health, property and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, quality of materials, construction, locations,
electrification and maintenance of all signs and sign structures not
located within a building.
B. No sign shall be erected in such a manner to confuse or obstruct the
view or interpretation of any official traffic sign, signal or devise.
C. The regulations of this Chapter are not intended to permit any
violations of other provisions of this code or of any other lawful
ordinance.
D. This Chapter shall not affect any existing signs as of date of passage
(November 14, 1994), except that where this Chapter calls for sign
removal, that paragraph shall be enforced from day of passage
(November 14, 1994).
A. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce all the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Code Enforcement Officer
or his/her duly authorized representative may enter at reasonable
times, any building, structure or premises in the City to perform any
duty imposed upon him/her by this Chapter. If the owner or occupant
shall refuse to allow entry to the Code Enforcement Officer or his/her
assistants, such Officer may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction
for a search warrant or other legal process for the purpose of securing
entry.
C. All appeals related to interpretation of Chapter 555: Signs and
Advertising, shall be referred to the Board of Zoning Adjustment of the
City of Maryville, Missouri.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or
maintain any sign or structure in the City or cause or permit the same
to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter.
Section
550.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
555.030
AO:663
Section 555.030. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §555.030; Ord. No. 5252
§1, 11-14-1994; Ord. No. 6806 §§1 — 2, 1-23-2006; Ord. No. 6852 §§1
— 2, 8-7-2006; Ord. No. 7197 §1, 3-22-2010]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign, changeable copy sign, directory sign, door
sign, freestanding sign, illuminated sign, interior sign, on-premise sign or
window sign and the structure which supports same, that has either ceased
to be used, which the owner no longer intends to use, which no longer
advertises or identifies a use conducted on the property on which the sign
is erected or which has no advertisement upon it.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion
including flashing on/off. Animated signs, which are differentiated from
changeable copy signs as defined and regulated by this Chapter, include the
following types:
Electrically activated. Animated signs producing the illusion of movement
by means of electronic, electrical or electro-mechanical input and/or
illumination capable of simulating movement through employment of the
characteristics of one (1) or both of the classifications noted below: (This
shall include electricity in any form including battery, solar power or other
means of creating or producing an electrical charge.)
AWNING — An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering of
rigid or non-rigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that
may be either permanent or retractable, including such structure that are
internally illuminated by fluorescent or other light sources.
AWNING SIGN — A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or
surfaces of an awning.
Flashing. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period
of illumination is either the same as or less than the period of nonillumination.
For the purposes of this Section, flashing will not be
defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off phases of
illumination exceeds four (4) seconds.
1.
Patterned illusionary movement. Animated signs or animated portions
of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated movement
through alternate or sequential activation of various illuminated
elements for the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns
designed to appear in some form of motion.
Mechanically activated. Animated signs characterized by repetitive
motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by
electric motors or other mechanically induced means.
2.
Section
555.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
555.030
AO:664
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign that is designed so that characters,
letters or illustrations can be charged or rearranged without altering the
face or surface of the sign.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer or other person charged
with the administration and enforcement of this Chapter or his/her duly
authorized deputy.
COPY — Copy or sign copy.[Ord. No. 7327 §§1 — 2, 3-9-2011]
COPY OR SIGN COPY — Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos
and graphic elements comprising the content or message of a sign, but shall
not include numerals, letters or symbols which are solely used to identify a
street address.[Ord. No. 7327 §§1 — 2, 3-9-2011]
COURTHOUSE SQUARE DISTRICT — The geographic area within the
rectangle, the outer boundaries of which are defined by the centerline of
Sixth Street on the north; the centerline of Vine Street on the east; the
centerline of Jenkins Street on the south; and the centerline of Fillmore
Street or the extension of the centerline of Fillmore Street on the west,
which area includes the Courthouse Square.
CURB LINE — The line at the face of the curb nearest to the street or
roadway. In the absence of a curb, the curb line shall be established by a
City representative.
DISPLAY SURFACE — The area made available by the sign structure for the
purpose of displaying the advertising message.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign that is designed and erected for the sole
purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic to a hospital or a government office or government-owned facility.
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign on which the multiple names and locations of
occupants or the use of a building is given.
DOOR SIGN — A sign painted or permanently affixed to the window surface.
ELECTRIC SIGN — Any sign containing electrical wiring, but not including
signs illuminated by an exterior light source.
FLASHING SIGN — See "ANIMATED SIGN, ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED".
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign principally supported by a structure affixed
to the ground and not supported by a building, including signs supported by
one (1) or more columns, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground. This
shall include but is not limited to pole signs, ground signs and monument
signs which must also meet all additional requirements or limitations within
the definition of the specific sign type.
GROUND SIGN — A sign placed at or near ground level not exceeding eight
(8) feet in height and which is supported by one (1) or more upright poles
or braces in or upon the ground.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A assign characterized by the use of artificial
light, either projecting through its surface(s) (i.e., internally illuminated)
Section
555.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
555.030
AO:665
or reflecting at its surface(s) from an external source (i.e., externally
illuminated).
INTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed within a building, but not including
"window signs" as defined by this Chapter.
LEGAL SETBACK LINE — A line established by this code beyond which no
building may be built. A legal setback line may be a property line.
MAJOR SHOPPING CENTER — A tract of ground not less than five (5) acres
in size, developed as a unified retail shopping center consisting of one (1)
or more retail stores or shops.
MARQUEE SIGN — A sign attached or hung from a marquee.
MULTI-TENANT BUILDING — A non-residential building that contains
more than one (1) occupancy and does not have separate and distinct
entrances to each occupancy from the street.
NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE — The edition currently adopted by the
City of Maryville, Missouri, as published by the National Fire Protection
Association.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN — A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor
environment for the purpose of the display of messages which does not
pertain to the business, the services and/or products at the property on
which it is displayed.
ON-PREMISE SIGN — A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor
environment for the purpose of the display of messages pertaining to the
business, the services and/or products at the property on which it is
displayed.
POLE SIGN — A sign structure in the ground with at least eight (8) feet of
clearance from ground to the lowest point of the sign.
POLITICAL SIGNS — Any sign of any kind promoting, supporting or
opposing any candidate, office, issue or proposition to be voted upon at any
public election.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to or
projects more than six (6) inches from a building face or wall and has the
sign face at an angle to the face of the building.
PROJECTION — The distance by which a sign extends beyond the building
line.
SIGN — Any medium, including its structure and component parts, which
is used or intended to be used to attract attention to the subject matter
for advertising purposes, which shall include paint on the surface of the
building when used for the purposes of advertising. This shall include, but is
not limited to, awning signs, electric signs, ground signs, monument signs,
pole signs, projecting signs, temporary signs and wall signs. Wording or
design directly upon the surface of a building or structure by paint, not
for commercial advertising purposes, but rather done for philanthropic,
Section
555.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
555.030
AO:666
aesthetic or educational reasons, including murals, shall not be considered
a sign.
SIGN AREA — The area of the smallest rectangle which completely encloses
the display surface of the sign.
SNIPE SIGN — Any temporary off-premises sign located or situated on
public or private property.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building
of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign which has no structural support, footing,
foundation, pier, pole, grade beam or any other accepted method of frost
heave prevention extending below the frost line. It shall include any sign
which is not designated or manufactured to be permanently anchored or
affixed to the ground, building or structure, but rather is designed or
primarily used as a sign which is moveable from place to place. This shall
include, but is not limited to, signs affixed to a trailer or other portable
structure and "A" frame or sandwich signs, yellow-flashing signs and
banners.
WALL OR FASCIA SIGN — Any sign attached to or erected against the wall
of a building or structure.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign painted or permanently affixed to the surface of a
window.
Section 555.040. Licensing. [R.O. 2008 §555.050; Ord. No. 5252 §1,
11-14-1994]
Any person or persons erecting outdoor signs shall possess a valid General
Contractor's license, except that a non-structural wall sign may be erected
by the property owner, tenant or lessee.
Section 555.050. Permits and Fees — Sign Permits Required. [R.O.
2008 §555.060; Ord. No. 5252 §1, 11-14-1994]
No sign shall hereafter be erected, re-erected, constructed, altered or
maintained, except as provided by this Chapter and with a permit for the
same, issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. A separate permit shall be
required for a sign for each business entity, and/or a separate permit for
each group of signs on a single supporting structure. In addition, electrical
permits shall be obtained for electric signs.
Section 555.060. Application for Sign Permit. [R.O. 2008 §555.070;
Ord. No. 5252 §1, 11-14-1994]
Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing upon forms furnished
by the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall contain the location
by street and number of the proposed sign structure, as well as the name
and address of the owner and the sign contractor or erector. The Code
Section
555.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
555.060
AO:667
Enforcement Officer may require the filing of plans or other pertinent
information where, in his/her opinion, such information is necessary to
insure compliance with this Chapter.
Section 555.070. Signs Not Requiring Permits. [R.O. 2008
§555.080; Ord. No. 5252 §1, 11-14-1994]
Section 555.080. Garage Sale Signs. [R.O. 2008 §555.085; Ord. No.
6938, 9-12-2007]
A. Repainting or cleaning of an advertising structure or the changing of
the advertising copy or message thereon, unless a structural change is
made, shall not require a sign permit, nor shall the following signs
require a sign permit. These exceptions shall not be construed as
relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility of its erection
and maintenance, and its compliance with the provisions of the Chapter
or any other law or ordinance regulating the same. The following shall
not require a sign permit.
1. Any sign placed or painted on the inside of a building or outside of
any vehicle.
2. Nameplates or professional signs attached directly to the wall of a
building or other structure.
3. Municipal signs, legal notices, trespassing signs or signs to aid
safety.
4. Information or directional signs containing no advertising copy.
5. Real estate signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of the
premises.
6. Tablets constructed of bronze, brass, stone or other noncombustible
materials, when built or attached to the walls of a
building provided that such tablet bears only the name of the
owner, the name or use of the building or reading matter
commemorating a person or event.
7. Signs announcing the name of the architect, engineer or
contractors of a building under construction, alteration or repair
and signs announcing the character of the building enterprise or
the purpose for which the building is intended.
8. Signs to advertise public or civic welfare or charitable enterprises
placed on posts or buildings.
9. All political signs except that all political signs shall comply with
the provisions of Section 555.150.
A. Signs for public or private temporary sales located in residential
districts (e.g., garage, yard or porch sales) shall be subject to the
following provisions:
Section
555.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
555.080
AO:668
Section 555.090. Fees. [R.O. 2008 §555.090; Ord. No. 5252 §1,
11-14-1994; Ord. No. 6618 §1, 2-9-2004]
1. A maximum of five (5) signs may be used for notifying the public of
temporary garage sales and yard sales.
2. Each sign shall be no more than four (4) square feet (24" x 24") and
each sign shall contain the following information:
a. General statement of a "garage sale" or "yard sale";
b. Location of the garage or yard sale;
c. Dates and times which garage/yard sale shall be occurring.
3. Sign height is limited to three (3) feet from the ground to the
highest point of the sign. Signs cannot be affixed to stop signs,
street signs, utility poles, speed limit signs or any other object
permanently existing in the City right-of-way (R-O-W).
4. Signs must be placed in the ground utilizing a pole, stake, rod, etc.
5. Signs may be placed in the City of Maryville street R-O-W provided
they are not obstructing the view of traffic from any direction and
must be at least one (1) foot from the curbing of the road.
6. Garage sales, yard sales and the like shall be limited to operating
hours of 6:00 A.M. — 7:00 P.M. on any given day.
7. All signs from said garage/yard sale sign(s) shall be installed no
more than twenty-four (24) hours prior to start of sale and shall be
removed from the locations within twenty-four (24) hours from the
time of the end of the sale.
8. All signs must be non-illuminated.
9. No person shall post a sign in violation of this Section. Each
violation of Subsections (1) through (8) of this Section shall be
subject to a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each day said
violation occurs.
A. The fees for signs and other display structures for which permits are
required under Section 555.050 shall be at the following rate:
1. Outdoor advertising other than a painted sign.
a. Sign permit: $1.00 per sq. ft.
Minimum: $10.00.
b. Temporary sign: $5.00.
2. Signs which are painted directly to the surface of a building or
structure.
Section
555.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
555.090
AO:669
Section 555.100. Outdoor Advertisers. [R.O. 2008 §555.100; Ord.
No. 5252 §1, 11-14-1994]
Every person advertising by means of outdoor advertising regulated by this
Chapter shall file with the Public Works Department a complete report of
the location and size of all existing signs owned or placed by them.
Section 555.110. Maintenance. [R.O. 2008 §555.110; Ord. No. 5252
§1, 11-14-1994]
Section 555.120. Signs Within Specific Zones. [R.O. 2008 §555.120;
Ord. No. 5252 §1, 11-14-1994; Ord. No. 5552 §1, 7-14-1997; Ord. No.
6805 §§1 — 2, 1-23-2006; Ord. No. 6852 §§1 — 2, 8-7-2006; Ord. No.
6938, 9-12-2007; Ord. No. 7196 §1, 3-22-2010]
a. Permit: $5.00.
A. The owner of any property on which any sign is placed and the person
maintaining the sign shall be equally responsible, individually and
jointly, for the condition of the area in the vicinity of the sign and shall
be required to keep it clean, sanitary and free from noxious or offensive
substances.
B. If any sign herein regulated is or becomes insecure or in danger of
falling, or otherwise unsafe, the City representative shall notify the
person or persons maintaining the same to make such sign safe and
secure, or to remove same. In the event that the sign is not made secure
or removed within ten (10) days, the City may recover the cost of
removal of such sign from the owner of the property on which the sign
is located.
A. Types of signs permitted within the City are limited to those listed
below, according to the land use zone in which they are located and are
subject to classification based on definitions contained herein and in the
City's Building Code.
1. Signs permitted in "R-1" and "R-2" Zones shall be limited to the
following:
a. One (1) name plate sign mounted on the building not more
than one (1) square foot in area.
b. One (1) non-illuminated "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign per lot
and not more than four (4) square feet in area.
c. One (1) sign per church not more than forty (40) square feet in
area on church premises indicating activities and services
therein provided.
d. One (1) non-illuminated sign per building not more than
sixteen (16) square feet in area showing the names of
architects, engineers, builders, tenants or agents on the
Section
555.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
555.120
AO:670
premises of a building being constructed, provided, that such
sign shall be removed upon completion of the building.
e. Ground signs displaying information pertinent to an
undeveloped subdivision, provided that no such sign be located
closer than two hundred (200) feet to an occupied dwelling,
shall be located entirely on private property and shall be
removed upon completion of the subdivision. No sign shall
have an area greater than fifty (50) square feet.
2. Signs permitted in "R-3" and "R-4" Zones shall be limited to the
following.
a. For each apartment development there shall be permitted one
(1) ground sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area,
located entirely on private property.
b. In addition, not more than two (2) non-illuminated ground
signs advertising the rental or lease of the premises, each not
exceeding four (4) square feet in area.
c. One (1) non-illuminating sign per building not more than
sixteen (16) square feet showing the names of architects,
engineers, builders, tenants or agents on the premises of a
building being constructed provided such sign shall be
removed upon completion of the building.
3. Within the Courthouse Square District, the provisions of this
Subsection shall prevail over and supersede any sign regulation
otherwise applicable to that area pursuant to zoning designation.
Sign regulations in the Courthouse Square District shall be as
follows:
a. Permitted signs. Within the Courthouse Square District, each
commercial building shall be allowed a total of two (2) signs
per exposed facade, each of which shall be designed in a
manner that is suitable and complimentary to adjacent
buildings and businesses. Only the following sign types are
permitted in the Courthouse Square District:
(1) A wall sign in compliance with the following provisions:
(a) The display surface shall not exceed fifteen percent
(15%) of the square footage of the building facade
area up to a maximum of sixty (60) square feet of
display surface;
(b) The top of the sign can be placed either up to eighteen
(18) feet above the front sidewalk or to the top of the
second (2nd) floor window sill, parapet or eave,
whichever is higher;
Section
555.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
555.120
AO:671
(c) The sign shall not project more than twelve (12)
inches from the building;
(d) The sign may be painted directly only upon a side or
rear facade.
(2) A projecting sign in compliance with the following
provisions:
(a) The sign area shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in
area;
(b) The sign may be lit only by directed external
illumination;
(c) The sign shall have a minimum eight (8) foot vertical
clearance from the lowest point of the sign to the
sidewalk elevation;
(d) Clearance between the building face and the
projecting sign must be between two (2) inches and
twelve (12) inches;
(e) The top of the sign can be placed either up to eighteen
(18) feet above the front sidewalk or to the top of the
second (2nd) floor window sill, parapet or eave,
whichever is higher.
(3) A freestanding sign in compliance with the following
provisions:
(a) The building's front facade must be set back at least
thirty (30) feet from the front property line;
(b) The sign area shall not exceed forty (40) square feet;
(c) The height of the signboard, post or any supporting
elements shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet.
(4) An awning sign (or matched set of awning signs) in
compliance with the following provisions and any other
awning regulations applicable by the City of Maryville:
(a) An awning with signage shall be located only on the
ground floor;
(b) The signage may appear on either valance or awning,
but not both;
(c) The lettering and graphics shall not exceed twelve
(12) inches in height.
b. Additional permitted signs. In addition to signage permitted by
Subsection (3)(a), the following additional signs are permitted:
Section
555.120
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
555.120
AO:672
(1) Retail businesses. Retail businesses shall be permitted one
(1) portable, two-sided sandwich sign in compliance with
the following provisions:
(a) A single side of the sign must not be greater than eight
(8) square feet in area and the sign may be of a
maximum total height of five (5) feet;
(b) The sign must not use electricity in any form;
(c) The sign may only be displayed during the business
hours of the retail business;
(d) The sign shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
(2) Multi-tenant buildings. Multi-tenant buildings are allowed
one (1) directory sign per entrance, either wall-mounted or
projecting, in accordance with the following provisions:
(a) Small signs for each tenant with an optional header,
grouped together with the total sign area not to
exceed sixty percent (60%) of the product of the
number of businesses and the ten (10) square foot
individual limit (e.g., 3 businesses = 3 x 10 = 30 x .60
= 18 square feet);
(b) The signs must share a unifying format, style or color;
(c) The signs must be located within four (4) feet of the
entrance.
(3) Painted window or door signs. Signs in accordance with
the following provisions:
(a) Each sign's total area shall not exceed twenty-five
percent (25%) of the window or door area;
(b) The sign shall be silk-screened, vinyl, etched or handpainted;
(c) Total window signage may not exceed one-third (?) of
the area of the window.
(4) Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be permitted in
accordance with the following provisions:
(a) Each business shall be permitted to display one (1)
temporary sign for a period of time not to exceed
thirty (30) days;
(b) Permits shall not be required for real estate signs,
development and construction signs, political signs,
municipal signs, legal notices, trespassing signs, signs
Section
555.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
555.120
AO:673
to aid safety, fliers posted by an individual (e.g.,
garage sale signs) and civic and charitable event
signs. Otherwise, all temporary signs require a permit
of five dollars ($5.00) pursuant to the provisions of this
Code;
(c) All permitted temporary signs must have the date of
removal printed clearly on the lower right-hand corner
as viewed from the front;
(d) No temporary sign shall exceed twenty-four (24)
square feet in area nor shall it be permanently
fastened to pylons, piers, footings or other means of
permanent installation;
(e) No more than six (6) temporary sign permits per year
will be issued for any individual business;
(f) Temporary signs shall meet all other requirements of
this Chapter;
(g) Snipe signs posted by individuals, in compliance with
this Section, must be removed within ten (10) days of
posting.
c. Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited and may
not be placed, erected, installed or maintained in the
Courthouse Square District:
(1) Off-premise signs, except for directional or snipe signs or
signs as otherwise approved by this Chapter;
(2) Snipe signs (e.g., garage sale signs) which are attached to
a public streetscape fixture, utility pole, light pole or other
similar structure;
(3) Animated, changing, flashing or exterior neon signs;
(4) Signs located on rooftops, dormers or balconies;
(5) Permanently-placed sidewalk signs.
4. Signs in Zoning District "C-O" through "M-2", other than within
General Business District "I" and General Business District "II",
shall be limited to the following:
a. Pole signs. Pole signs shall not exceed a maximum height of
twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Ground signs. Ground signs providing traffic or parking
directions or other instructions shall not exceed ten (10)
square feet.
c. Advertising signs (including pole signs and ground signs):
Section
555.120
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
555.120
AO:674
Section 555.125. Shopping Center Informational Signs. [R.O. 2008
§555.125; Ord. No. 6801 §1, 1-9-2006]
(1) For property having one hundred (100) feet of street
frontage and ten thousand (10,000) square feet of total lot
area, advertising signs shall not exceed seventy-five (75)
square feet plus an additional one-half (½) square foot of
signage for every foot of street frontage over one hundred
(100) feet up to a maximum area of one hundred (100)
square feet.
(2) For shopping centers over five (5) acres, a sign having area
not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
(3) Undeveloped tracts over ten thousand (10,000) square
feet. One (1) sign having an area not to exceed one
hundred (100) square feet.
(4) All signs must be located according to the applicable
setback requirements of the Zoning Code of the City of
Maryville, Missouri. However, notwithstanding any
setback requirements that may exist elsewhere in the
Code, signs in Zoning District "M-1" and "M-2" shall be
setback not less than fifteen (15) feet from the property
line.
(5) (Reserved.)
d. Wall signs. Wall signs including signs painted directly to the
surface of a building or structure shall be permitted on the wall
or fascia, including mansard, of each side of a building not to
exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the area of each wall and may
project above the top of the wall or fascia a distance not to
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the vertical dimension of
the sign or three (3) feet.
5. The following sign(s) are prohibited and may not be placed,
erected, installed or maintained within the City: Snipe signs (e.g.,
event announcement, for sale, or garage sale signs) which are
attached to a public streetscape fixture, utility pole, light pole or
other similar structure, except those installed and removed in
conformance with Section 555.080 of this Code as it applies to
garage, yard or porch sales.
A. As used in this Section, the term "shopping center" is defined as either:
1. A cluster or grouping of not less than five (5) stores, shops or other
premises located in a "C-1", "C-2" or "C-3" zone, generally open to
the public for the purpose of promoting business, mercantile or
commercial interest by sales, the premises of which include or are
surrounded by private walkways or a private parking lot; or
Section
555.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
555.125
AO:675
Section 555.130. Electrical Signs. [R.O. 2008 §555.130; Ord. No.
5252 §1, 11-14-1994]
Where electrical signs are permitted, they shall be operated only at such
times and in such manner so as no direct glare from any light source on
2. A tract of ground not less than five (5) acres in size developed as a
unified retail shopping area consisting of one (1) or more retail
stores or shops.
B. A shopping center shall be allowed an informational sign as defined in
this Section for the sole purpose of informing the public of the name of
each business or establishment doing business in or located at the
shopping center. However, no other pole signs or advertising signs are
allowed. The shopping center may have directional signs and such
awning, directory, projecting, temporary, sandwich, wall or window
signs as authorized by this Code.
C. Said informational sign shall be a freestanding sign for the center as a
whole and shall meet the following requirements:
1. Only one (1) informational sign shall be allowed per shopping
center unless the street frontage of the shopping center exceeds
five hundred (500) continuous feet on one (1) street. If the street
frontage of the shopping center exceeds this distance, then one (1)
additional sign is permitted. No shopping center shall be allowed
more than two (2) informational signs per street frontage.
2. The informational sign shall be a freestanding sign as defined by
this Code and must be separate from any building or other facility
located in the shopping center. The sign shall be constructed and
installed with materials and architectural design characteristics
consistent with the design of the shopping center.
3. Each informational sign shall be allowed a maximum of two (2)
parallel surface faces. The surface face for each side of the sign
shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
4. The informational sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in
height as measured from the ground level to the top of the sign or
support structure, whichever is higher.
5. Notwithstanding any other Code requirements, the information
sign shall be placed at least fifteen (15) feet from the property line
or adjoining right-of-way and may be constructed with the sign face
commencing at ground level. However, in the event the
informational sign is allowed to be placed less than fifteen (15) feet
from the property line or right-of-way, whether by a variance or
other Code authorization, in that instance the sign shall be
constructed with a minimum of eight (8) feet clearance between
the bottom of the sign face and the ground level.
Section
555.125
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
555.130
AO:676
such sign constitutes a nuisance to any owner or occupier of adjacent or
neighboring property or to any other person.
Section 555.140. Temporary Signs. [R.O. 2008 §555.140; Ord. No.
5252 §1, 11-14-1994]
Section 555.150. Political Signs. [R.O. 2008 §555.150; Ord. No.
5252 §1, 11-14-1994; Ord. No. 7039 §1, 8-11-2008]
A. The following shall apply to all temporary signs as defined in Section
555.030:
1. For each business or property there shall be permitted to display
one (1) temporary sign for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30)
days. No sign shall be erected unless a permit therefore has been
issued.
2. No temporary sign shall exceed forty (40) square feet in area or six
(6) feet in height nor shall any such sign be fastened to pylons,
piers, footings or other means of permanent installation.
3. No temporary sign may remain in place for more than thirty (30)
days.
4. Temporary signs to advertise charitable enterprises may remain in
place for a period not to exceed seven (7) days with no charge made
for permit application.
5. No more than four (4) temporary sign permits per year will be
issued for any individual business or merchant.
6. Temporary signs shall meet all other requirements of this Chapter.
A. Political Signs On Public Property Or Right-Of-Way. No political sign
shall be placed in or on any public property or within the public right-ofway
in any manner.
B. Political Signs In Residential Area. Political signs located in any area
zoned for and predominately developed for residential use shall not
exceed two (2) feet by two (2) feet on each side. No such sign within
such area shall be placed or erected more than thirty (30) days prior to
the election to which such sign pertains and such sign shall be removed
within seven (7) days after such election.
C. Political Signs In Other Areas. Political signs located in any area zoned
for use other than residential or in any area not then predominately
developed for residential use may be any size but no such sign may be
placed or erected more than thirty (30) days prior to the election to
which such sign pertains and such sign shall be removed within seven
(7) days after such election.
Section
555.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
555.150
AO:677
Section 555.160. Exception. [R.O. 2008 §555.160; Ord. No. 5252 §1,
11-14-1994]
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to notices posted by order of
any court or to notices to the public required by law to be posted in public
places.
Section 555.170. Relocation of Signs. [R.O. 2008 §555.170; Ord. No.
5252 §1, 11-14-1994]
Any sign that is moved to another location on the same or other premises
shall be considered a new sign and a permit shall be secured for any work
performed in connection therewith when required by this Chapter.
Section 555.175. Abandoned Sign Removal, When Deemed
Nuisance. [Ord. No. 7196 §2, 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 7327 §§1 — 2,
3-9-2011]
D. The owner or occupier of the property upon which any political sign is
erected, placed or located shall be responsible for the removal of such
sign within the time required by this Section.
E. The candidate on whose behalf any political sign is displayed, the
chairman or any political committee for any such candidate or the
chairman of any committee supporting or opposing any issue or
proposition in any election concerning which a political sign is
displayed shall be deemed prima facie responsible for the placement,
erection and removal of any such sign as required by this Section.
A. The sign copy on any abandoned sign shall either be entirely removed
from the abandoned sign or covered with an opaque material matching
the background color of the abandoned sign by the owner of the real
estate or at such owner's direction within sixty (60) days of the date
upon which the use of the real estate which was advertised by the
abandoned sign is terminated.
B. Within sixty (60) days of the mailing of written notification from the City
to the owner of the real estate upon which an abandoned sign is
located, regarding the requirement of removal of sign copy on any
abandoned sign described in Subsection (A) hereof, then such sign copy
shall be removed by said owner or at such owner's direction in the
manner described in Subsection (A).
C. Any sign copy on any abandoned sign in violation of Subsection (A) or
(B) hereof are hereby declared to be a common nuisance, and such
common nuisance may be abated in the manner as nuisances are now
or may hereafter be abated under the abatement provisions of Chapter
215 of this Code.
D. Violation of this Section may also be punished pursuant to Section
555.200 or its successor.
Section
555.150
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
555.180
AO:678
Section 555.180. By-Pass Signs. [R.O. 2008 §555.180; Ord. No. 5252
§1, 11-14-1994]
In all zones where permitted and adjacent to Highway 71 By-pass external
freestanding business signs as regulated in each zone and each district,
may be installed to a maximum height of sixty-five feet (65) and a maximum
surface area of two hundred twenty-five (225) feet if the location is within
one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the edge of the by-pass roadway
and if the plans and descriptions are prepared by a registered engineer or
architect and approved by the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the sign
construction.
Section 555.190. Non-Conforming Signs — Amortization. [R.O.
2008 §555.190; Ord. No. 5252 §1, 11-14-1994]
A. All signs which have been lawfully erected shall be deemed to be legal
and lawful signs and may be maintained subject to the provisions of this
Section.
B. Non-conforming signs which become deteriorated or dilapidated to the
extent of over sixty percent (60%) of the physical value they would have
if they had been maintained in good repair must be removed within
sixty (60) days. Non-conforming signs which are damaged to the extent
of sixty percent (60%) or less of their physical value must be repaired
within sixty (60) days from date of notification or removed. Nonconforming
signs which are damaged, other than by vandalism, to the
extent of over sixty percent (60%) of their physical value must be
removed within sixty (60) days of receiving such damage or brought
into compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. Non-conforming
signs which are damaged by vandalism to the extent of over sixty
percent (60%) of their physical value must be restored within sixty (60)
days, removed or brought into compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
C. Non-conforming signs may not be enlarged or increased in height.
D. Non-conforming signs which are enlarged or increased in height in
violation of this Section must be removed.
E. A non-conforming sign may not be relocated except when such
relocation brings the sign into compliance with this Chapter. Nonconforming
signs which are relocated in violation of this Section must
be removed.
F. Freestanding signs including temporary signs, lawfully in existence on
November 13, 1994, including freestanding signs existing pursuant to
variances granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, which do not
conform with the provisions of this Chapter shall be removed, altered or
replaced so as to conform with the provisions of this Chapter no later
than January 1, 1996. This Subsection does not apply to bill boards
which were lawfully erected.
Section
555.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
555.190
AO:679
Section 555.200. Violation and Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §555.200; Ord.
No. 5252 §1, 11-14-1994]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a ordinance violation. Each day that
the violation is permitted to exist after notification in writing by the Code
Enforcement Officer and the expiration of time designed in said notice shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 560
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
G. The sign face of a non-conforming sign may be altered if the sign face is
not thereby enlarged beyond the maximum area allowed by this
Chapter.
H. On-premise wall, canopy and awning signs lawfully in existence on
December 20, 1993, including such signs existing pursuant to variances
granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, which do not conform with
the provisions of this Chapter shall be removed, altered or replaced so
as to conform with the provisions of this Chapter no later than
December 20, 2008.
Section
555.190
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
555.200
AO:680
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 560.010. Title Purpose. [R.O. 2008 §560.010; Ord. No. 5430
§1, 6-25-1996]
Section 560.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §560.020; Ord. No. 5430
§1, 6-25-1996]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases and words and
their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein:
2-YEAR FREQUENCY STORM — A storm that is capable of producing
rainfall expected to be equaled or exceeded on the average of once in two
(2) years. It may also be expressed as an exceedance probability with a fifty
percent (50%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
10-YEAR FREQUENCY STORM — A storm that is capable of producing
rainfall expected to be equaled or exceeded on the average of once in ten
(10) years. It may also be expressed as an exceedance probability with a ten
percent (10%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
25-YEAR FREQUENCY STORM — A storm that is capable of producing
rainfall expected to be equaled or exceeded on the average of once in
A. The provisions of Chapter 560 shall constitute and be known as the
"Storm Water Management Ordinance" for the City of Maryville,
Missouri, hereby called the "Municipality".
B. The purpose of this Chapter is to protect, maintain, and enhance the
public health, safety and general welfare by establishing the minimum
requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of
increased stormwater runoff associated with both future land
development and existing developed land within the municipality.
Proper management of stormwater runoff will minimize damage to
public and private property, ensure a functional drainage system,
reduce the effects of development on land and stream channel erosion,
assist in the attainment and maintenance of water quality standards,
enhance the local environment associated with the drainage system,
reduce local flooding, maintain as nearly as possible the pre-developed
runoff characteristics of the area and facilitate economic development
while mitigating associated flooding and drainage impacts.
C. The application of this Chapter and the provisions expressed herein
shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall
not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by
State Statute. In addition, if site characteristics indicate that complying
with these minimum requirements will not provide adequate designs or
protection for local property or residents, it is the designer's
responsibility to exceed the minimum requirements as necessary. The
Director of Public Works shall be responsible for the coordination and
enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.
Section
560.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.020
AO:681
twenty-five (25) years. It may also be expressed as an exceedance
probability with a four percent (4%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
100-YEAR FREQUENCY STORM — A storm that is capable of producing
rainfall expected to be equaled or exceeded on the average of one (1) in one
hundred (100) years. It also may be expressed as an exceedance probability
with a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
AS-BUILT PLAN — A set of engineering or site drawings that delineate the
specific permitted stormwater management facility as actually constructed.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — A wide range of management
procedures, schedules of activities, prohibitions on practices and other
management practices which have been demonstrated to effectively control
the quality and/or quantity of stormwater runoff and which are compatible
with the planned land use.
CITY MANAGER — The official responsible for the administration of the City
or his/her duly authorized representative.
CROSS-DRAIN CULVERT — A culvert located under a roadway.
DESIGN REPORT — The report that accompanies the stormwater
management plan and includes data used for engineering analysis, results
of all analysis, design and analysis calculations (including results obtained
from computer programs), and other engineering data that would assist the
municipality in evaluating proposed stormwater management facilities.
DESIGNER — A professional engineer, architect or land surveyor, licensed
in the State of Missouri who prepares plans and studies required by this
Chapter.
DETENTION STRUCTURE — A permanent stormwater management
structure whose primary purpose is to temporarily store stormwater runoff
and release the stored runoff at control rates.
DEVELOP LAND — To change the runoff characteristics of a parcel of
land in conjunction with residential, commercial, industrial or institutional
construction or alteration.
DEVELOPED LAND USE CONDITIONS — The land use conditions
according to the current, Official Zoning Map adopted by the City of
Maryville, Missouri.
DEVELOPMENT — Should generally mean any of the following actions
undertaken by a public or private individual or entity:
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots,
plots, sites, tracts, parcels or other divisions by plat or deed, or
1.
Any land change, including, without limitation, clearing, tree removal,
grubbing, stripping, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and
filling of land.
2.
Section
560.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
560.020
AO:682
DIRECTOR, PUBLIC WORKS — The individual designated by the City
Manager to direct the operations of the Public Works Department.
EASEMENT — A grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use of
such land by others for a specific purpose or purposes, and which must be
included in the conveyance of land affected by such easement.
EROSION — The wearing away of land surface by the action of wind, water,
gravity, ice or any combination of those forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL — The control of solid material,
both mineral and organic during a land disturbing activity to prevent its
transport out of the disturbed area by means of air, water, gravity or ice.
EXISTING LAND USE CONDITIONS — The land use conditions existing at
the time of the most recent official aerial photograph available from the
municipality.
GRADING — Excavating, filling, (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling
of earth material, or any combination thereof, including the land in its
excavated or filled conditions.
IMPERVIOUS — The condition of being impenetrable by water.
IMPERVIOUSNESS — The degree to which a site is impervious.
INFILTRATION — The passage or movement of water through the soil
profile.
INTERIOR CULVERT — A culvert that is not located under a roadway.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY — Any use of land by any person that results
in a change in the natural cover or topography that may cause erosion and
contribute to sediment and alter the quality and/or quantity of stormwater
runoff.
LOT SPLIT — The division of a platted lot into two (2) parcels not involving
the dedication or vacation of a street or alley.
MAINTENANCE — Any action necessary to preserve stormwater
management facilities in proper working condition, in order to serve the
intended purposes set forth in Article I of this Chapter and to prevent
structural failure of such facilities. Maintenance shall not include actions
taken solely for the purpose of enhancing the aesthetic aspects associated
with stormwater management facilities.
MUNICIPALITIES — The City of Maryville, Missouri.
NATURAL WATERWAYS — Waterways that are part of the natural
topography. They usually maintain a continuous or seasonal flow during
the year and are characterized as being irregular in cross-section with a
meandering course. Construction channels such as drainage ditches shall
not be considered natural waterways.
NON-ERODIBLE — A material, e.g., natural rock, riprap, concrete, plastic,
etc., that will not experience surface wear due to natural forces of wind,
water, ice, gravity or a combination of those forces.
Section
560.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.020
AO:683
NON-POINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution contained in stormwater
runoff from ill defined, diffuse sources.
OFFICIAL MAP — The Zoning Map adopted by the City Council showing the
zoning districts, streets, highways and parts theretofore laid out, adopted
and established by law and any amendments thereto adopted by the City
Council or additions thereto resulting from the approval of subdivision plats
and the subsequent filling of such approved plats.
ON-SITE STORM WATER MANAGEMENT — The design and construction
of a facility necessary to control stormwater runoff within and for a single
development.
PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR THE LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY —
POST DEVELOPMENT CONDITIONS — The conditions which exist
following the completion of the land disturbing activity in terms of
topography, vegetation, land use and rate, volume or direction of
stormwater runoff.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT CONDITIONS — Those land use conditions that
existed prior to the initiation of the land disturbing activity in terms of
topography, vegetation, land use and rate, volume or direction of
stormwater runoff.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary plat of residential or commercial
subdivisions submitted pursuant to the municipality's subdivision
regulations.
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works
established by the Council of the City of Maryville, Missouri.
RECORD SURVEY — A final field survey which locates the visible surface
features of a constructed stormwater facility on the ground, but without
locating non-visible or sub-surface features such as the actual route and
elevation of buried pipe.
REGIONAL STORM WATER MANAGEMENT — The design and construction
of a facility necessary to control stormwater runoff within or outside a
development and for one (1) or more developments.
REGISTERED CIVIL ENGINEER — A civil engineer properly registered and
licensed in the State of Missouri.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR — A land surveyor properly registered and
licensed in the State of Missouri.
The person who has or represents those having financial or operational
control over the land disturbing activity; and/or
1.
The landowner or person in possession or control of the land who
directly or indirectly allowed the land disturbing activity or has
benefitted from it or who has failed to comply with any provision of this
Chapter.
2.
Section
560.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
560.020
AO:684
REGISTERED LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A landscape architect properly
registered and licensed in the State of Missouri.
RESPONSIBLE PERSONNEL — Any foreman, superintendent, or similar
individual who is the on-site person in charge of land disturbing activities.
RETENTION STRUCTURE — A permanent structure whose primary
purpose is to permanently store a given volume of stormwater runoff.
Release of the given volume is by infiltration and/or evaporation.
SEDIMENT — Solid particulate matter, both mineral and organic, that has
been or is being transported by water, air, ice or gravity from its site of
origin.
STABILIZATION — The installation of vegetative or structural measures to
establish a soil cover to reduce soil erosion by stormwater runoff, wind, ice
and gravity.
STAGE WORK or STAGE CONSTRUCTION — A plan for the staged
construction of stormwater facilities where portions of the facilities will be
constructed as different stages of the proposed development are started or
completed.
STORM WATER CONCEPT PLAN — The overall proposal for a storm
drainage system, including stormwater management structures, and
supporting documentation as specified in the Storm Water Management
Design Guide, for each proposed private or public development to the
extent permitted by law. Also included are the supporting engineering
calculations and results of any computer analysis, if necessary.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN GUIDE — The manual of design,
performance, and review criteria for stormwater management practices,
prepared under the direction of the municipality or contacted professional.
Copies of this manual can be obtained from the municipality.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Those structures and
facilities that are designed for the collection, conveyance, storage,
treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff into and through the drainage
system.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The set of drawings and other
documents that comprise all of the information and specifications for the
drainage systems, structure, concepts and techniques that will be used
to control stormwater as required by this Chapter and the Storm Water
Management Design Guide. Also included are the supporting engineering
calculations and results of any computer analysis.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT QUALITATIVE CONTROL — A system of
vegetative, structural or other measures that reduce or eliminate pollutants
that might otherwise be carried by stormwater runoff.
STORM WATER RUNOFF — The direct response of a watershed to
precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff that enters a
ditch, stream, storm drain or other concentrated flow during and following
the precipitation.
Section
560.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.020
AO:685
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Except for "lot split" as defined, shall mean the
division of a tract of land three (3) or more lots, tracts, sites, parcels or
areas any one of which is less than three (3) acres in area and/or the division
of a tract of land into any number of lots, tracts, sites, parcels or areas
of any size which includes improvements, new streets, easements, right-ofway,
right of ingress and egress or provisions for a public area or public
facility.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — The division of land into lots, tracts, sites, parcels
or areas for development purposes either of which is three (3) acres or less
in area and each having a frontage of not more than two hundred (200) feet
on an existing City, State or Federal highway or road dedicated or deeded
to the public provided that the proposed subdivision of land:
SWALE — A structure measure with a lining of grass, riprap or other
materials which can function as a detention structure and convey
stormwater runoff without causing erosion.
VARIANCE — The modification by the City Council of the minimum
stormwater management requirements for specific circumstances where
the strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary
hardship and not fulfill the intent of this Chapter.
WAIVER — The relinquishment from stormwater management
requirements by the City Council for a specific land disturbing activity on a
case-by-case review basis.
WATER QUALITY — Those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate
to the rate and volume of the stormwater runoff to downstream areas
resulting from land disturbing activities.
WATER QUANTITY — Those characteristics of stormwater runoff from a
land disturbing activity that relates to the physical, chemical, biological, or
radiological integrity of water.
WATERSHED — The drainage area contributing stormwater runoff to a
single point.
Does not include any new streets, easements, right-of-way, rights of
ingress or egress but shall include an approved sewer and water
system.
1.
2. Does not include a provision for a public area or public facility.
Conforms to the minimum lot area and other requirements contained in
the Zoning Code.
3.
Conveys the right-of-way necessary for road widening and maintenance
of City roads where the granting of such right-of-way can be given
without undue hardship.
4.
Section
560.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
560.030
AO:686
Section 560.030. Scope of Chapter. [R.O. 2008 §560.030; Ord. No.
5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
No person shall develop any land without having provided for appropriate
stormwater management measures that control or manage runoff, in
compliance with this Chapter, unless exempted in Article I, Section 560.040.
Section 560.040. Exemptions From Requirements. [R.O. 2008
§560.040; Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
Section 560.050. Storm Water Management Design Guide. [R.O.
2008 §560.050; Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
To assist in the design and evaluation of stormwater management facilities
in the municipality, a Storm Water Management Design Guide has been
developed. Example design procedures and criteria are presented for
conducting hydrologic and hydraulic evaluations. Although the intention of
the guide is to establish uniform design practices, it neither replaces the
need for engineering judgment nor precludes the use of information not
presented. Other accepted engineering procedures may be used to conduct
hydrologic and hydraulic studies if approved by the municipality.
A. The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of
this Chapter and the requirements of providing stormwater
management measures:
1. Land disturbing activities on agricultural land for production of
plants and animals useful to man.
2. Land disturbing activities undertaken on forest land for the
production and harvesting of timber and timber products.
3. Construction or improvement resulting in less than a fifty percent
(50%) increase in square footage of single-family residences or
their accessory buildings.
Section
560.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.050
AO:687

ARTICLE II
Storm Water Concept and Preliminary Development Plans
Section 560.060. Scope of Development Plan. [R.O. 2008 §560.060;
Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996; Ord. No. 8147, 12-10-2018]
A. In developing plans for a residential/commercial subdivision, individual
lots in a residential/commercial subdivision development shall not be
considered to be separate land-disturbing activities and shall not
require individual storm water management permits. Instead, the
residential/commercial subdivision development, as a whole, shall be
considered to be a single land-disturbing activity. Hydrologic
parameters that reflect the ultimate subdivision development shall be
used in all engineering calculations. Individual lot development with
new dwellings or any structure which has more than fifty percent (50%)
added to existing square footage shall require submittal of
topographical maps with before and after elevations for the entire
perimeter of the lot.
1. If individual lots or sections in a residential/commercial subdivision
are being developed by different property owners, all landdisturbing
activities related to the residential/commercial
subdivision shall be covered by the approved storm water
management plan for the residential/commercial subdivision.
Individual lot owners or developers shall sign a certificate of
compliance that all activities on that lot will be carried out in
accordance with the approved storm water management plan for
the residential/commercial subdivision. (See Exhibits A and B of
Ord. No. 5430 which are on file in the City offices).
2. Residential/commercial subdivisions which were approved for
construction by the City Council prior to the effective date of these
regulations are exempt from these requirements. Development of
new phases of existing subdivisions which were not previously
approved shall comply with the provisions of these regulations.
B. For residential land-disturbing activities involving less than one (1) acre
of actual land disturbance which are not part of a larger common plan
of development or sale, the person responsible for the land-disturbing
activity shall submit a simplified storm water management plan to the
Public Works Department meeting the requirements listed below. This
plan does not require approval by the municipality and does not require
preparation of certification by the designers specified in Section
560.160 of Article II. All commercial developments regardless of size
must conform to Article II, Sections 560.070 through 560.160, unless a
waiver is granted by the municipality.
1. A narrative description of the storm water management facilities to
be used.
Section
560.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.060
AO:689
Section 560.070. Storm Water Concept and Storm Water
Management Plan. [R.O. 2008 §560.070; Ord. No. 5430 §1,
6-25-1996]
2. A general description of topographic and soil conditions of the
development site.
3. A general description of adjacent property and a description of
existing structures, buildings, and other fixed improvements
located on surrounding properties.
4. A sketch plan to accompany the narrative which shall contain:
a. A site location drawing of the proposed project, indicating the
location of the proposed project in relation to roadways,
jurisdictional boundaries, streams and rivers;
b. The boundary lines of the site on which the work is to be
performed;
c. All areas within the site which will be included in the landdisturbing
activities shall be identified and the total disturbed
area calculated;
d. A topographic map of the site;
e. Anticipated starting and completion dates of the various stages
of land-disturbing activities and the expected date the final
stabilization will be completed; and
f. The location of temporary and permanent vegetative and
structural storm water management control measures.
5. Storm water management plans shall contain certification by the
person responsible for the land-disturbing activity that the landdisturbing
activity will be accomplished pursuant to the plan. (See
Exhibit C of Ord. No. 5430 which is on file in the City offices.)
6. Storm water management plans shall contain certification by the
person responsible for the land-disturbing activity of the right of
the municipality to conduct on-site inspections. (See Exhibit D of
Ord. No. 5430 which is on file in the City offices.)
7. The municipality reserves the right to require storm water
management preparation as in Article II, Section 560.130, as
recommended by the Director of Public Works.
C. For residential land-disturbing activities disturbing greater than or
equal to one (1) acre or less than one (1) acre if part of a common
development plan of one (1) acre or more and all commercial landdisturbing
activities, the requirements of Article II, Sections 560.070
through 560.160, shall apply.
Section
560.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
560.070
AO:690
Section 560.080. Permit Requirements. [R.O. 2008 §560.080; Ord.
No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
A. A storm water concept plan for development shall be submitted for
review by the Public Works Department prior to submission of the
storm water management plan and construction plans for the entire
development, or any portion thereof. The storm water concept plan
must identify the location and type of facilities to be constructed in
sufficient detail to accurately estimate construction costs and enable
the Public Works Department to determine if a storm water
management plan is needed. If they determine a final storm water
management plan is not needed, the storm water concept plan then
becomes the storm water management plan for this development.
B. All preliminary plats of the development shall be consistent with the
storm water concept plan required in Subsection (A), above.
C. Upon approval of the concept plan by the Director of Public Works, the
applicant shall submit a final storm water management plan (as part of
the construction plans) to the City Council for review and approval.
D. Should any storm water management plan involve any storm water
management facilities or land to be dedicated to public use, the same
information shall also be submitted for review to the department having
jurisdiction over the land or other appropriate departments or agencies
prior to submission to the City Council for review and approval. The
final storm water management plan shall serve as the basis for all
subsequent construction.
E. If disapproved by the City Council, the storm water management plan
may be reviewed with the designer, where it will either be changed,
modified or resubmitted. If rejected, changes, additional analysis or
other information needed to approve the next submittal of the concept
plan shall be identified by the City Council. After the receipt of the
revised storm water management plan, the City Council shall issue a
decision approving, rejecting or conditionally approving the plan with
modification.
A. No final occupancy permit shall be issued without the following:
1. Recorded easement for storm water management facilities.
2. Receipt of an as-built plan which includes a certification of the
storm drainage system.
B. No site grading permit shall be issued or modified without the
following:
1. Right of entry for emergency maintenance if necessary. (See
Exhibit E & F of this Ord. No. 5430 which are on file in the City
offices.)
Section
560.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.080
AO:691
Section 560.090. Fees. [R.O. 2008 §560.090; Ord. No. 5430 §1,
6-25-1996]
A list of fees for plan review and other fees associated with this Chapter can
be obtained from the Public Works Department.
Section 560.100. Permit Suspension and Revocation. [R.O. 2008
§560.100; Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
2. Right of entry for inspections. (See Exhibits E & F of this Ord. No.
5430 which are on file in the City offices.)
3. Any off-site easement needed.
4. An approved storm water concept plan or storm water
management plan, as appropriate.
5. An approved storm water ownership and maintenance plan.
C. The approved storm water management plan shall contain certification
by the applicant that all land clearing, construction, development and
drainage will be done according to the storm water management plan
or previously approved revisions. Any and all site grading permits may
be revoked at any time if the construction of storm water management
facilities is not in strict accordance with approved plans. (See Exhibit C
of this Ord. No. 5430 which is on file in the City offices.)
D. In addition to the plans and permits required from the municipality,
applicants shall obtain all State and Federal permits required for the
proposed development.
A. A site grading permit may be suspended or revoked if one (1) or more of
the following violations have been committed:
1. Violation(s) of the conditions of the storm water management plan
as approved;
2. Construction not in accordance with the approved plans;
3. Non-compliance with correction notice(s). (See Exhibit G of this
Ord. No. 5430 which is on file in the City offices) or stop work
order(s), (see Exhibit H of this Ord. No. 5430 which is on file in the
City offices); or
4. The existence of an immediate danger in a downstream area in the
judgment of the Director of Public Works or his/her designee.
B. If one (1) or more of these conditions are found, a written notice of
violation(s) shall be served upon the owner or authorized
representative and an immediate stop work order may be issued. The
notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance
with the plan. Correction of these violations must be started
immediately or the owner shall be deemed in violation of this Chapter.
Section
560.080
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
560.110
AO:692
Section 560.110. Minimum Runoff Control Requirements. [R.O.
2008 §560.110; Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
A. The minimum storm water control requirements shall provide
management measures necessary to accomplish the following:
1. Install storm water management facilities to limit the 2-year and
10-year developed peak discharge rates to pre-developed peak
discharge rates. The design of these facilities shall be based on
procedures contained in the Storm Water Management Design
Guide or procedures approved by the Director of Public Works. The
2-year and 10-year design storms cover the range of normal
flooding. Structures must be analyzed for both. The 25-year storms
are commonly used for structures under roadways.
2. The requirements or portions thereof, of Subsection (A)(1) above,
may be waived by the City Council if it can be shown by the detailed
engineering calculations and analysis which are acceptable to the
municipality that one (1) of the following exists:
a. The installation of storm water management facilities would
have insignificant effects on reducing downstream flood peaks;
b. Storm water management facilities are not needed to protect
downstream developments and the downstream drainage
system has sufficient capacity to receive any increase in runoff
for the design storm;
c. It is not necessary to install storm water management facilities
to control developed peak discharge rates at the exit to a
proposed development and installing such facilities would
increase flood peaks at some downstream locations; or
d. The Public Works Department determines that storm water
management facilities are not needed to control developed
peak discharge rates and installing such facilities would not be
in the best interest of the municipality.
3. The requirements or portions thereof, of Subsection (A)(1) above,
may not be waived if the municipality determines that not
controlling downstream flood peaks would increase known flooding
problems, or exceed the capacity of the downstream drainage
system.
4. A waiver shall only be granted after a written request is submitted
to the City Manager through the Public Works Department by the
applicant containing descriptions, drawings, and any other
information that is necessary to evaluate the proposed land
disturbing activity. A separate written waiver request shall be
required if there are subsequent additions, extensions, or
modifications which would alter the approved storm water runoff
Section
560.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.110
AO:693
Section 560.120. Storm Water Management Facilities. [R.O. 2008
§560.120; Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
characteristics to a land disturbing activity receiving a waiver. The
municipality will conduct a review of the request for a waiver.
5. Discharge velocities shall be reduced to provide a non-erosive
velocity flow from a structure, channel or other control measure or
the velocity of the 10-year design storm runoff in the receiving
waterway prior to the land disturbing activity, whichever is greater.
B. For all storm water management facilities, a hydrologic-hydraulic study
shall be done showing how the drainage system will function with and
without the proposed facilities. For such studies the following land use
conditions shall be used. Existing land use data shall be taken from the
most recent aerial photography and field checked and updated.
1. For the design of the facility outlet structure, use developed land
use conditions for the area within the proposed development and
existing land use conditions for upstream areas draining to the
facility.
2. For any analysis of flood flows downstream from the proposed
facility, use existing land use conditions for all downstream areas.
3. All storm water management facilities emergency spillways shall
be checked using the 100-year storm and routing flows through the
facility and emergency spillways. For this analysis, developed land
use conditions shall be used for all areas within the analysis.
4. If accepted for municipal maintenance, the effects of existing
upstream detention facilities can be considered in the hydrologichydraulic
study.
A. Storm water management facilities may include both structural and
non-structural elements. Natural swales and other natural runoff
conduits shall be retained where practicable.
B. When additional storm water management facilities are required to
satisfy the minimum control requirements, the following measures are
examples of what may be used:
1. Storm water detention structures (dry basins);
2. Storm water retention structures (wet ponds — minimum depth six
(6) feet);
3. Facilities designed to encourage overland flow, slow velocities of
flow and flow through buffer zones;
4. Infiltration practices.
Section
560.110
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
560.120
AO:694
Section 560.130. Plan Requirements. [R.O. 2008 §560.130; Ord. No.
5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
C. Where detention and retention structures are used, designs which
consolidate these facilities into a limited number of large structures will
be preferred over designs which utilize a large number of small
structures.
D. Storm water management plans can be rejected by the municipality if
they incorporate structures and facilities that will demand considerable
maintenance, will be difficult to maintain or utilize numerous small
structures if other alternatives are physically possible.
E. The drainage system and all storm water management structures
within the municipality (including both public and private portions) will
be designed to the same engineering and technical criteria and
standards. The municipality's review will be the same whether the
portion of the drainage system will be under public or private control or
ownership.
F. All storm water management measures shall be designed in accordance
with the design criteria contained in the Storm Water Management
Design Guide using procedures contained in this manual or procedures
approved by the municipality.
A. Storm water management plans shall include as a minimum the
following:
1. A vicinity map indicating a north arrow, scale, boundary lines of the
site and other information necessary to locate the development
site.
2. The existing and proposed topography of the development site.
3. Physical improvements on the site, including present development
and proposed development.
4. Location, dimensions, elevations and characteristics of all storm
water management facilities.
5. All areas within the site which will be included in the land
disturbing activities shall be identified and the total disturbed area
calculated.
6. The location of temporary and permanent vegetative and structural
storm water management control measures.
7. An anticipated starting and completion date of the various stages of
land disturbing activities and the expected date the final
stabilization will be completed.
8. A determination that no occupied first (1st) floor elevation of any
structure is below the 100-year plus one (1) foot flood elevation.
Section
560.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.130
AO:695
9. At the direction of the Director of Public Works, for all portions of
the drainage system which are expected to carry between fifty (50)
and one hundred fifty (150) cfs for the 100-year storm, the 100-year
plus one (1) foot flood elevation analysis, the Public Works
Department will determine that one (1) of the following conditions
may exist:
a. The estimated runoff would create a hazard for adjacent
property or residents.
b. The flood limits would be of such magnitude that adjacent
residents should be informed of these limits.
10. For all portions of the drainage system which are expected to carry
one hundred fifty (150) cfs or more for the 100-year storm, the
100-year plus one (1) foot flood elevation analysis shall be done and
flood limits shall be shown on the storm water management plans.
11. Storm water management plans shall include designation of all
easements needed for inspection and maintenance of the drainage
system and storm water management facilities. As a minimum,
easements shall have the following characteristics:
a. Provide adequate access to all portions of the drainage system
and structures.
b. Provide sufficient land area for maintenance equipment and
personnel to adequately and efficiently maintain the system
with a minimum of ten (10) feet along both sides of all drainage
ways, streams, channels, etc., and around the perimeter of all
detention and retention facilities or sufficient land area for
equipment access for maintenance of all storm water
management facilities. The distance shall be measured from
the top of the bank or toe of the dam whichever is applicable.
c. Restriction on easements shall include prohibiting all fences
and structures which would interfere with access to the
easement areas and/or the maintenance function of the
drainage system.
12. To improve the aesthetic aspects of the drainage system, a
landscape plan for all portions of the drainage system shall be part
of the storm water management plan. This landscape plan shall
address the following:
a. Tree saving and planting plan.
b. Types of vegetation that will be used for stream bank
stabilization, erosion control, sediment control, aesthetics and
water quality improvement.
Section
560.130
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
560.130
AO:696
c. Any special requirements related to the landscaping of the
drainage system and efforts necessary to preserve the natural
aspects of the drainage system.
13. To improve the water quality aspects of the drainage system, the
storm water management plan shall include best management
practices to control the water quality of the runoff during the land
disturbing activities and during the life of the development. This
requirement is in addition to the requirements of the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Permit.
14. The storm water management plans shall include all engineering
calculations needed to design the system and associated structures
including pre- and post-development velocities, peak rates of
discharge and inflow and outflow hydrographies of storm water
runoff at all existing and proposed points of discharge from the site.
15. Description of site conditions around points of all surface water
discharge including vegetation and method of flow conveyance
from the land disturbing activity.
16. Construction and design details for structural controls.
17. The expected timing of flood peaks through the downstream
drainage system shall be assessed when planning the use of
detention facilities.
18. In determining downstream effects from storm water management
structures and the development, hydrologic-hydraulic engineering
studies shall extend downstream to a point where the proposed
development represents less than ten percent (10%) of the total
watershed.
19. All storm water management facilities and all major portions of the
conveyance system through the proposed development (i.e.,
channels, culverts) shall be analyzed, using the design and
100-year storms for design conditions and operating conditions
which can reasonably be expected during the life of the facility. The
results of the analysis shall be included in the hydrologic-hydraulic
study.
20. If the storm water management plan and/or design report indicates
that there may be a drainage or flooding problem at the exit to the
proposed development or at any location between the exit point
and the ten percent (10%) downstream point, the Director of Public
Works may require:
a. Water surface profiles plotted for the conditions of pre- and
post-development for the 100-year design storm;
Section
560.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.130
AO:697
Section 560.140. Plan Hydrologic Criteria. [R.O. 2008 §560.140;
Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
b. Water surface profiles plotted for the conditions of pre- and
post-development for the 100-year design storm;
c. Elevations of all structures potentially damaged by the 10- and/
or 100-year flows.
21. All storm water management plans submitted for approval shall
contain certification by the person responsible for the land
disturbing activity that the land disturbing activity will be
accomplished pursuant to the approved plan and that responsible
personnel will be assigned to the project. (See Exhibit C of this Ord.
No. 5430 which is on file in the City offices).
22. All storm water management plans shall contain certification, by
the person responsible for the land disturbing activity, of the right
of the Municipality to conduct on-site inspections. (See Exhibit D of
this Ord. No. 5430 which is on file in the City offices).
23. No storm water management plan shall be considered approved
without the inclusion of an approval signature and date on the
plans by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee. The
approval on the plans is solely an acknowledgement of satisfactory
compliance with the requirements of these regulations. The
approval does not constitute a representation or warranty to the
applicant or any other person concerning the safety,
appropriateness or effectiveness of any provision or omission from
the storm water management plan.
24. Approved storm water management plans remain valid for five (5)
years from the date of approval. Extensions or renewals of the plan
approvals may be granted by the City Manager upon written
request by the person responsible for land disturbing activity.
A. The hydrologic criteria to be used for the storm water concept and
storm water management plans shall be as follows:
1. 25-year design storm for all cross-drain culverts and drainage
designs.
2. 10-year design storm for all interior culverts and drainage designs.
3. 2- and 10-year design storms for all detention and retention basins
using procedures contained in the Storm Water Management
Design Guide or approved by the Public Works Department.
4. All drainage designs shall be checked using the 100-year storm for
analysis of local flooding and possible flood hazards to adjacent
structures and/or property.
Section
560.130
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
560.140
AO:698
Section 560.150. Plan Water Quality Criteria. [R.O. 2008 §560.150;
Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
5. All hydrologic analysis will be based on land use conditions
specified in Section 560.110(B).
6. For the design of storage facilities, a secondary outlet device or
emergency spillway shall be provided to discharge the excess
runoff in such a way that no danger of loss of life or facility failure is
created. The size of the outlet device or emergency spillway shall
be designed to pass the 100-year storm as a minimum requirement.
A. Following are the criteria related to using storm water management
facilities for water quality purposes:
1. Ponds, lakes and reservoirs.
a. When the land disturbing activity consists of the construction
of a pond, lake or reservoir which is singly built and not part of
a permitted land disturbing activity, the following procedures
will apply:
(1) A storm water management plan will not be required if the
pond, lake or reservoir is permitted under the State Dams
and Reservoirs Safety Act or has received a Certificate of
Exemption from the State Dams and Reservoirs Safety Act.
Best management practices should be used to minimize
the impact of erosion and sediment.
(2) A storm water management plan will be required for the
construction of all ponds, lakes or reservoirs not meeting
the conditions in (1) above that otherwise meet the size
requirement for storm water management plan approval.
b. When ponds are used for water quality protection, the ponds
shall be designed as both quantity and quality control
structures. Sediment storage volume shall be calculated
considering the clean out and maintenance schedules specified
by the designer during the land disturbing activity. Sediment
storage volumes may be predicted by the Universal Soil Loss
Equation or other methods acceptable to the Director of Public
Works.
c. Storm water runoff and drainage to a single outlet from land
disturbing activities which disturb ten (10) acres or more shall
be controlled during the land disturbing activity by a sediment
basin where sufficient space and other factors allow these
controls to be used until the final inspection. The sediment
basin shall be designed and constructed to accommodate the
anticipated sediment loading from the land disturbing activity
and meet a removal efficiency of eighty percent (80%)
suspended solids or 0.5 ML/L peak set table solids
Section
560.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.150
AO:699
concentration, whichever is less. The outfall device or system
design shall take into account the total drainage area flowing
through the disturbed area draining to the basin.
d. Other practices may be acceptable to the municipality if they
achieve an equivalent removal efficiency of eighty percent
(80%) for suspended solids or 0.5 ML/L peak set table solids
concentration, whichever is less. The efficiency shall be
calculated for disturbed conditions for the 10-year twenty-four
(24) hour design storm event.
e. Permanent water quality ponds having a permanent pool shall
be designed to store and release the first (1st) one-half (½)
inch of runoff from the site over a twenty-four (24) hour period.
The storage volume shall be designed to accommodate, at
least, one-half (½) inch of runoff from the entire site.
f. Permanent water quality ponds, not having a permanent pool,
shall be designed to release the first (1st) inch of runoff from
the site over a twenty-four (24) hour period.
g. The use of measures other than ponds to achieve water quality
improvement are recommended on sites containing less than
ten (10) disturbed acres.
2. Infiltration practices.
a. Permanent infiltration practices, when used, shall be designed
to accept, at a minimum, the first (1st) inch of runoff from all
impervious areas.
b. Area drainage to infiltration practices must be established and
vegetative filters established prior to runoff entering the
system. Infiltration practices shall not be used if a suspended
solids filter system does not accompany the practice. If
vegetation is the intended filter, there shall be at least a twenty
(20) feet width of vegetative filter prior to storm water runoff
entering the infiltration practice.
c. The bottom of the infiltration practice shall be at least two (2)
feet above the seasonal high water table, whether perched or
regional, determined by direct piezometer measurements
which can be demonstrated to be representative of the
maximum height of the water table on an annual basis during
years of normal precipitation or by the depth in the soil at
which mottling first occurs.
d. The infiltration practice shall be designed to completely drain
of water within seventy-two (72) hours.
e. Soils must have adequate permeability to allow water to
infiltrate. Infiltration practices are limited to soils having an
Section
560.150
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
560.150
AO:700
Section 560.160. Professional Registration Requirements. [R.O.
2008 §560.160; Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
infiltration rate of at least 0.30 inches per hour. Initial
consideration will be based on a review of the appropriate
soil survey, and the survey may serve as a basis for rejection.
On-site soil borings and textural classifications must be
accomplished to verify the actual site and seals on high water
table conditions when infiltration is to be utilized.
f. Infiltration practice greater than three (3) feet deep shall be
located at least ten (10) feet from basement walls.
g. Infiltration practices designed to handle runoff from
impervious parking areas shall be a minimum of one hundred
fifty (150) feet from any public or private water supply well.
h. The design of infiltration practice shall provide an overflow
system with measures to provide a non-erosive velocity of flow
along its length and at the outfall.
i. The slope of the bottom of the infiltration practice shall not
exceed five percent (5%). Also, the practice shall not be
installed in fill material, as piping along the fill/natural ground
interface may cause slope failure.
j. An infiltration practice shall not be installed on or atop a slope
whose natural angle of incline exceeds twenty percent (20%).
k. Clean outs will be provided, at a minimum, every one hundred
(100) feet along the infiltration practice to allow for access and
maintenance.
A. Storm water concept and storm water management plans and design
reports that are incidental to the overall or ongoing site design shall be
prepared, certified, and stamped/sealed by a qualified registered
Missouri professional engineer, land surveyor, or landscape architect
using acceptable engineering standards and practices. All other storm
water concept, and storm water management plans and design reports
shall be prepared, certified and stamped/sealed by a qualified
registered Missouri professional engineer using acceptable
engineering standards and practices.
B. The engineer, surveyor or landscape architect shall perform services
only in areas of his/her competence and shall undertake to perform
engineering or land surveying assignments only when qualified by
education and/or experience in the specific technical field. In addition,
the engineer, surveyor or landscape architect must verify that the plans
have been designed in accordance with this Chapter and the standards
and criteria stated or referred to in this Chapter.
Section
560.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.160
AO:701

ARTICLE III
Ownership and Municipality Participation
Section 560.170. Ownership of Storm Water Management Facilities.
[R.O. 2008 §560.170; Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
Section 560.180. Municipality Participation. [R.O. 2008 §560.180;
Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
A. All storm water management facilities shall be privately owned and
maintained unless the City Council accepts the facility for municipal
ownership and maintenance. The owner of all private facilities shall
grant to the municipality a perpetual non-exclusive easement which
allows for public inspection and emergency repair.
B. All storm water management measures relying on designed vegetated
areas or special site features shall be privately owned and maintained
as defined on the storm water management plan.
C. Most regional storm water management facilities will be publicly
owned and/or maintained.
A. When the municipality determines that additional storage capacity
beyond that required by the applicant for on-site storm water
management is necessary in order to enhance or provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare to correct unacceptable or
undesirable existing conditions or to provide protection in a more
desirable fashion for future development, the municipality may:
1. Require that the applicant grant any necessary easement over,
through or under the applicant's property to provide access to or
drainage for such a facility;
2. Require that the applicant attempt to obtain from the owners of
property over, through or under where the storm water
management facility is to be located any easement necessary for
the construction and maintenance of same. Failing to obtain such
easements the municipality may, at its option, assist in such
matters by purchase, condemnation, dedication or otherwise and
subject to Subsection (A)(3) below, with any cost incurred thereby
to be paid by the municipality; and/or
3. Participate financially in the construction of such facility to the
extent that such facility exceeds the required on-site storm water
management as determined by the municipality.
B. To implement this provision, both the municipality and developer must
be in agreement with the proposed facility that includes the additional
storage capacity and jointly develop a cost-sharing plan which is
agreeable to all parties.
Section
560.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.180
AO:703

ARTICLE IV
Maintenance, Construction and Inspection
Section 560.190. Maintenance. [R.O. 2008 §560.190; Ord. No. 5430
§1, 6-25-1996]
Section 560.200. Maintenance Agreement — Privately Owned
Facilities Only. [R.O. 2008 §560.200; Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
A. Any storm water discharge control facility which services a single lot or
commercial and industrial development shall be privately owned and
maintained, provided however, the owner thereof shall grant to the
municipality a perpetual, non-exclusive easement which allows for
public inspection and emergency repair, in accordance with the
maintenance agreement set forth in Section 560.200.
B. All regional storm water discharge control facilities, identified on
municipal storm water discharge control master plans, shall be publicly
owned and/or maintained only if accepted for maintenance by the City
Council.
C. All other storm water discharge control facilities shall be publicly
owned and/or maintained only if accepted for maintenance by the City
Council.
D. Private maintenance requirements shall be a part of the plat of the
subdivision.
A. A proposed inspection and maintenance agreement shall be submitted
to the Director of Public Works for review and for approval of the City
Council for all private on-site storm water discharge control facilities
prior to the approval of the storm water management plan. (See Exhibit
I of this Ord. No. 5430 which is on file in the City offices). Such
agreement shall be in form and content acceptable to the City Council
and shall be the responsibility of the private owner. Such agreement
shall provide for access to the facility by virtue of a non-exclusive
perpetual easement in favor of the municipality at reasonable times for
regular inspection by the municipality. The agreement will identify who
will have the maintenance responsibility. Possible arrangements for this
maintenance responsibility might include the following:
1. Use of homeowner associations;
2. Arrangements to pay the municipality for maintenance;
3. Private maintenance by development owner(s); or
4. Contracts with private maintenance companies.
B. All maintenance agreements shall contain without limitation the
following provisions:
Section
560.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.200
AO:705
1. A description of the property on which the storm water
management facility is located and all easements from the site to
the facility;
2. Size and configuration of the facility;
3. A statement that properties which will be served by the facility are
granted right to construction, use, reconstruction, repair,
maintenance and access to the facility;
4. A statement that each lot served by the facility is responsible for
repairs and maintenance of the facility and any unpaid ad valorem
taxes, public assessments for improvements and unsafe building
and public nuisance abatement liens charged against the facility,
including all interest charges together with attorney fees and cost
of expenses of collection. If an association is delegated these
responsibilities, then membership into the association shall be
mandatory for each parcel served by the facility and any successive
buyer, the association shall have the power to levy assessments for
these obligations and that all unpaid assessments levied by the
association shall become a lien on the individual parcel; and
5. A statement that no amendments to the agreement will become
effective unless approved by the City Council.
C. The agreement shall provide that preventive maintenance inspections
of storm water management facilities may be made by the municipality,
at its option, without limiting the generality of the foregoing. The
municipality's inspection schedule may include an inspection during the
first (1st) year of operation and once every year thereafter and after
major storm events (i.e., 5- or 10-year floods).
D. Inspection reports shall be maintained by the Public Works
Department.
E. The agreement shall provide that if, after an inspection, the condition of
a facility presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or
general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance,
the municipality shall have the right, but not the duty, to take such
action as may be necessary to protect the public and made the facility
safe. Any cost incurred by the municipality shall be paid by the owner.
F. The agreement shall be recorded by the owner in the Register of Deeds
prior to the final inspection and approval.
G. The agreement shall provide that the Director of Public Works shall
notify the owner(s) of the facility of any violation, deficiency or failure to
comply with this Chapter. The agreement shall also provide that upon a
failure to correct violations requiring maintenance work, within thirty
(30) days after notice thereof, the municipality may provide for all
necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. The
owner(s) of the facility shall be assessed the costs of the work
Section
560.200
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
560.200
AO:706
Section 560.210. Construction and Inspection. [R.O. 2008 §560.210;
Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
performed by the municipality pursuant to this Subsection and
Subsection (F) above. There shall be a lien on all property of the
owner(s) whose property utilizes or will utilize such facility in achieving
discharge control, which lien, when filed in the Register of Deeds, shall
have the same status and priority as liens for ad valorem taxes. Should
such a lien be filed, portions of the affected property may be released by
the City Manager following the payments by the owner of such owner's
pro rata share of the lien amount based upon the acreage to be released
with such release amount to be determined by the City Manager at his/
her reasonable discretion.
H. The City Manager, at his/her discretion, may accept the certification of
a registered engineer in lieu of any inspection required by this Chapter.
A. Prior to the approval of the storm water management plan, the
applicant shall submit to the Public Works Department a proposed
staged construction and inspection control schedule. This plan shall
indicate a phase line for approval. Otherwise the construction and
inspection control schedule will be for the entire drainage system.
B. Bi-stage work, related to the construction of storm water management
facilities, shall proceed until the next preceding stage of work,
according to the sequence specified in the approved staged
construction and inspection control schedule, is inspected and
approved by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee.
C. Any portion of the work which does not comply with the storm water
management plan shall be promptly corrected by the permittee.
D. The permittee shall notify the Public Works Department before
commencing any work to implement the storm water management plan.
E. The permittee shall provide an "as-built" plan certified by a registered
professional (as outlined in Article II, Section 560.150) to be submitted
upon completion of the storm water management facilities included in
the storm water management plan. The registered professional shall
certify that:
1. The facilities have been constructed as shown on the "as-built"
plan; and
2. The facilities meet the approved storm water management plan and
specification or achieves the function for which they were
designed.
F. A final inspection shall be conducted by the Director of Public Works or
his/her designee upon completion of the work included in the approved
storm water management plan to determine if the completed work is
constructed in accordance with the plan.
Section
560.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.210
AO:707
G. The Public Works Department shall maintain a file of inspection reports
and provide copies of all inspection reports to the permittee that
include the following: (See Exhibit J of this Ord. No. 5430 which is on
file in the City offices).
1. The date and location of the site inspection.
2. Whether the approved plans have been properly implemented.
3. Any approved plan deficiencies and any actions taken.
H. The Director of Public Works will notify the person responsible for the
land disturbing activity in writing when violations are observed
describing the following:
1. Nature of the violation;
2. Required corrective actions;
3. The time period for violation correction.
Section
560.210
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
560.210
AO:708
ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 560.220. Variances From Requirements. [R.O. 2008
§560.220; Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
Section 560.230. Review Hearings. [R.O. 2008 §560.230; Ord. No.
5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
A. The City Council may grant a variance from the requirement of this
Chapter if there are exceptional circumstances applicable to the site
such that strict adherence to the provisions of the Chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of the Chapter.
B. A written request for a variance submitted to the Director of Public
Works shall be required and shall state the specific variance and the
reasons, with supporting date, for their granting. The request shall
include descriptions, drawings, calculations and any other information
that is necessary to evaluate the proposed variance.
C. Any substantial variance form of the storm water management plan or
concept plan shall be referred to all agencies which reviewed the
original plan.
D. The Public Works Department will conduct a review of the request for a
variance and submit findings to the City Manager for recommendation
to the City Council.
A. Review Of Director Of Public Works Decision. Any individual company
or corporation aggrieved or prejudiced by decision of the Director of
Public Works or his/her designee concerning the Storm Water
Management Ordinance shall be entitled to request or review of said
decision. Said review shall be conducted by the City Manager pursuant
to the following procedure:
1. The City Clerk shall maintain a form for requesting review before
the City Manager.
2. Said request shall be filed within ten (10) days of the applicant's
receipt of notice of the decision which is being reviewed. Said
request for review shall state the specific manner in which the
decision of the Director of Public Works is alleged to be in error.
3. Upon receipt of the request for review, the City Manager shall
immediately notify the Director of Public Works and the Director
shall have five (5) days in which to submit a written response of
said request for review.
4. Within ten (10) days after receiving the response of the Director of
Public Works or within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the notice of
appeal, if no such response is submitted, the City Manager shall
render a decision affirming, reversing or modifying the decision of
Section
560.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.230
AO:709
the Director of Public Works. In the alternative, if deemed
appropriate by the City Manager, the City Manager may decline
to render a decision and direct the matter to be submitted to the
City Council and a review conducted pursuant to the following
paragraphs.
B. Review Of City Manager Decision. Any individual, company or
corporation aggrieved or prejudiced by the decision of the City
Manager concerning the Storm Water Management Ordinance shall be
entitled to request review of said decision. Said review shall be
conducted by the City Council pursuant to the following:
1. City Clerk shall maintain a form requesting a review before the City
Council.
2. Said request shall be filed within fifteen (15) days of the applicant's
receipt of notice of the decision of the City Manager which is being
reviewed.
3. The notice of appeal shall state the specific reason why the decision
of the City Manager is alleged to be in error.
4. Upon receipt of the appeal, the City Clerk shall immediately notify
the City Manager of the receipt of the appeal and the City Manager
shall have a period of five (5) days in which to prepare a written
response to said appeal. A copy of said response shall be provided
to the appellant.
5. The hearing shall be held before the City Council not less than
twenty-one (21) days after receipt by the City Clerk of the request
for review, unless extended by the City Council upon mutual
agreement of the parties or for good cause shown.
6. At the hearing, the City Council shall have the right to examine the
drawings, diagrams, books, records and papers pertinent to the
issues before it. The City Council shall have the power to issue any
necessary subpoenas over the signature of the City Clerk and to
issue all necessary processes to subpoena witnesses to compel by
subpoena duces tecum issued over the signature of the City Clerk,
the production of books, records, paper and other evidence and to
administer oaths and to take testimony.
7. The individual, company or corporation aggrieved shall have the
full right to be represented by counsel and may produce witnesses
and cross examine all witnesses who may appear against him/her at
any hearing held hereunder. Witnesses may appear voluntarily at
such hearing and testimony. Before any witness shall testify in any
such hearing or proceeding, said witness shall be sworn to tell the
truth by the Mayor or Acting Mayor.
8. All decisions, finding and orders of the City Council to the
proceedings shall be in writing. Parties to the proceedings shall be
Section
560.230
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
560.230
AO:710
Section 560.240. Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §560.240; Ord. No. 5430 §1,
6-25-1996]
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of the Storm
Water Management Ordinance. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall
be judged guilty of a ordinance violation and punished by a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be punished by incarceration
for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
incarceration. Each day's violation of, or failure, refusal or neglect to
comply with any provision of the Storm Water Management Ordinance shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Section 560.250. Civil Enforcement. [R.O. 2008 §560.250; Ord. No.
5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
At the decision of City Council and in addition to or an alternative remedy
from the provision previously noted herein, the City Attorney may seek to
have the practices, violations or failure to comply with the provisions of the
Storm Water Management Ordinance abated by an action for injunction or
other civil proceedings, to be maintained in the appropriate Circuit Court
for the State of Missouri or other appropriate forum.
notified of the decision by the City Council by certified mail to the
address listed on the request for review.
9. Based on the evidence produced at the hearing, the City Council
shall make an order as supported by the evidence, including the
following:
a. Affirm the decision of the City Manager and/or Director of
Public Works.
b. Reverse the decision of the City Manager and/or Director of
Public Works.
c. Affirm or reverse the decision of the City Manager and/or
Director of Public Works with such modifications to the
appealed decision as Council deems appropriate and is
supported by evidence.
C. Review Of City Council Decision. Following any decision or ruling by the
City Council relating to the Storm Water Management Ordinance, any
individual, company or corporation aggrieved or prejudiced by said
decision or ruling may seek judicial review of the matter provided by
law. The City Council may stay enforcement of its decision or ruling for
a period of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, pending the filing or
final disposition of an application for judicial review.
Section
560.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.260
AO:711
Section 560.260. Grandfather Clause. [R.O. 2008 §560.260; Ord. No.
5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
Any applicant or owner of a parcel of land within the jurisdiction of the
municipality who has constructed the required storm water management
facility or who is in the process of meeting the storm water management
requirements of the law at the time of the effective date of this Chapter may
elect to apply to the City Council for reconsideration under the provisions
of this Chapter.
Section 560.270. Conflict With Other Laws. [R.O. 2008 §560.270;
Ord. No. 5430 §1, 6-25-1996]
Whenever the provisions of this Chapter impose more restrictive standards
than are required in or under any other ordinance, the regulations herein
contained shall prevail. Whenever the provisions of any other ordinance
require more restrictive standards than are required herein, the
requirement of such shall prevail.
Section 560.280. Liability. [R.O. 2008 §560.280; Ord. No. 5430 §1,
6-25-1996]
Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this Chapter nor the
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter shall relieve any person from
the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed
by law nor shall it impose any liability upon the municipality for damage to
any person or property.
Section 560.290. Effective Date. [R.O. 2008 §560.290; Ord. No. 5430
§1, 6-25-1996]
This Chapter shall be effective immediately after passage and adoption by
the municipality and by reference to the Storm Water Management Design
Code.
Section
560.260
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
560.290
AO:712
Chapter 600
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
560.290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
560.290
AO:713

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 600.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §600.010; Ord. No. 4960
§1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 6202 §1, 6-28-1999]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
designated herein:
ABANDONMENT OF PREMISES — Voluntarily ceasing to operate a
business that has been legally licensed by the City and State to be
conducted under the Sections of this Chapter.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Intoxicating liquor or malt liquor.
CHURCH — Any building or structure regularly and primarily used as
a place of worship by any organized religious society, organization or
congregation, regardless of whether or not such building or structure was
originally designed and constructed for such purpose.
CLOSED PLACE — A place where all doors are locked and where no patrons
are in the place or about the premises.
CLUBS — Regularly incorporated associations not-for-profit under the laws
of this State organized for sole purpose as benevolent, charitable or social,
having regular dues-paying members. Any incorporated association
organized for the principal reason of selling alcoholic liquor shall not
constitute club.
"C.O.L." LICENSE — A license for the consumption of alcoholic beverages
in or upon premises that do not possess a license for the sale of alcoholic
beverages and where food, beverages or entertainment are sold or provided
for compensation as provided in Section 311.480, RSMo.
DWELLING — Any place that is used regularly or irregularly as a place of
repose, sleep or rest, or any place containing a bed, cot, divan, couch or
other article of furniture on which an adult person may recline; provided
however, this term does not include any premises used as a hotel, motel or
hotel room.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — All interest, legal or beneficial, direct or indirect,
in the capital devoted to the licensed enterprise and all such interest in
the net profits of the enterprise after payment of reasonable and necessary
operating business expenses and taxes, including interest in dividends,
preferred dividends, interest and profits, directly or indirectly paid as
compensation for, or in consideration of interest in, or for the use of,
the capital devoted to the enterprise or for property or money advanced,
loaned or otherwise made available to the enterprise, except by way of
ordinary commercial credit or bona fide bank credit not in excess of credit
customarily granted by banking institutions whether paid as dividends,
interest or profits or in the guise of royalties, commissions, salaries or any
other form whatsoever.
Section
600.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.010
AO:715
IN A MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes the interior of any motor vehicle or the
bed or flatbed area of any pickup, truck or trailer.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR — As defined in the liquor control laws of the State
of Missouri, currently Section 311.020, RSMo.
LICENSEE — The holder of any license issued under the provisions of this
Chapter.
MALT LIQUOR — Any beer manufactured from pure hops or pure extract
of hops and pure barley malt or other wholesome grains or cereals and
wholesome yeast and pure water and free from all harmful substances,
preservatives and adulterants and having an alcoholic content not in excess
of five percent (5%) by weight.
MANAGING OFFICER — The person who is in active management and
control of an alcoholic beverage establishment.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes any self-propelled vehicle not operated
exclusively upon tracks.
OPEN CONTAINER — Any container which is immediately capable of being
consumed from or the seal of which has been broken.
OPERATOR or OPERATED — A person who is in actual physical control of a
motor vehicle.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE — One (1) container of not less than fifty (50)
milliliters of any intoxicating liquor containing in excess of five percent (5%)
alcohol by volume or three (3) or more standard containers of malt liquor.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, club, association, firm, corporation,
limited liability company, joint stock company, syndicate, receiver, trustee,
conservator or other officer appointed by any State or Federal Court.
POSSESSION — May be either actual or constructive possession if the
individual has knowledge of the presence of the item. A person has actual
possession if he/she has the container on his/her person or within easy
reach and convenient control. A person who, although not in actual
possession, has the power and intention at a given time to exercise
dominion or control over the container either directly or through another
person or persons is in constructive possession of it. Possession may be sole
or joint. If one (1) person alone has possession of the item, possession is
sole; if two (2) or more persons share possession of the item, possession is
joint.
PREMISES — The bounds of the enclosure where alcoholic beverages are
sold or consumed.
RESIDENT CORPORATION — A corporation incorporated under the laws of
this State, all the officers and director of which, and all the stockholders
who legally and beneficially own or control sixty percent (60%) or more
of the stock in amount and in voting rights shall be qualified legal voters
and taxpaying citizens of the County and municipality in which they reside
and who shall have been bona fide residents of the State for a period
of three (3) years continuously, immediately prior to the date of filing
Section
600.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.010
AO:716
of application for a license, provided that a stockholder need not be a
voter or a taxpayer, and all the resident stockholders of which shall own,
legally and beneficially at least sixty percent (60%) of all the financial
interest in the business to be licensed under this Chapter; provided, that no
corporation licensed under the provisions of State law on January 1, 1947,
nor any corporation succeeding to the business of a corporation licensed
on January 1, 1947, as a result of a tax-free reorganization coming within
the provisions of Section 112, United States Internal Revenue Code shall be
disqualified by reason of the new requirements herein, except corporations
engaged in the manufacture of alcoholic beverages containing alcohol in
excess of five percent (5%) by weight or owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by non-resident persons, partnerships or corporations engaged in
the manufacture of alcoholic beverages containing alcohol in excess of five
percent (5%) by weight.
RESORT — Any establishment having at least thirty (30) rooms for the
overnight accommodation of transient guests, having a restaurant or similar
facility on the premises at least sixty percent (60%) of the gross income
of which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food, or means
a restaurant provided with special space and accommodations where, in
consideration of payment, food, without lodging, is habitually furnished
to travelers and customers, and which restaurant establishment's annual
gross receipts immediately preceding its application for a license shall not
have been less than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) per year
with at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) of such gross receipts from
non-alcoholic sales, or means a seasonal resort restaurant with food sales
as determined in Subsection (2) of Section 311.095, RSMo. Any facility
which is owned and operated as a part of the resort may be used to
sell intoxicating liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises of
such facility and, for the purpose of meeting the annual gross receipts
requirements of this Subsection, if any facility which is a part of the resort
meets such requirement, such requirement shall be deemed met for any
other facility which is a part of the resort.
RESTAURANT BAR — Any establishment having a restaurant or similar
facility on the premises at least fifty percent (50%) of the gross income
of which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on
such premises or which has an annual gross income of at least two hundred
thousand dollars ($200,000.00) from the sale of prepared meals or food
consumed on such premises.
SALE BY THE DRINK — The sale of any intoxicating liquor, except malt
liquor, in the original package in any quantity less than fifty (50) milliliters.
SCHOOL — Any school that is regularly used as a public, private or
parochial school, elementary school, high school, college, university,
professional school, business or secretarial school receiving some support
from public, religious or charitable funds.
SELF-CONTAINED MOTOR HOME — A motor vehicle designed for
operation on the highway which contains at minimum a bed, sink,
Section
600.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.010
AO:717
refrigerator, stove and functional restroom facility which are designed to be
contained within the motor vehicle.
WHOLESALERS, DISTRIBUTORS — Firms or corporations selling
intoxicating liquors to duly licensed retailers for resale.
Section 600.020. Time Fixed for Opening and Closing Premises —
Closed Place Defined — Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §600.020; Ord. No. 4960
§1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7528 §1, 5-28-2013]
Section 600.030. Exceptions to Closing Hours Prescribed in Section
600.020(a). [R.O. 2008 §600.030; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord.
No. 6599 §1, 11-10-2003]
A. No person having a license under this law, nor any employee of such
person, shall sell, give away, or permit the consumption of, or suffer the
same to be done upon or about his/her premises, any intoxicating liquor
in any quantity between the hours of 1:30 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on
weekdays and between the hours of 1:30 A.M. and 10:00 A.M. Sunday
and from 10:00 P.M. on Sunday until 6:00 A.M. Monday.
B. No person holding a "C.O.L." license under this Chapter shall permit the
drinking or consumption of intoxicating liquor in, upon or about the
premises between the hours of 1:30 A.M. Sunday and after 6:00 A.M. on
Monday.
A. When January first (1st), March seventeenth (17th), July fourth (4th), or
December thirty-first (31st) falls on Sunday, and on the Sundays prior to
Memorial Day and Labor Day and on the Sunday on which the national
championship game of the national football league is played, commonly
known as "Super Bowl Sunday", any person having a license to sell
intoxicating liquor by the drink may be open for business and sell
intoxicating liquor by the drink under the provisions of his/her license
on that day from the time and until the time which would be lawful on
another day of the week, notwithstanding any provisions of Section
311.290, RSMo., or any other provision of law to the contrary.
B. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter to the contrary,
any person who possesses the qualifications required by this Chapter,
and now or hereafter meets the requirements of and complies with the
provisions of this Chapter, may apply for, and the Supervisor of Liquor
Control may issue, a license to sell intoxicating liquor, as in this Chapter
defined, between the hours of 9:00 A.M. Sunday and Midnight on
Sunday for retail sales or by the drink at retail for consumption on the
premises of any restaurant bar as described in the application.
Section
600.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.040
AO:718
Section 600.040. Possession of Alcoholic Beverages by Drugstores
and Prescription by Physicians. [R.O. 2008 §600.040; Ord. No. 4960
§1, 3-11-1991]
Any druggist may have in his/her possession intoxicating liquor purchased
by him/her from a licensed vendor, or intoxicating liquor lawfully acquired
at the place of acquisition and legally transported into this State and the
City, and lawfully inspected, gauged and labeled as provided for in State
Law; such intoxicating liquor to be used in connection with the business
of a druggist, in compounding medicines or as a solvent or preservant;
provided, that nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a regularly licensed
druggist, after he/she procures a license therefor in compliance with this
Chapter, from selling intoxicating liquor in the original package, but not to
be drank or the package opened on the premises where sold; and provided
further, that nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting the right
of a physician to prescribe intoxicating liquor in accordance with his/her
professional judgment for any patient at any time, or prevent a druggist
from selling intoxicating liquor to a person on prescription of a regularly
licensed physician as above provided.
Section 600.045. Age Limitations for Entry Upon Premises of a
Liquor by the Drink Licensee, Notices and Penalty. [R.O. 2008
§600.045; Ord. No. 5320 §1, 7-17-1995; Ord. No. 5402 §1, 4-8-1996]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of nineteen (19) years
to enter in, be upon the premises of, or to linger or loiter in or about the
premises of any licensee holding a liquor by the drink license or a
consumption of liquor license, except any such person under the age of
nineteen (19) years of age may be on such premises if accompanied by
his/her parent or legal guardian.
B. It shall be unlawful for any individual to allow, cause or assist any
person under the age of nineteen (19) years to enter or be on the
premises of, or linger or loiter in or about the premises of any licensee
holding a liquor by the drink license or consumption of liquor license in
violation of the preceding paragraph.
C. Any license holding a liquor by the drink license or consumption of
liquor license shall have a sign conspicuously displayed in the common
area at the principal entrance to the premises, which shall read as
follows:
IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF NINETEEN
(19) TO ENTER THESE PREMISES UNLESS ACCOMPANIED BY A
PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN. VIOLATION CAN RESULT IN A FINE
OF UP TO FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS ($500.00) AND/OR NINETY (90)
DAYS IN JAIL.
D. This Section shall not apply to any establishment where substantial
quantities of food are served (fifty percent (50%) or more gross sales
from the sale of food prepared or consumed on the premises) or fifty
Section
600.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.045
AO:719
Section 600.050. Sale to Minors or Other Persons and Permitting
Consumption by Minors on C.O.L. Premises — Prohibited. [R.O.
2008 §600.050; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
No licensee or his/her employee shall sell, vend, give away or otherwise
supply any intoxicating liquor in any quantity whatsoever to any person
under the age of twenty-one (21) years or to any person intoxicated or
appearing to be in a state of intoxication or to a habitual drunkard; nor
shall any person holding a "C.O.L." license or his/her employee permit the
drinking or consumption of intoxicating liquor in, upon or about the licensed
premises by any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
Section 600.060. Securing Intoxicating Liquor for Minor —
Prohibited. [R.O. 2008 §600.060; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
percent (50%) or more gross sales from the sale of commodities other
than liquor, including such as billiards, bingo, bowling, indoor golf,
soccer or volleyball.
E. This Section shall not apply to any charitable, fraternal, religious,
service or veteran's organization that has obtained an exemption from
payment of Federal income taxes as provided in Section 501(c)(3),
501(c)(4), 501(c)(5), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), 501(c)(19), or
501(d) of the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended
in accordance with Section 311.090(2), RSMo.
F. Every person who commits a violation of this Section shall be adjudged
guilty of a ordinance violation, and be punished by imprisonment not
exceeding three (3) months in jail or a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each
entry in or upon the premises in violation of this Section, or each
occurrence of loitering in violation of this Section, shall be punishable
as a separate distinct offense.
A. No person, organization, club or other group shall purchase or in any
way secure or supply intoxicating liquor for or to any person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years.
B. The prohibition obtained in Subsection (A) shall not apply to the
purchase, securing or supply of any intoxicating liquor by the parent or
guardian of such person under such age or to the administrating of the
sale of intoxicating liquor to such person under such age by a duly
licensed physician as part of the medical treatment.
C. If said violation of Subsection (A) in this Section shall be violated, then
the person as well as the organization, club or group which shall be
sponsoring, acquisiting or condoning the violation of this Section shall
be guilty of an ordinance violation and further, if the violation involves
any organization, club or group, the officers, directors, sponsors,
leaders or organizers of the illegal securing or supplying of intoxicating
Section
600.045
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.060
AO:720
Section 600.070. Purchase or Possession of Alcohol by a Minor —
Prohibited. [R.O. 2008 §600.070; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord.
No. 6778 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005]
Section 600.075. Allowing Possession or Consumption of Alcohol by
a Minor. [R.O. 2008 §600.075; Ord. No. 6777 §1, 8-29-2005]
liquor may in addition thereto, be held individually guilty of violating
this Section.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years to purchase or attempt to purchase any intoxicating liquor as
defined by Missouri law.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years to have in his or her possession any intoxicating liquor as defined
by State law or to be visibly intoxicated as that term is defined by State
law or to have a detectable blood alcohol content of two-hundredths of
one percent (.02%) or more by weight of alcohol in such person's blood.
C. For the purpose of determining a violation of this Section or any other
provision of this Chapter involving an alleged illegal sale transfer to or
possession of intoxicating liquor by a person under twenty-one (21)
years of age, a manufactured-sealed container describing that there is
intoxicating liquor therein need not be opened or the contents therein
tested to verify that there is such intoxicating liquor in such container.
The alleged violator may allege that there was not intoxicating liquor in
such container, but the burden of proof of such allegation is on the
person and it shall be presumed that a sealed container describing that
there is intoxicating liquor therein contains intoxicating liquor.
D. A first violation of Subsection (A) or (B), of this Section shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). A
subsequent violation of this Section shall be punishable pursuant to
Section 100.120, hereof. [Ord. No. 7363 §1, 9-26-2011]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to supply any intoxicating liquor to
any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
B. Any owner, occupant, or other person or legal entity with a lawful right
to the exclusive use and enjoyment of any property who knowingly
allows a person under the age of twenty-one (21) to drink or possess
intoxicating liquor or knowingly fails to stop a person under the age of
twenty-one (21) from drinking or possessing intoxicating liquor on such
property, unless such person allowing the person under the age of
twenty-one (21) to drink or possess intoxicating liquor is his or her
parent or guardian, is guilty of an ordinance violation.
C. It shall be a defense to the prosecution under this Section if:
1. The defendant is a parent or guardian of the person who is under
twenty-one (21) years of age; or
Section
600.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.075
AO:721
Section 600.080. Misrepresentation of Age of a Minor to Obtain
Intoxicating Liquor — Prohibited. [R.O. 2008 §600.080; Ord. No.
4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 600.090. Sale or Dispensation of Intoxicating Liquor by
Minors Prohibited — Exceptions. [R.O. 2008 §600.090; Ord. No.
4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
2. The defendant is a licensed retailer, club, drinking establishment or
caterer or holds a temporary permit or an employee thereof; and
the defendant sold the intoxicating liquor to the minor with
reasonable cause to believe that the minor was twenty-one (21)
years of more of age; and to purchase the intoxicating liquor, the
person exhibited to the defendant a driver's license, Missouri nondriver's
identification card or other official or apparently official
document containing a photograph of the minor and purporting to
establish that such minor was twenty-one (21) years of age and of
the legal age of consumption of intoxicating liquor.
A. Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and under the age of
twenty-one (21) years who shall represent that he or she has attained
the age of twenty-one (21) years for the purpose of purchasing, asking
for or in any way receiving any intoxicating liquor, except in cases
authorized by law, shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a
ordinance violation.
B. Any person under the age of seventeen (17) years who shall represent
that he or she has attained the age of twenty-one (21) years for the
purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any way receiving any
intoxicating liquor, except in cases authorized by law, may be
considered a delinquent child and may be dealt with in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 211, RSMo.
A. Except as provided in Subsections (B), (C), and (D) of this Section, no
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall sell or assist in the
sale or dispensing of intoxicating liquor.
B. In any place of business licensed in accordance with Section 311.200,
or Section 312.040, RSMo., persons at least eighteen (18) years of age
may stock, arrange displays, operate the cash register or scanner
connected to a cash register and accept payment for, and sack for
carryout, intoxicating liquor. Delivery of intoxicating liquor away from
the licensed business premises cannot be performed by anyone under
the age of twenty-one (21) years. Any licensee who employs any person
under the age of twenty-one (21) years, as authorized by this
Subsection, shall, when at least fifty percent (50%) of the licensee's
gross sales does not consist of non-alcoholic sales, have an employee
twenty-one (21) years of age or older on the licensed premises during
all hours of operation.
Section
600.075
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.090
AO:722
Section 600.095. Transporting or Possession of an Open Container.
[R.O. 2008 §600.095; Ord. No. 6202 §1, 6-28-1999]
C. In any distillery, warehouse, wholesale distributorship or similar place
of business which stores or distributes intoxicating liquor but which
does not sell intoxicating liquor at retail, persons at least eighteen (18)
years of age may be employed, and their duties may include the
handling of intoxicating liquor for all purposes except consumption,
sale at retail, or dispensing for consumption or sale at retail.
D. Persons eighteen (18) years of age or older may, when acting in the
capacity of a waiter or waitress, accept payment for or serve
intoxicating liquor in places of business which sell food for consumption
on the premises if at least fifty percent (50%) of all sales in those places
consist of food; provided, that nothing in this Section shall authorize
persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years to mix or serve across
the bar alcoholic beverages.
A. A person commits the offense of transporting an open container, if an
open container of intoxicating liquor is found within a motor vehicle
that is being operated within the City limits of the City of Maryville
other than on private property. An open container shall be considered to
be in the possession of the operator of the motor vehicle if the container
is not in the sole possession of a passenger.
B. A person commits the offense of possession of an open container, if an
open container of intoxicating liquor is possessed by him/her while the
person is a passenger in a motor vehicle being operated within the City
limits of the City of Maryville other than on private property.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, a person shall not be guilty
of transporting an open container, nor be guilty of possession of an open
container if:
1. The person is the passenger in a vehicle which the driver is
operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide
transportation for passengers and such driver holds a valid
commercial driver's license with a passenger endorsement; or
2. The person is a passenger of a bus in which the driver holds a valid
commercial driver's license with a passenger endorsement; or
3. The person is a passenger of a self-contained motor home; or
4. The open container is located in a locked glove compartment, a
locked trunk or other locked non-passenger area of the vehicle; or
5. In the case of motorcycles, motorized bikes and other two-wheeled
motor vehicles, the open container is enclosed within another
container.
Section
600.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.100
AO:723
Section 600.100. Dwelling — Licenses Prohibited. [R.O. 2008
§600.100; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages or "C.O.L." in
or upon any structure occupied in whole or in part as a dwelling unless such
dwelling is equipped with a separate entrance and unless there is no means
of entrance or exit from the licensed premises to any dwelling. This Section
shall not apply to back single rooms used by night watchmen as places of
rest.
Section 600.110. Effect of Sign Prohibiting Sale or Consumption on
Property. [R.O. 2008 §600.110; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
In the event the owner, tenant or manager of any property within the
confines of the City shall display a sign at or upon said property to the effect
that no intoxicating liquor may be sold, displayed or consumed upon said
property, then anyone in violation of the prohibition on said sign shall, upon
conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a ordinance violation.
Section 600.120. Keeping, Secreting, Unauthorized Beverages in
Licensed Establishment — Exceptions. [R.O. 2008 §600.120; Ord.
No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
Licensees selling intoxicating liquor at retail by the drink for consumption
on the premises where sold, shall not keep or secrete, nor allow any other
person to keep or secrete, in or upon the licensed premises, any intoxicating
liquor other than the kind expressly authorized to be sold by such licensee
or permittee.
Section 600.130. Mixing Liquor With Drugs — Prohibited. [R.O.
2008 §600.130; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
No holder of a license under this Chapter, or any other person, shall for
any purpose whatsoever mix or permit or cause to be mixed with any
intoxicating liquor kept for sale, sold or supplied by him/her as a beverage,
any drug or form of methylalcohol or impure form of alcohol.
Section 600.140. Misrepresentation of Brand of Intoxicating Liquor
Unlawful. [R.O. 2008 §600.140; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
No licensee shall sell intoxicating liquor or shall offer for sale any such
intoxicating liquor, brewed, manufactured or distilled by one (1)
manufacturer, in substitution for, or with the representation that any such
intoxicating liquor is the product of any other brewer, manufacturer or
distiller.
Section 600.150. Limitations on Number of Licenses for Any One
Premises. [R.O. 2008 §600.150; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
No more than one (1) retail license provided for by this Chapter shall be
issued for any single premises at any given time.
Section
600.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.160
AO:724
Section 600.160. Gambling and Gaming Limitations. [R.O. 2008
§600.160; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 6478 §1,
6-24-2002]
Section 600.170. Lewdness, Frequenting of Licensed Premises by
Prostitutes or Dissolute Persons — Prohibited. [R.O. 2008 §600.170;
Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 600.180. Licensee Not to Serve Setups or Permit
Consumption of Hard Liquor Directly From Bottle. [R.O. 2008
§600.180; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
No person holding a license for the retail sale of intoxicating liquor shall
knowingly sell, give away or serve upon the premises described in said
license, any glass, ice, water, soda-water, phosphates or any other kind
A. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to have, allow or encourage upon its
premises any gambling or gaming as defined by State law, including
both games of chance and games of skill, unless that gambling or
gaming is permitted on the premises of a licensee by the Missouri
Gaming Commission and the Missouri Division of Liquor Control.
B. It shall be unlawful for any gambling or gaming as defined by State law,
including both games of chance and games of skill, to occur on the
premises of a licensee, unless that gambling or gaming is permitted on
the premises of a licensee by the Missouri Gaming Commission and the
Missouri Division of Liquor Control.
C. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to allow or have any gambling
devices upon its premises unless the operation of said device on the
premises of the licensee is permitted by the Missouri Gaming
Commission and the Division of Liquor Control.
A. No retail licensee shall knowingly permit any prostitute, degenerate or
dissolute person to frequent the licensed premises.
B. No retail licensee shall allow in or upon his/her premises any improper
disturbance, lewdness, immoral activities, brawls, or any indecent,
profane or obscene language, songs, entertainment, literature or
advertising material — nor shall any licensee cause to have printed or
distributed any lewd, immoral, indecent literature or advertising
material; or cause to have printed or distributed any lewd, immoral,
indecent or obscene literature or advertising material; not allow any
person to appear on the licensed premises in a condition where either
or both of the breasts or pelvic area, or the buttocks, are not covered
with opaque clothing, and no dancing will be allowed on any surface
where food or drinks are served or any place within the premises open
to public view from the exterior of a licensed premises. No person shall
perform a lewd or erotic dance defined herein as being devoted to or
tending to arouse sexual desire, nor shall any person perform a
striptease dance defined herein as removal of clothing.
Section
600.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.180
AO:725
of liquids to be used for the purpose of mixing intoxicating drinks and
commonly referred to as "setups" nor shall any such licensee suffer any
person, while in or upon the licensed premises, to pour into, mix with,
or add intoxicating liquor to water, soda-water, ginger ale, seltzer, malt,
phosphates or any other kind of liquor or other liquor; provided however,
that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit any of the
above acts in any private guest room or private dining room of any duly
licensed hotel, motel or private club. No licensee shall knowingly allow any
person, while in or upon the licensed premises, to drink or consume directly
out of a bottle any alcoholic beverage containing in excess of five percent
(5%) alcohol by weight.
Section 600.190. Issuance and Execution of Warrant for Violation of
Chapter. [R.O. 2008 §600.190; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
Upon information by the City Prosecuting Attorney that any person has
failed or refused to observe all the terms and conditions of a subpoena
or subpoena duces tecum issued by the Director of Public Safety, or upon
complaint filed by a Public Safety Officer or other person authorized to
effect arrests, the Municipal Judge shall, at once issue a warrant for the
arrest of the person complained against, which warrant shall be directed to
the Director of Public Safety and shall be executed by him/her or any Officer
or member of the Department of Public Safety.
Section
600.180
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.190
AO:726
ARTICLE II
Enforcement — Duties and Powers
Section 600.200. Responsibility of Director of Public Safety —
Qualification. [R.O. 2008 §600.210; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991;
Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Safety (herein referred to as the
Director), with such aid as may be rendered by members of the Department
of Public Safety or other persons duly sanctioned by the City Manager, to
enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 600.210. Prohibited Interests of Certain Municipal Officers.
[R.O. 2008 §600.220; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
The City Manager, City Clerk, Public Safety Director and any other Public
Safety Officer shall not have any interest, direct or indirect, either
proprietary or by the means of any loan, mortgage or other lien either for
his/her own benefit or in a fiduciary capacity, or any other manner, in or on
the premises where intoxicating liquor is distilled, brewed, manufactured
or sold, nor shall any such person be or have any interest in any business
wholly or partially devoted to distilling, brewing, manufacturing or selling
of intoxicating liquor, either as owner, part-owner, partner, member of a
syndicate, shareholder or a corporation, agent or employee, either for his/
her own or their benefit or in a fiduciary capacity. No member of the
Department of Public Safety shall have any interest described in the last
preceding sentence.
Section 600.220. Powers to Enforce Provisions of This Chapter.
[R.O. 2008 §600.230; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
The Director or any member of the Department of Public Safety is hereby
empowered to make arrests in connection with the violation of any provision
of this Chapter or other ordinances of the City, to make searches and
seizures in relation to the same, to serve any subpoena or subpoena duces
tecum or other process relating to the enforcement of this Chapter.
Section 600.230. Inspections of Premises — Impoundment. [R.O.
2008 §600.240; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
The Director, or his/her expressly authorized agent, shall have the right at
any reasonable time to inspect, and the licensee shall allow inspection of
any licensed premises and all portions of the buildings thereof, including all
rooms, cellars, outbuildings, passageways, closets, halls, yards and attics
and all buildings used in connection with the operations carried on under
said license and which are in his/her possession or under his/her control
and all places where he/she keeps or has liquor stored and to seize any
Section
600.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.230
AO:727
and all objects that may appear to be in violation of any provision of this
Chapter and to hold in custody such objects as evidence until any matter
pertaining thereto. If not forfeited, objects shall be returned to the lawful
owner after the matter is finally adjudicated unless the same are found to
be contraband. If such objects are not claimed by the lawful owner within
ninety (90) days after final adjudication, they shall be deemed forfeited.
Section 600.240. Duty to Inspect Places of Business. [R.O. 2008
§600.250; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
Section 600.250. Suspension and Revocation of Licenses. [R.O.
2008 §600.260; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 5561 §1,
7-28-1997; Ord. No. 6108 §1, 8-24-1998; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
A. The Director shall have the duty of regularly inspecting all places of
business where liquor is sold, consumed or kept for sale, to maintain
periodic checks on all licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter thereby
insuring licensees' full compliance with the requirements of same and
to determine as to the wholesomeness and orderly manner in which any
intoxicating liquor establishment is maintained and operated.
B. Prior to granting a liquor license, a fire and life safety inspections shall
be performed by the Fire and Code Enforcement Departments. All
deficiencies resulting from said inspection shall be abated prior to the
issuance or renewal of liquor license(s).
A. Grounds For Suspension/Revocation. The City Council may suspend or
revoke any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter, upon
finding that:
1. Any licensee or any employee, agent or servant of such licensee has
not at all times maintained an orderly place or has maintained a
disorderly place. An orderly place is to be maintained by the
licensee through the prevention of immorality, violations of law,
affrays and breaches of the peace on the premises. For the
purposes of this Section, "premises" shall include the licensed
premises, parking lots and the area around the licensed premises
which is used as part of the business;
2. Any licensee or any employee, agent or servant of such licensee has
violated any of the provisions of this Chapter;
3. Any licensee or any employee, agent or servant of such licensee has
violated any Federal or State law pertaining to the sale or licensing
of intoxicating liquors or any other rule or regulation pertaining to
the sale or licensing of intoxicating liquors;
4. Any licensee or any employee, agent or servant of such licensee has
failed to exercise proper control of customers. The licensee or any
Section
600.230
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.250
AO:728
employee, agent or servant of such licensee shall use good
judgment in the sale of intoxicating beverages and shall not sell
the same to persons obviously intoxicated. As to any customer who
becomes unruly or abusive, it shall be the duty of the licensee to
call and fully cooperate with the Police or other law enforcement
agency;
5. Any licensee or any employee, agent or servant of such licensee has
failed to exercise proper control over the premises. The licensee
shall take necessary steps to supervise the premises immediately
outside the establishment, shall keep the premises free from litter
and shall not allow the premises to become a gathering location for
the liquor establishment's customers;
6. Any licensee or any employee, agent or servant of such licensee has
allowed or permitted any acts prohibited by Section 600.170, of the
Municipal Code of the City of Maryville;
7. The license granted under this Chapter was obtained through
materially false statements in the application of such license or
application for renewal thereof;
8. The licensee failed to make a full and complete disclosure of all
pertinent information in the application for such license or
application for renewal thereof;
9. The licensee, since the issuance of such license, has ceased to be
the person actually engaged in the active control and management
of the particular establishment for which the license was issued;
10. The licensed premises are no longer used for the purposes
permitted by the license and, after five (5) days' written notice, the
licensee has failed to respond or satisfactorily explain the change;
11. The occurrence of any act or instance which would render the
licensed premises ineligible or unsuitable for a license under the
provision of this Chapter; or
12. The operation of the licensed establishment has been discontinued
or abandoned.
B. Probable Cause Motion. Upon affirmative vote of three (3) members of
the City Council, concluding that evidence has been presented
establishing that there is probable cause to believe that a licensed
establishment or licensee has violated any of the provisions of Section
600.250(A), and that the City Council should conduct a formal hearing
on the issue of suspension or revocation of liquor license for said
licensee, the City Council shall hold a formal hearing pursuant to
further provisions of this Chapter.
C. Notice Of Intent To Hold Hearing. Upon affirmative vote pursuant to
Subsection (B) above, the City Clerk shall notify the licensee in writing
Section
600.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.250
AO:729
of the intent of the City Council to hold a formal hearing on the issue of
suspension or revocation of a license granted pursuant to this Chapter.
Said notice shall provide the licensee notice of the date, time and
location of the hearing and shall either be personally served on the
licensee or a copy shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to
the last known address of the licensee or the residence address of the
licensee. The licensee shall receive said notice not less than ten (10)
days prior to the hearing.
D. Notice Of Grounds For Hearing. After consultation with the City
Attorney, the City Clerk shall provide written notice to the licensee of
the grounds to be presented to the City Council on the issue of
suspension or revocation of a license granted pursuant to this Chapter.
Said notice shall be personally served upon the licensee or a copy shall
be mailed by registered or certified mail to the last known address of
the licensee or residence address of the licensee. The licensee shall
receive said notice not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
E. Continuances. Upon its own motion or at the request of any party,
including the licensee, the City Council may grant such reasonable
continuances of the formal hearing as it deems appropriate.
F. Authority Of Council. The Council shall have authority to suspend any
license granted pursuant to this Chapter for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days or to revoke the license.
G. Hearing Procedure. The Council shall consider all information,
documents and testimony presented at the formal hearing and then
render its decision based thereon. The hearing need not be conducted
according to the applicable rules of evidence as applied by judicial
bodies in the State of Missouri. However, the hearing procedure shall
ensure that a fair and impartial forum is provided at which each party
shall have the right to:
1. Call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of
the hearing;
2. Introduce documentary and physical evidence;
3. Cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing;
4. Rebut any evidence presented; and
5. Represent himself/herself or be represented by an attorney of his/
her choice.
Section
600.250
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.250
AO:730
Witnesses may be subpoenaed or may voluntarily appear at
such hearing. Before any witness shall testify at any such
hearing or proceeding, the witness shall swear to testify under
oath. All proceedings and such hearings shall be taken down
stenographically or recorded mechanically or electronically or
a combination thereof. Said proceeding shall be transcribed
whenever required by law.
H. Decision Of City Council. At the conclusion of all the evidence, the
Council shall first determine whether the licensee has violated any of
the provisions of Section 600.250(A). Upon an affirmative vote as to
that issue by at least three (3) members of the City Council, the Council
shall thereupon establish an appropriate penalty, after considering the
nature and severity of the offense(s) and the particular licensee's
historical compliance or non-compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter. The penalty shall be set by an affirmative vote of at least three
(3) members of the City Council.
I. Findings Of Fact. Any determination that suspension or revocation of a
license is appropriate, the City Council shall first issue its decision as
written findings of fact, which shall set forth the violation(s) supported
by the evidence and the duration and commencement date of any term
of suspension or revocation.
J. Effective Date Of Suspension Or Revocation. No suspension or
revocation shall become effective until the licensee has been given
notice of the commencement date of the suspension or revocation and
the duration thereof. Said notice shall be given at least ten (10)
calendar days prior to the effective date of the suspension or
revocation. The notice requirement of this Section may be satisfied by
compliance with any of the following:
1. Public announcement of the dates of the suspension or revocation
or any hearing held pursuant to this Chapter when the licensee or
his/her representative is present at the time of the announcement.
Notice shall commence from the date of the announcement.
2. Personally serving a copy of the findings of fact upon the licensee.
3. Mailing a copy of the findings of fact by registered or certified mail
to the last known address of the licensee or the residence address
of the licensee.
4. By posting a copy of the dates of suspension on the entrance door
of the establishment to be closed under the terms of the
suspension. Notice shall commence with the date of the posting.
5. In the event service cannot be obtained under the procedures
outlined in any of the first (1st) three (3) paragraphs, any method of
service allowed for service of civil process under the Missouri Rules
of Civil Procedure may be used.
Section
600.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.260
AO:731
Section 600.260. Effect of Suspension or Revocation of License.
[R.O. 2008 §600.265; Ord. No. 5561 §1, 7-28-1997; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
Section 600.270. Subpoena of Witnesses. [R.O. 2008 §600.270; Ord.
No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 5561 §1, 7-28-1997; Ord. No. 7003
§1, 4-28-2008]
Witnesses may be subpoenaed for any hearing conducted pursuant to this
Chapter. Subpoenas may be issued by the City Clerk for any witnesses
whose presence is desired at any hearing or proceeding before the City
Council to suspend or revoke a license, or to refuse a license or renewal
thereof. Such subpoena may be served by any member of the Maryville
Public Safety Department or may be served and returned thereon in the
same manner as provided by law in civil suits in the Circuit Courts of this
State. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to obey all terms
and conditions of any subpoena issued pursuant to this Chapter.
Section 600.280. Suspension/Revocation Order Violations. [R.O.
2008 §600.280; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 5561 §1,
7-28-1997; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to maintain a "closed place"
during the time of any suspension or revocation of license pursuant to this
Chapter.
A. Maintain Closed Place. Any licensee shall maintain a "closed place"
during the term of its suspension or revocation.
B. Effect On License Fees. In the event of the suspension or revocation of
any license issued pursuant to this Chapter, the City shall not return,
refund or prorate any part of the license fee paid for such license.
C. Effect Of Revocation On Reissuance. Whenever a license has been
revoked under the provisions of this Chapter, before any license is
issued to operate a liquor establishment either at the same location or
by the same licensee, it shall be necessary that the procedures be
satisfied as are required for the issuance of an original license.
D. Effect On Court Proceedings. The penalty established by the City
Council by the suspension or revocation of a license pursuant to this
Chapter shall not limit or effect the authority of any other
administrative body or any court to establish an additional, separate
penalty or punishment for the same conduct.
Section
600.260
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.280
AO:732
ARTICLE III
Licenses
Section 600.290. Scope of License Requirements. [R.O. 2008
§600.290; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
Section 600.300. Temporary Permit for Sale by Drink — Certain
Organizations. [R.O. 2008 §600.300]
Section 600.310. Due Dates for License Fees. [R.O. 2008 §600.310;
Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
All license fees shall be due and payable on or before June first (1st) of each
year and shall be good for the year beginning July first (1st) and ending
June thirtieth (30th). Renewal applications received by City Clerk after June
A. No person shall directly or through the use of agents or servants
engage in the manufacture, brewing, sale, exposure for sale or resale or
distribution of intoxicating liquors within the confines of the City
without first having duly obtained a license authorizing such
manufacture, brewing, sale or distribution as herein provided.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person operating any premises where food,
beverages or entertainment are sold or provided for compensation, who
does not possess a license for the sale of intoxicating liquor, to permit
the drinking or consumption of intoxicating liquor in or about said
premises between 10:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. the following day without
having a C.O.L. license as defined in this Chapter.
A. The City Clerk may issue a permit for the sale of intoxicating liquor for
consumption on premises where sold to any church, school, civic,
service, fraternal, veteran, political or charitable club or organization
for sale at a picnic, bazaar, fair or similar gathering. The permit shall be
issued only for the day or days named therein and it shall not authorize
the sale of intoxicating liquor for more than seven (7) days by any such
club or organization.
B. If the event will be held on a Sunday, the permit shall authorize the sale
of intoxicating liquor on that day beginning at 11:00 A.M.
C. At the same time that an applicant applies for a permit under the
provisions of this Subsection, the applicant shall notify the Director of
Revenue of the holding of the event by certified mail and by such
notification shall accept responsibility for the collection and payment of
any applicable sales tax.
D. No provision of law or rule or regulation of the City shall be interpreted
as preventing any wholesaler or distributor from providing customary
storage, cooling or dispensing equipment for use by the permit holder
at such picnic, bazaar, fair or similar gathering.
Section
600.290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.310
AO:733
first (1st), and before the expiration of such license shall incur a penalty
of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Late applications will be processed as
soon as practical. If such license is originally issued after July first (1st) but
before December thirty-first (31st) of the same calendar year, the applicant
shall pay one-twelfth (1/12) of such fee for each month or fraction thereof
remaining in the twelve (12) month period ending on June thirtieth (30th) of
the next following calendar year. The fee for any license issued subsequent
to December thirty-first (31st) of any license year shall be one-half (½) of
the annual fee with all renewals thereafter being issued on July first (1st) in
each year.
Section 600.320. Qualifications of Licensees — Individuals. [R.O.
2008 §600.320; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
No individual shall be granted a license unless such individual is actively
engaged in the actual control and management of the particular alcoholic
beverage or C.O.L. establishment for which a license is sought, is twentyone
(21) years of age, is of good moral character, has never been convicted
of a felony and is a qualified legal voter and taxpaying citizen of this
State. No individual shall be granted a license hereunder whose license
as such dealer has been revoked or who has been convicted within the
last three (3) years of a violation of the provisions of any law applicable
to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor or who employs in his/
her business as such dealer any individual whose license has been revoked
or who has been convicted of violating the provisions of any such law
since the date aforesaid; provided however, that the City Council may in
its discretion grant a license to such individual whose license has been
revoked for abandonment of the licensed premises as set forth in Section
600.250(A)(6).
Section 600.330. Qualifications of Licensees — Partnership. [R.O.
2008 §600.330; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
No license shall be issued to any partnership unless all members of the
partnership are persons who would be eligible for licenses as individuals,
and no such license shall be issued to any partnership which has been the
holder of a liquor license that has been revoked; provided however, that the
City Council may in its discretion grant a license to a partnership whose
license has been revoked for abandonment of the premises as set forth in
Section 600.250(A)(6).
Section 600.340. Qualifications of Licensees — Corporation. [R.O.
2008 §600.340; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
No license shall be issued to any corporation if such corporation, or any
officer, Director, or any stockholder owning, legally or beneficially, directly
or indirectly, ten percent (10%) or more of the stock of such corporation, or
Section
600.310
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.340
AO:734
other financial interest therein, or ten percent (10%) or more of the interest
in the business for which the corporation is licensed, shall have had a liquor
license revoked or shall have been convicted of violating the provisions of
any law applicable to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor since
the ratification of the Twenty-First Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States or shall not be a person of good moral character; provided,
that the City Council may in its discretion grant a license to a corporation
whose license has been revoked for abandonment of the premises pursuant
to Section 600.250(A)(6), and provided further, that no wholesaler license
shall be issued to a corporation for the sale of intoxicating liquor in excess
of five percent (5%) by weight, except to a resident corporation.
Section 600.350. Application for License. [R.O. 2008 §600.350; Ord.
No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
A. Form. Applicants for a license may procure the proper forms by request
to the City Clerk setting forth in said request the specific type and
nature of license sought and the location desired.
B. Identification Of Applicant. Upon receipt of the application, in addition
to answering all other questions thereon, the applicant shall state his/
her name and address if a natural person, or if a firm, partnership or
association, the name and address of each member of the firm,
partnership, or association, or if the applicant is a corporation and
requests a license for intoxicating liquor by the drink, the names and
addresses of all its officers, members of its Board of Directors, all
stockholders and ownership interests shall be required; otherwise, this
requirement pertaining to stockholders shall be optional at the
discretion of the Director of Public Safety.
C. Information Requested.
1. The place of birth of each applicant and if the applicant is a
naturalized citizen, the date and place of naturalization.
2. Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony.
3. Whether or not any distiller, wholesaler, winemaker, brewer or
supplier of coin-operated, commercial, manual or mechanical
amusement devices, or the employees, officers or agents thereof,
has any financial interest in the retail business of the applicant for
the sale of alcoholic beverages, or a C.O.L. and whether or not the
applicant, either directly or indirectly, will borrow or accept from
any such persons equipment, money, credit or property of any kind
except ordinary commercial credit for liquor sold.
4. A complete description of the plans, specifications and fixtures in
the applicant's proposed place of business if the application is for a
retail license; provided however, that this shall apply only when
application is for a new location or change in the plans or
specifications within a previously established location.
Section
600.340
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.350
AO:735
Section 600.360. More Than Three Licenses by Any One Person
Prohibited — Exception. [R.O. 2008 §600.360; Ord. No. 4960 §1,
3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
No person or any employee, officer, agent, subsidiary or affiliate thereof
shall have more than three (3) licenses, nor be directly or indirectly
interested in any business of any person, or of any employee, officer, agent,
subsidiary or affiliate thereof, to sell intoxicating liquor at retail by the
drink for consumption on the premises described in any license, nor shall
any intoxicating liquor be sold at retail by the drink for consumption at
the place of sale at more than three (3) places in the City by any person
or corporation or by any employee, officer, agent, subsidiary or affiliate
thereof; provided that, in determining whether any person or any employee,
officer, agent, subsidiary or affiliate thereof has a disqualifying interest in
more than three (3) licenses, there shall not be counted any license to sell
intoxicating liquor at retail by the drink for consumption on premises which
includes a restaurant at least fifty percent (50%) of the gross income of
which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on the
premises where sold.
5. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the ordinances
of the City, the laws of the State or of the United States in the
conduct of the business.
6. A comprehensive and informative statement to disclose the true
ownership and management of the business and the location, place
or premises for which a license is sought.
7. Whether or not the proposed location, place or premises is within
one hundred (100) feet of a school or church.
D. Full, True And Complete Answers Required. No license shall be granted
hereunder unless the applicant renders full, true and complete answers
to all questions contained in said application.
E. Application For Original Package License. If the application seeks an
original package license, an affidavit by the individual owner, or if a
partnership, all of said partners, or if a corporation, the managing
officer of said corporation, must be submitted therewith and contain
therein the type of business presently engaged in or in conjunction with
which the license shall be used, and further, stating that the said
applicant has and at all times keeps in his/her place of business a stock
of goods having an invoice value of at least one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), exclusive of fixtures and intoxicating liquors.
F. Supplemental Reports. The licensee, upon request of the Director, shall
file a supplemental report within fifteen (15) days of any loan made to
the licensee of money or credit relating directly or indirectly to the
licensed business.
Section
600.350
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.370
AO:736
Section 600.370. Investigation of Application for License. [R.O.
2008 §600.370; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
Section 600.380. Issuance of License. [R.O. 2008 §600.380; Ord. No.
4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
Section 600.385. Permit to Cater Liquor by the Drink. [R.O. 2008
§600.385; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
A. The Director shall supervise an immediate, thorough investigation of
application received hereunder and the character, background,
associates, financial investments and indebtedness of the applicant.
The suitability of the location and surrounding conditions of the
proposed premises shall also be investigated. The Director shall report
to the City Council on the results of his/her investigation.
B. The Director shall furnish to the City Council all pertinent information
contained in the Police Department records and the results of
submission of the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
C. In an effort to offset the expense of the investigation process, all new
license applications shall pay a non-refundable investigation fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to the license fee.
D. If an existing license holder in good standing applies for an additional
license whether at the same address or a different address, an
investigation fee shall not apply.
A. If an application for a license hereunder is approved by the City Council
and payment of the license tax made in the form of a bank draft, United
States or express money order, certified check or cashier's check
payable to the City of Maryville for the correct amount of the license
fee, the City Clerk shall grant to the applicant a license to operate and
conduct business at the location in the City for the period as set forth in
the license certificate. Every license shall set forth the type of license
granted and shall particularly describe the premises at which alcoholic
beverages may be sold, and such license shall not authorize or permit
the sale of alcoholic beverages at any place other than that described
therein.
B. An approved application for an alcohol license by the Maryville City
Council shall be temporary in nature, until the applicant receives a valid
County and State license. The license shall not become permanent until
the noted expiration when the applicant provides the City Clerk with a
copy of the valid State license. In the event the license is denied by the
State or a copy of the State license is not submitted to the City of
Maryville within forty-five (45) days of City Council approval, the City of
Maryville alcohol license shall become void immediately.
Section
600.370
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.385
AO:737
Section 600.390. Purchasers of Alcoholic Beverage Establishments.
[R.O. 2008 §600.390; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
A bona fide purchaser of an existing establishment who possess all the
individual qualifications required by this Chapter may be issued a license.
Section 600.395. Occupancy Limitations and Enforcement. [R.O.
2008 §600.395; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
Section 600.400. Possession or Right to Occupy Premises
Prerequisite to Issuance of License. [R.O. 2008 §600.400; Ord. No.
4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
A licensee hereunder shall be in possession of the premises, or have the
legal right to occupy the same, before any license shall be issued hereunder.
Section 600.410. Issuance of License Within One Hundred Feet of a
School or Church. [R.O. 2008 §600.410; Ord. No. 4960 §1,
A. Upon receipt of application, the City Manager or City Clerk shall verify
whether or not a temporary permit to cater, at retail, intoxicating liquor
by the drink for consumption at particular function, occasion or event at
a particular location other than the licensed premises. Applicant shall
hold a liquor-by-the-drink license with the City of Maryville. Said
application shall be received no less than fifteen (15) days prior to
scheduled event. The temporary permit shall be effective for a period
not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days and shall authorize the service
of alcoholic beverages at such function, occasion or event during the
hours at which alcoholic beverages may be lawfully sold. For every
permit issued, a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid for each
calendar day (12:00 A.M. to 11:59 P.M. = 1 day) for which the permit is
issued.
B. An applicant granted a permit for outdoor catering shall install
temporary fencing which designates the catered area to which the
permit applies.
C. If catering event is held on City property, a general liability policy of
insurance which names the City as an additional insured shall be
obtained by the applicant in an amount equal to the sovereign immunity
limits of the City as calculated pursuant to Section 537.610, RSMo. (or
its successor). A copy of which shall be provided to the City Clerk prior
to the time such permit is issued.
A. Occupancy limits will be calculated in accordance with the currently
adopted Fire Code, as indicated in Chapter 225: Fire Code, of the
Maryville Municipal Code.
B. Occupancy limits will be enforced by the Public Safety Department.
Section
600.385
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.410
AO:738
3-11-1991; Ord. No. 6829 §§1 — 2, 5-15-2006; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
Section 600.420. License to Be Signed — Attested and Sealed. [R.O.
2008 §600.420; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
All licenses granted by virtue of this Chapter shall be signed by the Mayor
and attested by the City Clerk with the Seal of the City affixed thereon.
Section 600.430. No Limitation on Number of Licenses to Resorts —
Statement Required. [R.O. 2008 §600.430; Ord. No. 4960 §1,
3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
A. No license shall be granted for the sale of intoxicating liquor within one
hundred (100) feet of any school, church or other building regularly
used as a place of religious worship, unless the applicant for the license
shall first obtain consent of the City Council, except that when a school,
church or place of religious worship shall hereafter be established
within one hundred (100) feet of any place of business licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor, the license thereof shall not be denied for this
reason. Such consent shall not be granted until ten (10) days' written
notice has been provided to all owners of property within one hundred
(100) feet of the proposed licensed business.
B. Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to any premises holding a
license issued before May 1, 2005, by the City of Maryville for the sale
of intoxicating beer. To retain a license under this Subsection, the
licensed premises shall not change license type, amend the legal
description or be without a liquor license for more than ninety (90)
days.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter to the contrary,
any person who possesses the qualifications required by this Chapter,
and who now or hereafter meets the requirements of and complies with
the provisions of this Chapter, may apply for, and the City may issue, a
license to sell intoxicating liquor, as defined in this Chapter, by the
drink at retail for consumption on the premises of any resort as
described in the application.
B. A seasonal resort restaurant is a restaurant which is not a new
restaurant establishment and which is open for business eight (8) or
fewer consecutive months in any calendar year. Fifty percent (50%) of
all gross sales of such restaurant shall be sales of prepared meals. Any
new seasonal resort restaurant establishment having been in operation
for less than twelve (12) weeks may be issued a temporary license to
sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the
premises for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days if the seasonal
resort restaurant establishment can show a projection for annualized
gross sales of which fifty percent (50%) shall be sales of prepared
meals. The temporary license fee and the annual license fee shall be
Section
600.410
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.430
AO:739
Section 600.440. License Fees. [R.O. 2008 §600.440; Ord. No. 4960
§1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
Before any license required by this Chapter shall be issued, the annual
fee required therefore shall be paid to the City Clerk. Annual license fees
required for licenses under this Chapter shall be the maximum amount
allowable according to the State law (Fees = 1½ x State's fees) Section
311.220, RSMo.
Section 600.450. Renewal of Licenses. [R.O. 2008 §600.450; Ord.
No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 6001 §1, 11-10-1997; Ord. No.
7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
prorated to reflect the period of operation of the seasonal resort
restaurant. The license shall be valid only during the period for which
application was made and for which the fee was paid. Any seasonal
resort restaurant upon resuming business for its season of operation
shall not be considered a new establishment for purposes of issuing a
temporary license. Nothing in this Subsection shall prohibit a seasonal
resort restaurant from becoming a resort restaurant upon application,
payment of fees, and compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
C. The times for opening and closing the establishments as fixed in Section
311.290, RSMo., the authority for the collection of fees by counties as
provided in Section 311.220, RSMo., and all other laws and regulations
of the State relating to the sale of liquor by the drink for consumption
on the premises where sold shall apply to resorts in the same manner as
they apply to establishments licensed under Section 311.090, RSMo.
D. Any new resort or restaurant establishment having been in operation
for less than ninety (90) days may be issued a temporary license to sell
intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the
premises for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days if the resort or
restaurant establishment can show a projection of an annual gross
receipts of not less than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) per
year with at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) of such gross
receipts from non-alcoholic sales. The license fee shall be prorated for
the period of the temporary license based on the cost of the annual
license for the establishment.
A. Sales By Drink And COL Licenses. Each person holding a license under
this Chapter and desiring such license renewed shall file with the City
Clerk an application for license renewal on or after the first (1st) day of
June of each year.
B. Proper Parties To File. The application shall be filed by President or
other officer who has authority to act on behalf of the corporation for
such matters, as evidenced by written documentation provided to the
City by the corporation; and if such officer is not the manager of the
location for which the license is to apply, then the manager shall also
sign as a co-applicant on behalf of the corporation. Should the manager
Section
600.430
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.450
AO:740
Section 600.455. Procedures for Failure or Refusal to Grant or
Renew a License. [R.O. 2008 §600.455; Ord. No. 6001 §1,
11-10-1997; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
of such location be replaced during the license term, the new manager
shall so advise the City immediately and shall make all subsequent
renewals during such manager's tenure.
C. Contents Of Application. The application shall disclose in affidavit form
the following information along with any other information deemed
necessary:
1. A comprehensive and informative statement to disclose the true
ownership and management of the business including the names
and addresses of any and all persons who may be engaged in,
either directly or indirectly, any part of the management or control
of the business.
2. Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony.
3. Whether or not any distiller, wholesaler, winemaker, brewer or
supplier of coin-operated, commercial, manual or mechanical
amusement devices or the employees, officers or agents thereof
has any financial interest in the retail business of the applicant for
the sale of alcoholic beverages or C.O.L., and whether or not the
applicant, either directly or indirectly, will borrow or accept from
any such persons equipment, money, credit or property of any kind
except ordinary commercial credit for liquor sold.
4. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the ordinances
of the City, the laws of the State or of the United States in the
conduct of the business.
D. Penalty. If any licensee fails to file the application for license to transfer
any license issued by virtue of this Chapter, and no license shall be
effective at any place except upon those premises for which said license
was originally issued, provided however, that in the event a license
hereunder should obtain a buyer, lessee, sublessee or assignee for the
establishment for which license was issued, said buyer, lessee,
sublessee or assignee shall be given prior consideration for a license on
condition of compliance with all provisions of this Article.
A. Right To Deny. The City Council may deny or decline to grant an
application for a license or an application for renewal of a license upon
any of the following:
1. Finding that the applicant is not qualified under the provisions of
this Chapter;
2. Finding that any of the Subsections in Section 600.250(A) are true;
Section
600.450
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.455
AO:741
3. Finding, in its discretion, that it is not advisable to grant a license
to the applicant;
4. Finding that the proposed location is unsatisfactory; or
5. Finding it is not in the best interest of the City of Maryville to grant
or renew such a license.
B. Right To Hearing. In the event the City Council of the City of Maryville
shall fail or refuse to grant or renew a license under the provisions of
this Chapter, the applicant shall be entitled to a formal hearing. Notice
of the denial or declination to grant an application shall be given to the
applicant by either personally serving notice of the same upon the
applicant or by mailing notice to applicant by certified mail to the last
known address or the residence address of the applicant. Said notice
shall inform applicant of the right to a hearing on the issue and the
procedures for requesting a hearing. Said notice shall be provided
within ten (10) days of the decision of the Council, absent extenuating
circumstances.
C. Hearing Request. Applicant may request a formal hearing before the
City Council by filing a request for the same with the City Clerk on the
form provided by the City. Said notice must be filed within ten (10) days
of applicant receiving the notice pursuant to this Section.
D. Notice Of Or Denial Of Renewal Or A License Hearing. The City Clerk
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the intent of the City Council to
hold a formal hearing on the issue of denial of a license or denial of
renewal of a license granted pursuant to this Chapter. Said notice shall
provide the applicant notice of the date, time and location of the
hearing and shall either be personally served on the applicant or a copy
shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the last known address
of the applicant or the residence address of the applicant. The applicant
shall receive said notice not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
E. Notice Of Grounds For Hearing. After consultation with the City
Attorney, the City Clerk shall provide written notice to the applicant of
the grounds to be presented to the City Council on the issue of denial
pursuant to this Chapter. Said notice shall be personally served upon
the applicant or a copy shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to
the last known address of the applicant or residence address of the
applicant. The applicant shall receive said notice not less than ten (10)
days prior to the hearing.
F. Continuances. Upon its own motion or at the request of any party,
including the applicant or the City Attorney, the City Council may grant
such reasonable continuances of the formal hearing as it deems
appropriate and may grant such temporary licenses for specific
duration for such prorated fees as the City Council deems appropriate.
G. Hearing Procedure. The Council shall consider all information,
documents and testimony presented at the formal hearing and then
Section
600.455
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.455
AO:742
Section 600.460. Transfer of Location of Licensed Establishment.
[R.O. 2008 §600.460; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
A license may, subject to the approval of the City Council upon application
in writing, be transferred to any other part of the building containing
the licensed premises if the premises sought to be licensed meet the
requirements of this Chapter.
render its decision based thereon. The hearing need not be conducted
according to the applicable rules of evidence as applied by judicial
bodies in the State of Missouri. However, the hearing procedure shall
ensure that a fair and impartial forum is provided at which each party
shall have the right to:
1. Call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of
the hearing;
2. Introduce documentary and physical evidence;
3. Cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing;
4. Rebut any evidence presented; and
5. Represent themselves or be represented by an attorney of their
choice.
The City Attorney shall present the evidence supporting the
denial. Witnesses may be subpoenaed or may voluntarily
appear at such hearing. Before any witness shall testify at
any such hearing or proceeding, the witness shall swear to
testify under oath. All proceedings and such hearings shall
be taken down stenographically or recorded mechanically or
electronically or a combination thereof. Said proceeding shall
be transcribed whenever required by law.
H. Decision Of City Council. At the conclusion of all the evidence, the
Council may grant or deny the application for a license or the
application for renewal of a license. Notice of any denial or declination
to grant an application shall be given to the applicant by either
personally serving notice of the same upon the applicant or by mailing
notice to applicant by certified mail to the last known address or the
residence address of said applicant. Said notice shall be provided
within ten (10) days of the decision of the Council, absent extenuating
circumstances.
Section
600.455
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.470
AO:743
Section 600.470. Death of Licensee Under Unexpired License. [R.O.
2008 §600.470; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
In the event of the death of a licensee, any relative of such deceased
licensee, who shall meet the other requirements of this Article, may be
permitted to operate the business of the licensee for the remainder of the
period for which a license fee has been paid by the deceased licensee.
Section 600.475. Refund. [R.O. 2008 §600.475; Ord. No. 7003 §1,
4-28-2008]
No fees paid for an alcoholic beverage license or permit shall be refunded,
whether partially or in full, once a determination is made with regard to the
approval or denial of the license/permit.
Section 600.480. Display of License. [R.O. 2008 §600.480; Ord. No.
4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
All licenses duly issued and obtained in compliance with this Chapter shall,
at all times, be placed in an open and conspicuous location within the
premises being operated thereunder.
Section 600.490. Lost Licenses. [R.O. 2008 §600.490; Ord. No. 4960
§1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
Section 600.500. Continuance of License After Partner's
Withdrawal. [R.O. 2008 §600.500; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord.
No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
If one (1) or more members of a partnership having a license withdraws
from the partnership, the Director upon application accompanied by a bill
of sale or affidavit or transfer shall allow the remaining partner or partners
originally licensed to continue the operation under the original license for
the remainder of the period for which the license fee has been paid and it
shall not be necessary for the remaining partner or partners to secure a new
license until the expiration of the license.
A. Whenever proof that a license has been lost or destroyed is furnished by
a licensee, a duplicate in lieu thereof shall be issued by the City upon
payment of the sum of five dollars ($5.00) by the said licensee and
submission by the latter of an application for a duplicate license in the
form provided wherein true and complete answers must be given to the
following:
1. The date upon which the license was lost or destroyed.
2. The circumstances under which the license was lost or destroyed.
3. A request that a duplicate license be issued.
Section
600.470
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.510
AO:744
Section 600.510. Regulations on Retail Licenses, Including "C.O.L."
Licenses. [R.O. 2008 §600.510; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord.
No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
Section 600.520. Prohibited Acts — Full Original Package Sales
License. [R.O. 2008 §600.520; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No.
7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
A. Orders Off Licensed Premises, Prohibited. No orders for the sale of
alcoholic beverages at retail shall be taken at any place not licensed
under this Chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages, even though
such orders are filled and delivery thereon made at a place duly
licensed hereunder. Nothing in this provision shall be construed as to
prevent any hotel or motel operator or private club from serving any
alcoholic beverages to any guest, including registered guests, in or
occupying any room of such hotel, motel or private club, if such
alcoholic beverage so served shall be kept in or served from a licensed
location, place or premises in such hotel, motel or private club.
B. Displaying Of License On Premises Other Than Those Licensed,
Prohibited. No licensee shall post such license or allow such license to
be posted upon premises other than the premises licensed, or upon
premises where traffic in alcoholic beverages is being carried on by any
person other than the licensee, or knowingly deface, destroy or alter
any such license in any respect.
All such licensees shall keep prominently displayed on their licensed
premises at all times which their City license is in effect all Federal
tax stamps or State licenses issued to them or to any other person
designating them or the licensed premises as a person or place
authorized by the Federal Government or State to deal in alcoholic
beverages or "C.O.L.".
C. Prohibited Interests. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at
retail or "C.O.L." license shall be issued to any person in which any
distiller, wholesaler, winemaker, brewer or supplier of coin-operated
commercial, manual or mechanical amusement devices, or the
employees, officers or agents thereof, has any financial interest or has
furnished, directly or indirectly, equipment, money, credit or property of
any kind except ordinary commercial credit for alcoholic beverages.
A. Consumption On Premises. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a full
original package sales license, or any employee, agent or servant of
such licensee, to allow the consumption of any alcoholic beverages in or
upon the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to
consume alcoholic beverages on such premises.
B. Other Than Original Package. It shall be unlawful for such licensee or
any employee, agent or servant of such licensee to sell, dispense or give
away alcoholic beverages except in the original package.
Section
600.510
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.520
AO:745
Section 600.530. Prohibited Acts — Malt Liquor — Original Package
Sales Licenses. [R.O. 2008 §600.530; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991;
Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
Section 600.540. All Wholesale Licenses, Certain Credit to
Retailers, Prohibited. [R.O. 2008 §600.540; Ord. No. 4960 §1,
3-11-1991; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
No wholesale licensee shall extend commercial credit to any retailer beyond
the limitations provided in the State Statutes or by regulations pursuant
thereto.
C. Alcoholic Beverages, Posted "Not For Sale", When. All such licensees
whose place of business remains open on the days and at the hours
when the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by
law shall, at all times upon such days and at such hours, keep all
alcoholic beverages covered or closed off from the view of customers
and posted by conspicuous notice "Not for Sale". Any alcoholic
beverages in view of customers or not so posted shall be deemed an
illegal sale of same and grounds for the suspension or revocation of the
license.
A. Consumption On Premises. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a
license for the sale of malt liquor in the original package, or any agent,
servant or employee of such licensee, to allow the consumption of any
alcoholic beverages on such premises.
B. Unlicensed Beverages On Premises. It shall be unlawful for such
licensee, or any agent, servant or employee of such licensee, to have in
or upon the licensed premises any intoxicating liquor other than malt
liquor.
C. Malt Liquor To Be Posted "Not For Sale", When. All such licensees
whose places of business remain open on the days and at the hours
when the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by
law shall keep all malt liquor covered or closed off from the view of
customers and posted by conspicuous notice "Not for Sale". Any
alcoholic beverages in view of customers or not so posted shall be
deemed an illegal sale of the same and grounds for the suspension or
revocation of the license.
Section
600.520
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
600.540
AO:746
ARTICLE IV
Penalty
Section 600.550. Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §600.550; Ord. No. 5561 §1,
7-28-1997; Ord. No. 7003 §1, 4-28-2008]
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or any Section thereof
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than three (3)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day or part of a day during or on which any
person violates any provision of this Chapter.
Section
600.550
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.550
AO:747
Chapter 605
RETAIL SALES OF CIGARETTES
Section 605.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §605.010; Ord. No. 5479
§1, 11-25-1996]
When used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
herein indicated:
CIGARETTE — An item manufactured of tobacco or any substitute therefor,
wrapped in paper or any substitute therefor, weighing not to exceed three
(3) pounds per one thousand (1,000) cigarettes and which is commonly
classified, labeled or advertised as a cigarette.
PACKAGE OF CIGARETTES — A container of any type composition in which
is normally contained twenty (20) individual cigarettes, except as in special
instances when the number may be more or less than twenty (20).
RETAIL DEALER — Any person who sells to a consumer or to any person for
any purpose other than resale.
SALE — In this instance is defined to be and declared to include sales,
barters, exchanges and every other manner, method and form of
transferring the ownership of personal property from one person to another.
"Sale" also means the possession of cigarettes or tobacco products by any
person other than a manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer and shall be prima
facie evidence of possession for consumption.
WHOLESALE DEALER — Any person, firm or corporation organized and
existing, or doing business, primarily to sell cigarettes or tobacco products
to, and render service to, retailers in the territory the person, firm or
corporation chooses to serve; that purchases cigarettes or tobacco products
directly from the manufacturer; that carries at all times at his/her or its
principal place of business a representative stock of cigarettes or tobacco
products for sale; and that comes into the possession of cigarettes or
tobacco products for the purpose of selling them to retailers or to persons
outside or within the State who might resell or retail the cigarettes or
tobacco products to consumers. This shall include any manufacturer, jobber,
broker, agent or other person, whether or not enumerated in this Chapter,
who so sells or so distributes cigarettes or tobacco products.
Section 605.020. License Required — Fees. [R.O. 2008 §605.020;
Ord. No. 5479 §1, 11-25-1996]
Each person engaged in said business shall pay an occupational tax at the
rate of two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) per one thousand (1,000) for each
and all cigarettes sold, offered or displayed for sale. The intended meaning
of this Chapter is that the same shall levy an occupations tax based upon
and pursuant to the method provided for by Section 94.110, RSMo., and
pursuant to the powers therein granted and the powers further granted
under the Statutes of Missouri to Cities of the Third Class.
Section
600.550
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
605.020
AO:748
Chapter 610
TATTOOING, BODY PIERCING AND BRANDING
Section 610.010. License Requirement. [R.O. 2008 §610.010; Ord.
No. 7052 §1, 9-22-2008]
Section 610.020. Regulations. [R.O. 2008 §610.020; Ord. No. 7052
§1, 9-22-2008]
Section 610.030. Inspections. [R.O. 2008 §610.030; Ord. No. 7052
§1, 9-22-2008]
A. No person who performs tattooing, body piercing or branding shall
practice without a license issued by the Director of the Missouri
Division of Professional Registration.
B. No establishment in which tattoos, body piercing or brandings are
applied shall be operated without a license issued by the Director of the
Missouri Division of Professional Registration.
C. Any person or establishment who violates this Section shall be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per occurrence.
D. For purposes of this Section, each day that such person or
establishment is in violation of this Chapter shall be a separate
occurrence punishable under this Section.
A. Each person who performs tattooing, body piercing or branding on
another person shall perform such actions in conformance with those
portions of the Missouri Code of State Regulations and Chapter 324,
RSMo., which are applicable to tattooing, branding and body piercing.
B. Each establishment in which tattoos, body piercing or brandings are
applied shall be operated in conformance with those portions of the
Missouri Code of State Regulations and Chapter 324, RSMo., which are
applicable to tattooing, branding and body piercing.
C. Any person or establishment who violates this Section shall be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per occurrence.
D. For purposes of this Section, each day that such person or
establishment is in violation of this Chapter shall be a separate
occurrence punishable under this Section.
A. Inspections of establishments at which tattoos, body piercing and/or
brandings are applied and of persons who perform tattooing, body
piercing and/or brandings, shall be performed by the Nodaway County
Health Department no less than two (2) times each calendar year. The
purpose of these inspections is to insure compliance by such persons
and establishments with the Missouri Code of State Regulations
applicable to tattooing, branding and body piercing. A copy of the
Section
605.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
610.030
AO:749
Chapter 615
SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT
MERCHANTS
Section 615.010. Permit and License Required. [R.O. 2008
§620.010; Ord. No. 6837 §§1 — 2, 6-26-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any canvasser or solicitor, peddler or itinerant
merchant to engage in such businesses within the corporate limits of the
City without first obtaining a permit and license therefor in compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter. Any person, firm, entity or corporation,
association, club or society which is determined to be non-profit in nature is
not required to adhere to the provisions outlined in this Chapter.
Section 615.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §620.020; Ord. No. 6837
§§1 — 2, 6-26-2006]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
designated herein:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — Any individual traveling by foot, motor
vehicle or any other type of conveyance, taking or attempting to take orders
for sale of goods, wares or merchandise, personal property of any nature
whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed
in the future. This definition shall include any person who, for himself or
for another person, firm or corporation, hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure, tent, boat or any other place within the City for the
purpose of exhibition of samples and taking orders for future delivery.
ITINERANT MERCHANT — Any person, firm, entity or corporation,
whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, who engages in a
temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares or merchandise
within the City and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases,
uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, boat or any
street, alley or other place within the City for the exhibition or sale of
such goods, wares or merchandise, either privately or at public auction.
The person, firm, entity or corporation so engaged shall not be relieved
from complying with the provisions of this Chapter merely by reason of
results of said inspections shall be forwarded to the City by the
Nodaway County Health Department.
B. Any person or establishment who does not allow the Nodaway County
Health Department to perform the required inspection shall be fined
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per occurrence.
C. For purposes of this Section, each day that such person or
establishment does not allow the Nodaway County Health Department
to perform such inspection shall be a separate occurrence punishable
under this Section.
Section
610.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
615.020
AO:750
associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer or by conducting business in connection with, as a part of or in
the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer.
PEDDLER — Any person traveling by foot, motor vehicle or any other type of
conveyance from place to place, carrying, conveying or transporting goods,
wares or merchandise, offering and exposing the same for sale or making
sales and delivering articles to purchasers or who, without traveling from
place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, motor
vehicle or other vehicle or conveyance.
Section 615.030. Application. [R.O. 2008 §620.030; Ord. No. 6837
§§1 — 2, 6-26-2006]
A. Applicants for permit and license under this Chapter must file with the
City Clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by
the City, which shall require the following information:
1. Name and description of the applicant, including all aliases, Social
Security number, driver's license number with State and date of
birth.
2. Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
3. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods,
wares or merchandise to be sold.
4. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
5. The length of time and dates for which the right to do business is
desired.
6. The place where the goods, wares, merchandise or property
proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are
manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are
located at the time said application is filed and the proposed
method of delivery.
7. The sales tax number on which the City sales tax will be reported.
8. A photograph of the applicant taken within sixty (60) days
immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which
picture shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head
and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishable
manner.
9. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been found
guilty of, pled guilty to or been convicted of any crime or any
violation of any municipal ordinance including the nature of the
offense, the location of the conviction or plea of guilty, including
court and dates and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
Section
615.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.030
AO:751
Section 615.040. Investigation and Issuance of License. [R.O. 2008
§620.040; Ord. No. 6837 §§1 — 2, 6-26-2006]
Section 615.050. Fees. [R.O. 2008 §620.050; Ord. No. 6837 §§1 — 2,
6-26-2006]
The license fee which shall be charged by the City Clerk for such license
shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year or any part thereof.
10. When the proposed operation includes the sale of food products,
including items prepared, cooked or assembled on site, a statement
of approval from the local office of the Missouri Department of
Health acknowledging that the individual's display and food
preparation location and setup has been approved.
A. Upon receipt of such application, a copy shall be referred to the
Director of the Public Safety Department.
B. The Director shall supervise an immediate, thorough investigation of
the application received and the character, background, associates and
prior criminal history of the applicant. The suitability of the location and
surrounding conditions of the proposed premises shall also be
investigated. The Director shall report to the City Clerk on the results of
the investigation.
C. The Director shall furnish to the City Clerk all pertinent information as
described above.
D. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Director
of Public Safety shall endorse on the application his/her approval and
return said application to the City Clerk who upon payment for the
prescribed fee and the determination that the applicant meets and has
complied with the condition of this Chapter and meets the requirements
therein shall deliver to the applicant his/her permit and issue a license.
Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer
and shall show the name, address and photograph of the licensee, the
kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of
issuance and the length of time the same shall be valid, as well as the
license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in
such soliciting or canvassing.
E. If the result of the investigation is not satisfactory or the applicant has
not complied with the conditions of this Chapter or does not meet the
requirements herein, the application shall be denied.
F. The City Clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued.
Section
615.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
615.060
AO:752
Section 615.060. Display of License. [R.O. 2008 §620.060; Ord. No.
6837 §§1 — 2, 6-26-2006]
All licenses issued and obtained in compliance with this Chapter shall at all
times be placed in an open and conspicuous location within the premises or
area being operated thereunder and shall be produced upon request.
Section 615.070. Duty of Police to Enforce. [R.O. 2008 §620.070;
Ord. No. 6837 §§1 — 2, 6-26-2006]
Any public safety officer of the City or any Law Enforcement Officer is
authorized to require any person seen soliciting or canvassing, and who is
not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his/her license
and to enforce the provisions of this Chapter against any person found to be
violating the same.
Section 615.080. Records. [R.O. 2008 §620.080; Ord. No. 6837 §§1
— 2, 6-26-2006]
The Director of Public Safety shall report to the City Clerk all convictions
for violation of this Chapter and the City Clerk shall maintain a record for
each license issued and record the reports of violation therein.
Section 615.090. Revocation of License. [R.O. 2008 §620.090; Ord.
No. 6837 §§1 — 2, 6-26-2006]
A. Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be
revoked by the City Council after notice and hearing for any of the
following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his/her business as solicitor, canvasser, peddler or
itinerant merchant;
3. Any violation of this Chapter;
4. Conviction of any crime or ordinance violation involving moral
turpitude; or
5. Conducting the business of soliciting in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public;
6. Violations of any provisions of this Chapter;
7. The occurrence of any act or instance which would render the
licensed premises ineligible or unsuitable for a license under the
provisions of this Chapter;
Section
615.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.090
AO:753
Section 615.100. Appeal. [R.O. 2008 §620.100; Ord. No. 6837 §§1 —
2, 6-26-2006]
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Director of Public Safety or the
City Clerk in the denial of a permit or license as provided in this Chapter
shall have the right of appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken
by filing with the Council, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action
complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a
written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Council
shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such
hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in
Section 615.090(B) of this Chapter for notice of hearing on revocation.
Section 615.110. Expiration of License. [R.O. 2008 §620.110; Ord.
No. 6837 §§1 — 2, 6-26-2006]
All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall expire
on the thirty-first (31st) day of December in the year when issued; if a
license is issued for a duration ending prior to December thirty-first (31st)
of the year in which it is issued, renewal of the license for additional terms
may be made upon filing of application as set forth herein.
Chapter 620
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT
8. The determination that the licensee failed to make a full and
complete disclosure of all pertinent information in the application
for such license.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing
setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and
place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee at his/her last known address at least five (5) days prior to the
date set for hearing.
Section
615.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
615.110
AO:754
ARTICLE I
Gas Distribution System
Section 620.010. Person Construed. [R.O. 2008 §630.010; Ord. No.
4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
The word "person", when used in this Article, shall include any individual,
corporation, firm, partnership, association, trustee or receiver, or any other
group or combination of individuals acting as a unit, in the plural as well as
in the singular number.
Section 620.020. License Tax Required. [R.O. 2008 §630.020; Ord.
No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
Every person now or hereafter engaged in the business of supplying natural
gas for compensation through pipes along, upon, over, under or through
the streets, alleys, parkways or other publicly owned premises within the
City, shall pay to the City, as a license tax, for the privilege of engaging in
said business within the City, the respective amounts during the respective
periods more particularly set out in Section 620.030 hereof.
Section 620.030. Statement — Contents — Filing — Tax — Payment.
[R.O. 2008 §630.030; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
Section 620.040. Tax in Lieu of Occupation, Etc. — Tax. [R.O. 2008
§630.040; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
The tax herein required to be paid shall be in lieu of any other license,
occupation, excise or merchandising tax but shall not be in lieu of any ad
valorem tax.
A. It is hereby made the duty of every person engaged in the business
described in Section 620.020, to file with the City Clerk, on or before
the tenth (10th) day of the month, a payment in the amount of two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00). On or before the twenty-fifth (25th) day of
the month, each person shall file a statement of the gross receipts
derived from the sale of natural gas for retail, residential and
commercial purposes within the corporate limits of Maryville, Missouri,
during the calendar month for which the statement was issued. At the
time of filing such statement, such person shall pay the City the balance
of a sum equal to five percent (5%) of the above stated gross.
B. The City Manager, or any duly authorized representative of the City,
shall have the right to investigate the correctness of such statements at
all times, and shall have access to the books and records of such person
for such purposes at all times.
Section
620.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
620.050
AO:755
Section 620.050. Penalties. [R.O. 2008 §630.050; Ord. No. 4960 §1,
3-11-1991]
Any person operating any business herein designated who shall fail to file a
statement as herein required, or who shall fail or refuse to pay the license
tax herein provided for when due, shall for such failure pay as a penalty to
the City, ten percent (10%) of the license tax due and unpaid for the first
(1st) month or part thereof, and for each and every month thereafter, three
percent (3%) the amount of such tax until the same is fully paid.
Section
620.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
620.050
AO:756
ARTICLE II
Electrical Distribution System
Section 620.060. Person Construed. [R.O. 2008 §630.060; Ord. No.
4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
The word "person", when used in this Article, shall include any individual,
corporation, firm, partnership, association, trustee or receiver, or any other
group or combination of individuals acting as a unit, in the plural as well as
in the singular number.
Section 620.070. License Tax Required. [R.O. 2008 §630.070; Ord.
No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 6204 §1, 6-28-1999]
Every person engaging in the business of supplying electricity for
compensation through wires or other means of transmission along, upon,
over, under or through the streets, alleys, parkways or other publicly owned
premises within the City shall pay a license tax equal to five percent (5%)
of the total gross receipts derived from the sale of electricity within the
corporate City limits of the City of Maryville for retail, residential and
commercial purposes. Said tax shall be paid to the City Clerk on a monthly
basis pursuant to the provisions outlined in this Chapter.
Section 620.080. License Tax, Statement and Payment. [R.O. 2008
§630.080; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 6204 §1,
6-28-1999]
A. Every person engaging in the business of supplying electricity for
compensation within the City limits of the City of Maryville as described
in this Chapter shall pay the following applicable license tax:
1. Every person engaged in the business of supplying electricity for
compensation whose gross monthly sales for the month are less
than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall file with the
City Clerk on or before the twenty-fifth (25th) day of the following
month a statement of total gross receipts derived from the sale of
electricity for retail, residential and commercial purposes within
the corporate limits of the City during the calendar month
immediately preceding the date of the statement. Each statement
shall reflect the gross receipts collected during the calendar month
immediately preceding the month during which the statement is
filed. At the time of filing such statement, the license tax prescribed
by this Chapter shall be paid to the City Clerk.
2. Every person engaged in the business of supplying electricity for
compensation whose gross monthly sales within the City for the
month equals or exceeds one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) shall file with the City Clerk, on or before the tenth
(10th) day of the following month, an estimated tax payment of
eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00). On or before the twenty-fifth
(25th) day of that month, such person shall file a statement of gross
Section
620.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
620.080
AO:757
Section 620.090. Tax in Lieu of Occupation, Etc. — Tax. [R.O. 2008
§630.090; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
The tax herein required to be paid shall be in lieu of any other license,
occupation, excise or merchandising tax but shall not be in lieu of any ad
valorem tax.
Section 620.100. Penalties. [R.O. 2008 §630.100; Ord. No. 4960 §1,
3-11-1991]
Any person operating any business herein designated who shall fail to file a
statement as herein required, or who shall fail or refuse to pay the license
tax herein provided for when due, shall for such failure pay as a penalty to
the City, ten percent (10%) of the license tax due and unpaid for the first
(1st) month or part thereof, and for each and every month thereafter, three
percent (3%) the amount of such tax until the same is fully paid.
receipts derived from the sale of electricity for retail, residential
and commercial purposes within the corporate limits of the City
during the calendar month immediately preceding the date of the
statement. Each statement shall reflect the gross receipts collected
during the calendar month immediately preceding the month
during which the statement is issued. At the time of filing such
statement, the remaining balance of the license tax as prescribed
by this Chapter shall be paid to the City Clerk.
3. The City Clerk or any duly authorized representative of the City
shall have the right to investigate the correctness of such
statements at all times and shall have access to the books and
records of such persons for all such purposes at all times.
Section
620.080
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
620.100
AO:758
Chapter 625
TELEPHONE COMPANY
Editor's Note — Ord. nos. 6819 and 6825 were passed in compliance
with HB209 of the 2006 Missouri legislative session. Provisions contained
in HB209 were subsequently deemed unconstitutional by the Missouri
Supreme Court on August 8, 2006 in City of Springfield, Appellant V Sprint
Spectrum, L.P., Respondent Case No. SC87238. Consequently, these
ordinances were not codified. Ord. no. 6867 subsequently returned ch. 625
to its original wording.
Section 625.010. Person Construed. [R.O. 2008 §635.010; Ord. No.
4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
The word "person", when used in this Chapter shall include any individual,
corporation, firm, partnership, association, trustee or receiver, or any other
group or combination of individuals acting as a unit, in the plural as well as
in the singular number.
Section 625.020. License Tax. [R.O. 2008 §635.020; Ord. No. 4960
§1, 3-11-1991]
Every person now or hereafter engaged in the business of operating for
compensation a telephone communicating system, together with plant and
facilities, and through wires and cables upon poles or in conduits along,
upon, over or under the streets, alleys, parkways or other publicly owned
premises within the City, and other telephonic communication equipment,
shall pay to the City as a license tax and fee a sum equal to five percent
(5%) of the gross amount received by such person as charges for all services
supplied by said person within the limits of the City.
Section 625.030. Statement — Filing. [R.O. 2008 §635.030; Ord. No.
4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
A. It shall be the duty of every person engaged in the business described in
Section 625.020 to file with the City Clerk, on or before the tenth (10th)
day of May, 1963, and on or before the tenth (10th) day of November,
1963, and on or before the tenth (10th) day of May and November
thereafter, a statement of the total gross receipts derived from charges
for services received for telephone service and facilities during the
preceding month. The billing period of such preceding month will be
the sixteenth (16th) through the fifteenth (15th) and shall relate to the
calendar month in which the billing period begins. Such statement is to
be properly signed, certified and sworn to by an authorized
representative of the person making such statement.
B. Any duly designated representative of the City shall have the right to
investigate the correctness of such statement and shall have access to
the books and records of such person, his/her trustees or successors in
interest, for such purpose. The City shall have the right, acting through
Section
620.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
625.030
AO:759
Section 625.040. Payment Date. [R.O. 2008 §635.040; Ord. No. 4960
§1, 3-11-1991]
Every person engaged in the business described in Section 625.020 shall
pay to the City Clerk, on or before the tenth (10th) day of May, 1963, and
the tenth (10th) day of each and every month thereafter, a sum equal to five
percent (5%) of the total gross receipts of such person received, based on
the latest statement filed by said person with the City Clerk as referred to
in Section 625.030. There shall be attached to each payment a statement
showing the month for which the tax is being paid, the gross receipts for
the month as shown by such last statement filed, and the amount of the tax
being paid.
Section 625.050. Payments in Lieu of Other Taxes. [R.O. 2008
§635.050; Ord. No. 4960 §1, 3-11-1991]
The payments herein required to be made shall be in lieu of all other
occupation licenses, taxes or fees, charges, or special taxes (other than
the usual general or ad valorem taxes, and such other taxes, licenses or
fees as are imposed against the public generally), which have been or may
hereafter be imposed by the City under authority conferred by law against
any person by reason of engagement in the telephone business as set out in
this Chapter.
Section 625.060. Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §635.060; Ord. No. 4960 §1,
3-11-1991]
Any person operating any business described in this Chapter pertaining
to telephone communication systems, who shall fail to file the reports as
herein required, or who shall fail to pay the license tax and fee herein
provided for when due, shall, for such failure, pay as a penalty to the City
ten percent (10%) of the fee and tax due and unpaid for the first thirty (30)
days, or any part thereof, and for each succeeding thirty (30) days or any
part thereof such person shall pay as a penalty three percent (3%) of such
fee and tax as long as the fee and tax shall remain unpaid.
Chapter 630
VIDEO AND CABLE SERVICES PROVIDERS
the City Manager, to require such person to file a statement to cover
such period other than for the months set forth above in Subsection
(A), provided that any of the following should occur; any major change
in the corporate limits of the City, or unusual growth in the number of
telephone connections; or if such person should receive from the Public
Service Commission of the State of Missouri authority to revise its rate
schedule.
Section
625.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
630.100
AO:760
Section 630.100. Definitions. [Ord. No. 7519 §2, 4-8-2013]
The words and phrases used in this Section shall have the meanings as set
forth in Section 67.2677, RSMo., or, if not defined therein, shall have such
meanings as established by City Code.
Section 630.110. Franchise Fee. [Ord. No. 7519 §2, 4-8-2013]
Pursuant to Section 67.2689, RSMo., and as partial compensation for use of
the City's public rights-of-way, each video service provider or other person
providing video services within the City shall, to the extent permitted by
law, pay to the City a fee of five percent (5%) of the gross revenues from
such video services provided in the geographic area of the City. Such
payment shall be made as required by Section 67.2689, RSMo. The City
shall have the right to audit any video service provider as authorized by
Section 67.2691, RSMo. Late payments shall accrue interest due to the
City compounded monthly at one and one-half percent (1.5%) or such other
maximum rate as may be established by law.
Section 630.120. Customer Service Requirements. [Ord. No. 7519
§2, 4-8-2013]
All video service providers providing service within the City shall adopt
and comply with the minimum customer service requirements set forth in
Section 67.2692, RSMo. Notice or receipt of this Chapter by a video service
provider shall be deemed notice of the City invoking such customer service
requirements.
Section 630.130. Rights-of-Way Regulation; Indemnification;
Permits and Compliance with Other Laws. [Ord. No. 7519 §2,
4-8-2013]
Video service providers shall comply with the requirements of Sections
67.2707, 67.2709 and all applicable ordinances and regulations not
inconsistent with Sections 67.1830 to 67.1846 RSMo., relating to use of
the City's rights-of-way, including but not limited to Chapter 550 of the
City Code. Each video service provider shall indemnify and hold harmless
the City and its officers, employees and agents from any loss or damage,
including, but not limited to attorneys' fees, as provided in such ordinances
or regulations, but in no event less than the obligation on video service
providers set forth in Section 67.2695, RSMo. The City may require
documentation of such indemnification and other rights-of-way
management obligations by written agreement or other instrument to the
extent permitted by law. In addition, video service providers shall be subject
to and comply with any supplementary provisions relating to placement,
screening and location of facilities as provided in the City Code whether
on public or private property, and such other applicable laws of the City,
except as may be otherwise validly preempted. Notwithstanding any other
ordinance to the contrary, no facilities to be used for video services shall be
installed without obtaining a building permit from the City authorizing the
Section
630.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
630.130
AO:761
location and plans for such facilities on private property or an excavation
permit from the City authorizing work in public rights-of-way, or other
permit authorizing location of facilities from the City; provided that this
provision shall not apply to installation of otherwise lawful and authorized
poles or wires.
Section 630.140. Public, Educational and Governmental Channels.
[Ord. No. 7519 §2, 4-8-2013]
Each video service provider shall designate a number of channels for public,
educational and governmental programming consistent with Section
67.2703, RSMo.; provided that any greater number of channels as may be
required in the incumbent cable franchise or franchise ordinance, may be
required pursuant to Section 67.2703.2 RSMo. The City shall bear no cost
relating to the transmission, availability or maintenance of such channels
unless expressly authorized by the City in writing and approved by the
Governing Body. Incumbent cable operators and other video service
providers shall provide support for such public, educational and
governmental channels consistent with Section 67.2703.8, RSMo.
Section 630.150. Continued Obligations. [Ord. No. 7519 §2,
4-8-2013]
The obligations of a cable service provider or video service provider as set
forth in any existing cable services or video services franchise or ordinance
shall also continue to apply to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law.
Section 630.160. Reservation of Rights. [Ord. No. 7519 §2,
4-8-2013]
The City retains all rights in Sections 67.2675 through 67.2714, RSMo.,
inclusive, and may take any and all actions permitted by law to exercise
such rights or to enforce such obligations on providers of video service.
Section 630.170. Notice. [Ord. No. 7519 §2, 4-8-2013]
A copy of this Chapter shall be delivered to each video service provider
operating in the City after notice to the City that such provider is authorized
to provide service within the City; provided that the provisions of this
Chapter shall, to the extent permitted by law, not be affected by any claimed
or actual failure of a service provider to have received delivery of a copy of
this Chapter.
Chapter 635
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS
Section
630.130
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
630.170
AO:762
ARTICLE I
Establishment
Section 635.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §645.010; Ord. No. 5158
§1, 8-23-1993]
For the purposes of this Chapter and unless the context plainly requires
otherwise, the following terms shall have the meanings designated herein:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any live exhibition, performance, display or
dance of any type, including but not limited to, talking, singing, reading,
listening, posing, serving of food or beverages, soliciting for the sale of food,
beverages or entertainment, pantomiming, modeling, removing clothing,
or any service offered for amusement on premises where such exhibition,
performance, display or dance is intended to seek to arouse or excite the
sexual desires of the entertainer, other entertainers, or patrons; or any
exhibition, performance, display or dance involving a person who is nude or
in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the
human genitals, pubic region, vulva, pubic hair, buttocks, female breast or
breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola or nipple, or
the human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if the genitals are
completely and opaquely covered.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS — Any premises to which the public,
patrons or members are invited or admitted and where adult entertainment
is provided, offered or displayed to a member of the public, a patron or
member.
APPLICABLE STOCKHOLDER — Any stockholder who owns ten percent
(10%) or greater interests in a corporation which owns an interest in an
adult entertainment business.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and
independent contractors, who work in or at an adult entertainment business
or render any services directly related to the operation of an adult
entertainment business.
ENTERTAINERS — Any person who provides adult entertainment within an
adult entertainment premises as defined in this Section, whether or not a
fee is charged or accepted for entertainment.
LICENSEE — The holder of any license issued under the provisions of this
Chapter.
MANAGER — Any person who manages, directs, administers an adult
entertainment business, or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of
any portion of any activity involving adult entertainment occurring at any
premises of an adult entertainment business.
OPERATOR — Any person operating, conducting or maintaining an adult
entertainment business.
Section
635.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.010
AO:763
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or
unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture, governmental
entity, or other entity or group of persons, no matter how organized.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any area generally visible to public view and shall
include streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, parks, driveways, parking lots,
and automobiles whether moving or not.
SERVER — Any person who serves food or drink at an adult entertainment
business.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Areas of the human body including
uncovered or exposed human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; buttocks;
female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola or nipple; male genitals in a discernible erect state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; or any combination of the foregoing.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any sexual conduct, being actual or
simulated; any acts of human masturbation; any sexual intercourse; any
physical contact in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification
with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the
breast of a female; any sadomasochistic abuse; or, acts including animals
or any latent objects in an act of or apparent act of sexual stimulation or
gratification.
Section 635.020. Standards of Conduct. [R.O. 2008 §645.020; Ord.
No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
A. The following standards of conduct shall be adhered to by all adult
entertainment business licensees, their employees and all adult
entertainment business managers, servers and entertainers and
patrons of adult entertainment businesses, while on or about the
premises of the adult entertainment business:
1. Age restriction. Only persons eighteen (18) years of age or older
shall be permitted on the premises of any adult entertainment
business.
2. Exterior observation. The premises of all adult entertainment
businesses will be so constructed to include an anteroom, foyer,
partition or other physical barrier on all customer entrances, that
will insure that the interior of the premises is not observable from
the exterior of the building. In addition, all windows or other
openings shall be covered to prevent viewing of the interior of the
premises from the outside. All doorways not constructed with an
anteroom or foyer, will be covered in order to prevent observation
of the interior of the premises from the exterior of the building.
3. Exterior display. No adult entertainment business will be
conducted in any manner that permits from any exterior source by
display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening, the
observation of live performers engaged in an erotic depiction,
dance or material, or persons depicting, describing or relating to
Section
635.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
635.020
AO:764
specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined
herein.
4. Nudity prohibited, exceptions. No employee, manager, server or
entertainer in an adult entertainment business shall expose to view
any specified anatomical area by appearing nude, unclothed, in less
than opaque attire or in any fashion.
5. Certain acts prohibited.
a. No employee, manager, server or entertainer shall perform any
specified sexual activities as defined herein, wear or use any
device or covering exposed to view which simulates any
specified anatomical area, use artificial devices or inanimate
objects to perform or depict any of the specified sexual
activities as defined herein, or participate in any act of
prostitution.
b. No employee, manager, server, entertainer or patron of an
adult entertainment business shall knowingly touch, fondle or
caress any specified anatomical area of another person, nor
knowingly permit another person to touch, fondle, or caress
any specified anatomical area of such employee, manager,
server, entertainer or patron, whether such specified
anatomical areas are clothed, unclothed, covered or exposed.
c. No employee, manager, server or entertainer of an adult
entertainment business shall be visible from the exterior of the
adult entertainment business while such person is clothed or
unclothed so as to expose to view any specified anatomical
area nor be in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to
view any specified anatomical area.
d. No entertainer shall solicit, demand or receive any payment or
gratuity from any patron or customer for any act prohibited by
this Chapter and no entertainer shall receive any payment or
gratuity from any customer for any entertainment except as
follows:
(1) While such entertainer is on the stage or platform, a
customer or patron may place such payment or gratuity
into a box affixed to the stage and located at least two (2)
feet from the entertainer, or
(2) While such entertainer is not on the stage or platform and
is clothed so as to not expose to view any specified
anatomical area, a customer or patron may either place
such payment or gratuity into the entertainer's hand, or
under a leg garter or other money holding device worn by
such entertainer at least four (4) inches below the bottom
of the pubic region.
Section
635.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.020
AO:765
e. No owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the
premises of an adult entertainment premises shall:
(1) Knowingly permit alcoholic liquor or cereal malt
beverages to be brought upon or consumed on the
premises, (unless otherwise permitted pursuant to
Chapter 600, Alcoholic Beverages of this Code);
(2) Knowingly allow or permit the sale, distribution, delivery
or consumption of any controlled substance, illegal drug or
narcotic on the premises;
(3) Knowingly allow or permit any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years of age to be in or upon the premises;
(4) Knowingly allow or permit any act of prostitution or
patronizing prostitution on the premises;
(5) Knowingly allow or permit a violation of this Chapter, any
other City ordinance or State law.
f. No live exhibition, performance, display or dancing shall be
allowed on any surface where food or drinks are served.
6. Signs required. Every adult entertainment business shall have a
sign conspicuously displayed in the common area at the principal
entrance to the premises, on which uppercase letters shall be at
least two (2) inches high and lowercase letters at least one (1) inch
high, which shall read as follows:
THIS ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS IS
REGULATED
AND LICENSED BY THE CITY OF MARYVILLE,
MISSOURI
ENTERTAINERS ARE:
* Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct
or prostitution on the premises nor to fondle, caress or
touch the breast or breasts of a female, or the pubic
region, buttocks or genitals of any employee, patron or
other entertainer; nor to permit any employee, patron,
or other entertainer to fondle, caress or touch the
breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of said
entertainer.
* Not permitted to be nude, unclothed, or in less than
opaque attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to
view any portion of the female breast or breasts below
the top of the areola, or any portion of the entertainer's
pubic region, buttocks and or genitals.
Section
635.020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
635.020
AO:766
Section 635.030. Entry by a Minor. [R.O. 2008 §645.030; Ord. No.
5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall enter or attempt to
enter upon the premises of an adult entertainment business.
* Not permitted to demand or collect any payment or
gratuity from any customer for entertainment, except
as follows:
- While such entertainer is on the stage, by placing
such payment or gratuity into a box affixed to the
stage, or
- While such entertainer is not on the stage, by either
placing such payment or gratuity into the
entertainer's hand, or under the entertainer's leg
garter, or other properly located money holding
device.
CUSTOMERS ARE:
* Not permitted to be upon the stage at any time.
* Not permitted to touch, caress or fondle the breast or
breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of any
employee, manager, server or entertainer, nor engage
in solicitation for prostitution.
7. Lighting required. The premises of all adult entertainment
businesses shall be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are
permitted access at an illumination of not less that one (1) footcandle
as measured at the floor level, and such illumination must
be maintained at all times that any customer or patron is present in
or on the premises.
8. Closed booth or room prohibited. The premises of all adult
entertainment businesses shall be physically arranged in such
manner that the entire interior portions of any booths, cubicles,
rooms or stalls are visible from a common area of the premises.
Visibility shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains,
drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever.
9. Ventilation and sanitation requirements. The premises of all adult
entertainment businesses shall be kept in a sanitary condition.
Separate dressing rooms and restrooms for men and women shall
be maintained at all times and shall be kept in a sanitary condition.
10. Hours of operation. No adult entertainment business may be open
or in use between the hours of 1:30 A.M. and 9:00 A.M. on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday and between
the hours of 1:30 A.M. Sunday and 9:00 A.M. Monday.
Section
635.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.030
AO:767

ARTICLE II
Licensing
Section 635.040. License — Posting or Display. [R.O. 2008 §645.040;
Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
Section 635.050. Manager on Premises. [R.O. 2008 §645.050; Ord.
No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
Section 635.060. License Required for Adult Entertainment
Business. [R.O. 2008 §645.060; Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
A. Every person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed under
this Chapter as an adult entertainment business shall post such license
in a conspicuous place and manner on the adult entertainment facility
premises.
B. Every person holding an adult entertainment server, manager or
entertainer license shall post his or her license in his or her work area
on the adult entertainment facility premises so it shall be readily
available for inspection by City authorities responsible for enforcement
of this Chapter.
A. An adult entertainment manager shall be on duty at any adult
entertainment business at all times the premises are open for business.
The name of the manager on duty shall be prominently posted during
business hours.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the manager to verify that any person
who provides adult entertainment or works as a server within the
premises, possesses a current and valid adult entertainment
entertainer's license or an adult entertainment server's license, and
that such licenses are prominently posted.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain an adult
entertainment business in the City unless the owner, operator or lessee
thereof has obtained an adult entertainment business license from the
City. It shall additionally be unlawful for any person to operate such
business after such adult entertainment business license has been
revoked or suspended.
B. It is unlawful for any entertainer, employee or manager to knowingly
perform any work, service or entertainment for or directly related to
the operation of an unlicensed adult entertainment business.
C. It shall be prima facia evidence that an adult entertainment business
has not obtained such a license if said business fails to have posted, in
the manner required by this Chapter, an adult entertainment business
license. In addition, it shall be prima facia evidence that any
entertainer, employee or manager who performs any service or
entertainment in an adult entertainment business had knowledge that
Section
635.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.060
AO:769
Section 635.070. License Required for Managers, Servers and
Entertainers. [R.O. 2008 §645.070; Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
It is unlawful for any person to work as an entertainer, server or manager
at an adult entertainment business without first obtaining a license to do
so from the City, or to work as an entertainer, server or manager at an
adult entertainment business after such person's license to do so has been
revoked or suspended.
Section 635.080. License, Classification and Fees, and Due Date.
[R.O. 2008 §645.080; Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
Section 635.090. License Application. [R.O. 2008 §645.090; Ord. No.
5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
such business was not licensed if an adult entertainment license is not
posted, in the manner required by this Chapter.
A. The license year for all fees required under this Chapter shall be from
each July first (1st) through June thirtieth (30th). The application for a
license shall be accompanied by payment in the form of a bank draft,
United States or express money order, certified check or cashier's
check made payable to the City for the correct amount of the license
fee. No application shall be considered complete until such fee is paid
as required.
B. All licenses shall be issued for a specific location and shall be nonrefundable
and non-transferable.
C. The classification of licenses and fees for each shall be as follows:
1. Adult entertainment business license fee: $300.00 per year.
2. Adult entertainment manager's license fee (per person): $20.00 per
year.
3. Adult entertainment entertainer's license fee (per person): $20.00
per year.
4. Adult entertainment server's license fee (per person): $20.00 per
year.
D. All license fees shall be due and payable on or before July first (1st) of
each year and shall be good for the year beginning July first (1st) and
ending June thirtieth (30th). If such license is originally issued after July
first (1st) but before December thirty-first (31st) of the same calendar
year, the applicant shall pay one-twelfth (1/12) of such fee for each
month or fraction thereof remaining in the twelve (12) month period
ending on the June thirtieth (30th) of the next following calendar year.
The fee for any license issued subsequent to December thirty-first
(31st) of any license year shall be one-half (½) of the annual fee with all
renewals thereafter being issued on July first (1st) of each year.
Section
635.060
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
635.090
AO:770
A. Adult Entertainment Business License. All persons desiring to secure a
license to operate an adult entertainment business under the provisions
of this Chapter shall make a notarized application with the City Clerk.
All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing
to conduct or operate the adult entertainment business and shall be
accompanied by the fee required by this Chapter. All applications shall
be submitted on a form supplied by the City Clerk and shall contain the
following required information:
1. The name, residence address, home telephone number, occupation,
date and place of birth and Social Security number of the applicant.
2. If the applicant is a naturalized citizen, the date and place of
naturalization.
3. The name of the adult entertainment business, a description of the
adult entertainment to be performed on the licensed premises, and
the name of the owner of the premises where the adult
entertainment business will be located.
4. If the applicant is a partnership, the names, residence address,
Social Security numbers and dates of births of all partners.
5. If the applicant is a corporation, the names, residence addresses,
Social Security numbers and dates of birth shall be provided for all
corporate officers, directors and for all stockholders who own ten
percent (10%) or greater interest in the corporation.
6. The addresses of the applicant, all partners, all corporate officers,
directors and applicable stockholders for the five (5) years
immediately prior to the date of application.
7. A description of the adult entertainment business history or similar
business history of the applicant, all partners, and of all corporate
officers, directors and applicable stockholders, including whether
any such person or entity, in previously operating in this or another
City, County or State, has had a business license revoked or
suspended, the location, date and reason therefor, and the activity
or occupation subjected to such action, suspension or revocation.
8. A statement of the business, occupation or employment of the
applicant, all partners, and all corporate officers, directors and
applicable stockholders for the three (3) years immediately
preceding the date of the application.
9. A statement from the applicant, each partner, and from each
corporate officer, director and applicable stockholders that each
person has not been convicted of, released from confinement for
conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on:
a. Any felony criminal act within five (5) years immediately
preceding the application, including any felony criminal act
Section
635.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.090
AO:771
involving sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of
prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related
offenses as defined in the Missouri Criminal Code, or involving
controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses
as defined in the Missouri Comprehensive Drug Control Act,
Substances Act or any other Statutes or ordinances.
b. Any ordinance violation criminal act within two (2) years
immediately preceding the application, including any
ordinance violation criminal act involving sexual offenses,
prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child,
pornography or related offenses as defined in the Missouri
Criminal Code, or involving controlled substances or illegal
drugs or narcotics offenses as defined in the Missouri
Comprehensive Drug Control Act or any other Statutes or
ordinances.
c. Any municipal ordinance violation within two (2) years
immediately preceding the application, where such municipal
ordinance violation involved sexual offenses, indecent
exposure, prostitution or sale of controlled substances, illegal
drugs or narcotics.
10. A full set of fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant, of all
partners if the applicant is a partnership, and of all corporate
officers, directors and applicable stockholders if the applicant is a
corporation; said fingerprints and photographs to be secured by
Maryville Public Safety Department.
11. If the applicant is a corporation, a current certificate of registration
issued by the Missouri Secretary of State.
12. A statement that the applicant, partners, corporate officers,
directors and applicable stockholders in the conduct of business
will not violate any ordinances of the City, the laws of the State or
laws of the United States.
13. Whether or not the proposed located, place or premises is within
one thousand (1,000) feet of any school, church, City park or
licensed child care center.
14. A statement signed under oath by the applicant that the applicant
has personal knowledge of the information contained in the
application, that the information contained therein is true and
correct, and that the applicant has read and understands the
provisions of this Chapter regulating adult entertainment
businesses.
15. Until the information and documentation required by this
Subsection is provided, the application shall constitute an
incomplete application and it shall not be processed.
Section
635.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
635.090
AO:772
B. Adult Entertainment Manager, Server Or Entertainer's License. All
persons desiring to secure a license under the provisions of this
Chapter to be an adult entertainment manager, server or entertainer
shall make a notarized application with the City Clerk. All applications
shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to be an adult
entertainment manager, server or entertainer, and shall be
accompanied by the fee required by this Chapter. All applications shall
be submitted on a form supplied by the City Clerk and shall require the
following information:
1. The applicant's name, home address, home telephone number, date
and place of birth, Social Security number, and all stage names or
nicknames used in entertaining.
2. If the applicant is a naturalized citizen, the date and place of
naturalization.
3. The name and address of each adult entertainment business where
the applicant intends to work as a manager, server or entertainer,
and an "intent to hire" statement from an adult entertainment
business that is licensed, or that has applied for a license, under
the provisions of this Chapter, indicating the adult entertainment
business intends to hire the applicant to manage, serve or entertain
on the premises.
4. A statement from the applicant, that the applicant has not been
convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of, or
diverted from prosecution on:
a. A felony criminal act within five (5) years immediately
preceding the application, including any felony criminal act
involving sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of
prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related
offenses as defined in the Missouri Criminal Code or involving
controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as
defined in the Missouri Comprehensive Drug Control Act, or
other Statutes or ordinances.
b. A ordinance violation criminal act within two (2) years
immediately preceding the application, including any
ordinance violation criminal act involving sexual offenses,
prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child,
pornography or related offenses as defined in the Missouri
Criminal Code, or involving controlled substances or illegal
drugs or narcotics offenses as defined in the Missouri
Comprehensive Drug Control Act or any other Statutes or
ordinances.
c. Any municipal ordinance violation within two (2) years
immediately preceding the application, where such municipal
ordinance violation involved sexual offenses, indecent
Section
635.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.090
AO:773
exposure, prostitution or sale of controlled substances, illegal
drugs or narcotics.
5. A full set of fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant to be
secured by the Maryville Public Safety Department.
6. Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of eighteen
(18) years of age at the time the application is submitted. The City
Clerk shall photocopy such documentation and retain said
photocopy. Any of the following shall be accepted as documentation
of age:
a. A motor vehicle operator's license issued by any State bearing
this applicant's photograph and date of birth.
b. An identification card issued by any State bearing the
applicant's photograph and date of birth.
c. An official and valid passport issued by the United States of
America.
d. An official and valid immigration card issued by the United
States of America;
e. Any other form of picture identification issued by a
governmental entity that is deemed reliable by the City Clerk.
7. A statement that the applicant in the conduct of business or
employment will not violate any ordinance of the City, the laws of
the State or laws of the United States in the conduct of business or
employment.
8. Until the information and documentation required by this
Subsection is provided, the application shall constitute an
incomplete application and it shall not be processed.
C. Application Processing.
1. Upon receipt of a complete application for an adult entertainment
license or an adult entertainment manager, server or entertainer
license, the City Clerk shall immediately transmit one (1) copy of
the application to the Director of Public Safety for investigation of
the application. In addition, in the case of an application for an
adult entertainment business license, the City Clerk shall transmit
a copy of the application to the Director of Public Works.
2. It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Safety or his/her
designee to investigate such application to determine whether the
information contained in the application is accurate and whether
the applicant is qualified to be issued the license sought. The
character, background, associates, financial investments and
indebtedness of the applicant shall be investigated by the Director
of Public Safety, who shall report the results of the investigation to
Section
635.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
635.090
AO:774
Section 635.100. Examination of Application — Issuance of License
— Disapproval. [R.O. 2008 §645.100; Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
Section 635.110. License — Ineligibility and Disqualification. [R.O.
2008 §645.110; Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
the City Clerk not later than ten (10) working days from the date
the application is received by the City Clerk.
3. It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to determine
whether the structure where the adult entertainment business will
be conducted complies with the requirements and meets the
standards of the applicable health, zoning, building code, fire and
property maintenance ordinances of the City. The Director of Public
Works shall report the results of the investigation to the City Clerk
not later than ten (10) working days from the date the application is
received by the City Clerk.
4. Upon receipt of the reports from the Director of Public Works, the
City Clerk shall furnish all pertinent information to the City
Council. The City Clerk shall schedule the application for
consideration by the City Council at the earliest meeting consistent
with the notification requirements established by law. The
applicant shall be notified in writing of the date when the City
Council will consider the application.
A. If the application for an adult entertainment business license or an
adult entertainment business manager, server or entertainer license is
in proper form and accompanied by the appropriate license fee, the City
Council shall examine the application, and after such examination, the
City Council shall, if the applicant is qualified, approve a license as
provided for by law. However, a license shall not be approved to any
person who has failed to render full, free and complete answers to all
questions contained on the application or who is ineligible by reason of
an affirmative answer to the questions contained in Section 635.090 or
who is ineligible pursuant to any provision of Section 635.110. The
record of the City Council shall reflect the action taken on the
application.
B. If the license application is granted, the City Council shall direct the
City Clerk to issue the proper license. The license shall state that it is
not transferrable to other persons or premises and shall state the
period for which it is issued. The license shall be posted at all times in a
conspicuous location in the place of business that is licensed or where
the licensee is working.
C. If the application for a license is disapproved, the applicant shall be
immediately notified by registered or certified mail to the applicant's
last known address, and the notification shall state the basis for such
disapproval. Any applicant aggrieved by the disapproval of a license
application may seek judicial review in the manner provided by law.
Section
635.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.110
AO:775
A. An application for an adult entertainment business license shall be
ineligible and disqualified if one (1) or more of the following conditions
exist:
1. The applicant's premises is located within one thousand (1,000)
feet of any school, church, City park or licensed child care center.
Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects from the nearest point on the
property line of the applicant's enterprise to the nearest point on
the property line of such school, church, City park or licensed day
care center.
2. The applicant's premises is located within one thousand (1,000)
feet of any other adult entertainment business for which there is a
license issued. Measurements shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest point on the property line of the applicant's enterprise to
the nearest point on the property line of such other adult
entertainment business.
3. The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested in
the application.
4. The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful
information on the application.
5. The applicant's proposed business premises does not comply with
or meet the requirements of the applicable health, zoning, building
code, fire and property maintenance ordinances of the City.
However, upon a subsequent showing that the premises meet said
requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the
application shall be eligible for reconsideration by the City Council.
6. The applicant, any partner if the applicant is a partnership, or any
officer, director or applicable stockholder if the applicant is a
corporation, has been convicted of, released from incarceration for
conviction of or diverted from prosecution on any of the crimes or
violations set forth in Section 635.090(A)(9) during the time period
set forth in said Section.
7. The applicant, any partner if the applicant is a partnership, or any
officer, director or applicable stockholder if the applicant is a
corporation, has had an adult entertainment license revoked or
suspended in this or any other City or State during the past five (5)
years.
B. An application for an adult entertainment manager, server or
entertainer license shall be ineligible or disqualified if one (1) or more
of the following conditions exist:
1. The applicant failed to provide all of the information requested in
the application.
Section
635.110
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
635.110
AO:776
Section 635.120. Death of Licensee Under Unexpired License. [R.O.
2008 §645.120; Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
In the event of the death of a licensee, any relative of such deceased
licensee, who shall meet the other requirements of this Chapter, may be
permitted to operate the business of the licensee for the remainder of the
period for which a license fee has been paid by the deceased licensee.
Section 635.130. Lost Licenses. [R.O. 2008 §645.130; Ord. No. 5158
§1, 8-23-1993]
Section 635.140. Suspension, Revocation, or Non-Renewal —
License. [R.O. 2008 §645.140; Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
2. The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful
information in the application.
3. The employer for whom the applicant intends to work does not
have a current adult entertainment license or is ineligible to
receive an adult entertainment business license.
4. The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for
conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on any of the crimes or
violations set forth in Section 635.090(B)(4) during the time period
set forth in said Section.
5. The applicant has had an adult entertainment manager, server or
entertainer license revoked or suspended in this or any other City
or State during past five (5) years.
A. Whenever proof that a license has been lost or destroyed is furnished by
a licensee, a duplicate in lieu thereof shall be issued by the City Clerk
upon payment of the sum of five dollars ($5.00) by the said licensee and
submission by the latter of an application for a duplicate license in the
form provided wherein true and complete answers must be given to the
following:
1. The date upon which the license was lost or destroyed.
2. The circumstances under which the license was lost or destroyed.
3. A request that a duplicate license be issued.
A. The City Clerk or Director of Public Safety may recommend to the City
Council the suspension, revocation or cancellation of any license
granted under the terms of this Chapter.
B. The City Council may consider suspension, revocation or non-renewal
whenever it has information that:
1. The owner or operator of an adult entertainment business or a
holder of an adult entertainment manager, server or entertainer
Section
635.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.140
AO:777
license has violated, knowingly allowed or permitted the violation
of any of the provisions of this Chapter.
2. There have been recurrent violations of provisions of this Chapter
that have occurred under such circumstances that the owner or
operator of an adult entertainment business knew or should have
known that such violations were committed.
3. The adult entertainment business license or the adult
entertainment manager, server or entertainer license was obtained
through false statements in the application for such license or
renewal thereof.
4. The adult entertainment business licensee or the adult
entertainment manager, server or entertainer licensee failed to
make a complete disclosure of all information in the application for
such license or renewal thereof.
5. The owner or operator, or any partner, or any corporate officer,
director or applicable stockholder holding an adult entertainment
business license has become disqualified from having a license by a
conviction or deferral as provided in Section 635.090(A)(9).
6. The holder of an adult entertainment manager, server or
entertainer license has become disqualified from having a license
by a conviction or deferral as provided in Section 635.090(B)(4).
7. The licensee, since the issuance of such license, has ceased to be
the person actually engaged in the active control and management
of the licensed establishment.
8. The operation of a licensed establishment has been discontinued or
abandoned.
9. Any other occurrence that would render the licensee or licensed
premises ineligible or unsuitable for a license under the provisions
of this Chapter.
C. Before it may suspend or revoke a license, the City Council must hold a
hearing to determine whether grounds for suspension or revocation
exist. Prior to the hearing, the City Council must give ten (10) days
written notice to the licensee setting out the reasons for the hearing
and alleged grounds for suspension or revocation and conditions under
which that hearing may be held, which notice shall be personally served
upon the licensee or a copy of which shall be left at the premises
covered by the license or shall be mailed by registered or certified mail
to the licensee at his/her last known address or residence address. The
notice shall set forth the date, place and time of said hearing.
D. The City Council shall have the right to examine books, records and
papers of each licensee or applicant for a license or renewal thereof.
For such purpose, the City Council shall have the power to issue
Section
635.140
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
635.140
AO:778
Section 635.150. Renewal. [R.O. 2008 §645.150; Ord. No. 5158 §1,
8-23-1993]
subpoenas over the signature of the City Clerk and all necessary
processes to subpoena witnesses; to compel by subpoena duces tecum
issued over the signature of the City Clerk the production of books,
records, papers and other evidence; and to administer oaths and take
testimony.
E. The applicant or licensee shall have the full right to be represented by
counsel, to produce witnesses and cross-examine all witnesses who may
appear against him or her at any hearing held hereunder. Subpoenas
shall be issued by the City Clerk for any witness whose presence is
desired at any hearing or proceeding held hereunder. Such subpoena
shall be served and return thereon made in the same manner as
provided by law in civil suits in this State.
Witnesses may also appear voluntarily at such hearings and testify.
Before any witness shall testify in any such hearing or proceeding he/
she shall be sworn by the Mayor to tell the truth and nothing but the
truth.
F. All decisions, findings and orders of the City Council adverse to a party
to the proceedings shall be in writing. Parties to the proceedings shall
be notified of the decision of the City Council by certified mail.
G. Based on the evidence produced at the hearing, the Governing Body
may take any of the following actions:
1. Suspend the license for up to ninety (90) days.
2. Revoke the license for the remainder of the license year.
3. Place the license holder on administrative probation for a period of
up to one (1) year, on the condition that no further violations of the
Chapter occur during the period of probation. If a subsequent
violation does occur, and after a hearing, the violation is
determined to have occurred, the license shall be revoked for the
remainder of the license year.
A. Each person holding a license under this Chapter and desiring such
license renewed, shall file with the City Clerk an application for license
renewal between the first (1st) day of May and the fifteenth (15th) day
of May each year. Said application shall update and certify in affidavit
form all information required pursuant to Section 635.090. A license
may be renewed by making application to the City Clerk on application
forms provided for that purpose.
B. Upon timely application and review as provided for a new license, a
license issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be renewed by
issuance of a new license in the manner provided in this Chapter.
Section
635.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.150
AO:779
Section 635.160. Judicial Review — Stay of Enforcement of Orders.
[R.O. 2008 §645.160; Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
Following the entry of an order by the City Council, suspending or revoking
a license issued pursuant to this Chapter, or disapproving the renewal
application for a license, such licensee or applicant may seek judicial review
in a manner provided by law. The City Council may stay enforcement of such
order for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days pending the filing
and/or final disposition of proceedings for judicial review.
C. If any affidavit contains information which does not justify such renewal
or if the City Council has other information that the applicant has not
met all the other requirements of this Chapter, the City Council may
refuse to renew such license. In the event of such refusal, the applicant
shall be given a hearing before the City Council in the same manner as
provided herein for revocation or suspension proceedings.
D. If the application for renewal of a license is not made during the time
provided in Subsection (A) of this Section, the expiration of such license
shall not be affected. Upon expiration, a new application shall be
required.
Section
635.150
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
635.160
AO:780
ARTICLE III
Enforcement
Section 635.170. Responsibility of Director of Public Safety —
Qualifications. [R.O. 2008 §645.170; Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
Section 635.180. Prohibited Interests of Certain Municipal Officers.
[R.O. 2008 §645.180; Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
The City Manager, City Clerk, Public Safety Director and any other member
of the Department of Public Safety, shall not have any interest, direct or
indirect, either proprietary or by the means of any loan, mortgage or other
lien, either for his/her own benefit, in a fiduciary capacity, or any other
manner, in or on the premises of an adult entertainment business; nor
shall any such person be or have any interest in any adult entertainment
business, either as owner, part-owner, partner, member of a syndicate,
shareholder or a corporation, agent or employee, either for his/her own
benefit or in a fiduciary capacity.
Section 635.190. Powers to Enforce Provisions of This Chapter.
[R.O. 2008 §645.190; Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
The Director or any member of the Department of Public Safety is hereby
empowered to make arrests in connection with the violation of any provision
of this Chapter or other ordinance of the City, to make searches and seizures
in relation to the same, to serve any subpoena or subpoena duces tecum or
other process relating to the enforcement of this Chapter.
Section 635.200. Inspections of Premises — Impoundment. [R.O.
2008 §645.200; Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
The Director or his/her authorized agent, shall have the right at any
reasonable time to inspect and the licensee shall allow inspection of any
license premises and all portions of the buildings thereof, including all
rooms, cellars, out buildings, passageways, closets, halls, yards and attics
and all buildings used in connection with the operations carried on under
said license and which are in his/her possession or under his/her control,
and to size any and all objects that may appear to be in violation of any
provisions of this Chapter and to hold in custody such objects as evidence
until any matter pertaining thereto be resolved. If not forfeited, objects shall
A. It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Safety (herein referred to as
the Director), with such aid as may be rendered by members of the
Department of Public Safety or other persons duly sanctioned by the
City Manager, to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
B. All adult entertainment businesses shall permit representatives of the
Maryville Public Safety Department or their agents, or any other City
Official acting in their official capacity, to inspect the premises as
necessary to insure the adult entertainment business is in compliance
with all applicable regulations and laws.
Section
635.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.200
AO:781
be returned to the lawful owner after the matter is finally adjudicated unless
the same are found to be contraband. If such objects are not claimed by the
lawful owner within ninety (90) days after final adjudication, they shall be
deemed forfeited.
Section 635.210. Duty to Inspect Places of Business. [R.O. 2008
§645.210; Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
The Director shall have the duty of regularly inspecting all adult
entertainment businesses, to maintain periodic checks on all licenses issued
pursuant to this Chapter thereby insuring licensees' full compliance with
the requirements of same and to determine as to the wholesomeness and
orderly manner in which any adult entertainment business is maintained
and operated.
Section 635.220. Refusal to Obey Subpoena. [R.O. 2008 §645.220;
Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
The failure or refusal of any person to obey all terms and conditions of any
subpoena issued by the City Council is hereby declared to be a ordinance
violation.
Section 635.230. Suspension Order Violations. [R.O. 2008 §645.230;
Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
Any licensee who shall open or operate any adult entertainment business
during the time of any suspension order shall be guilty of a ordinance
violation.
Section 635.240. Issuance and Execution of Warrant for Violation of
Chapter. [R.O. 2008 §645.240; Ord. No. 5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
Upon information by the City Prosecuting Attorney that any person has
failed or refused to observe all the terms and conditions of a subpoena
duces tecum issued or upon complaint filed by a Public Safety Officer or
other person authorized to effect arrests, the Municipal Judge shall issue
a warrant for the arrest of the person complained against, which warrant
shall be directed to the Director of Public Safety and shall be executed by
him/her or any Officer or member of the Department of Public Safety.
Section 635.250. Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §645.250; Ord. No. 5158 §1,
8-23-1993]
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
Chapter. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be adjudged guilty of
a ordinance violation and punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or be punished by incarceration for a period not to
exceed one (1) year, or by both such fine and incarceration. Each day's
violation of, or failure, refusal or neglect to comply with, any provision of
this Chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Section
635.200
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
635.260
AO:782
Section 635.260. Civil Enforcement. [R.O. 2008 §645.260; Ord. No.
5158 §1, 8-23-1993]
The City Attorney, in addition to or as an alternative remedy from the
provisions of Section 635.250, may seek to have the practices, violations or
failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter abated by an action for
injunction to be maintained in the appropriate Circuit Court of the State of
Missouri.
Section 635.270. Regulations. [R.O. 2008 §645.270; Ord. No. 5158
§1, 8-23-1993]
The City Clerk shall have the power to promulgate regulations, as may be
necessary and feasible for the carrying out of the duties of his/her office and
which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter.
Section
635.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
635.270
AO:783
Chapter 640
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
635.270
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
635.270
AO:784
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 640.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-201879]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
CAR SERVICE — A business offered to the public to transport passengers
and/or passengers and their property for a fixed charge, fee, or rate based
primarily upon the amount of time the vehicle is retained.
CHAUFFEUR AGENCY — A business which supplies a driver to operate a
motor vehicle which is owned or rented by the customer and not owned or
rented by the business.
COURTESY CAR — Any vehicle used by an establishment to transport
patrons of an establishment from said establishment to another location
and/or back to the same establishment and nowhere else, or any vehicle
used by an establishment arranging sightseeing or other similar tours for
the purpose of transporting patrons of such establishment without charge.
DIGITAL NETWORK — Any online-enabled technology application, website,
or system offered or utilized by a transportation network company (TNC)
that enables the prearrangement of rides with TNC drivers.
DRIVER — Every person physically in charge of, operating or driving a
vehicle for hire. A driver shall only be a person and shall not be a business
entity.
DRIVER'S PERMIT — A permit granted by the City to a qualified driver of a
vehicle for hire.
LIMOUSINE — A motor vehicle of more than five-passenger capacity,
excluding the driver, that is licensed by the Missouri Department of
Transportation, especially a luxurious automobile, normally driven by a
chauffeur but shall not include motor buses.
LIMOUSINE SERVICE — A business offered to the public to transport
passengers and/or passengers and their property by limousine.
MOTOR BUS — A motor vehicle having a seating capacity for ten (10) or
more persons, but shall not include motor buses owned or leased by the
City, State, school district, or Federal government.
PREARRANGED RIDE — The provision of transportation by a TNC driver to
a rider, beginning when a TNC driver accepts a ride requested by a rider
through a digital network controlled by a TNC, continuing while the TNC
driver transports a requesting rider, and ending when the last requesting
rider departs from the TNC vehicle. A prearranged ride shall not include:
Transportation provided using a taxicab, limousine, or other vehicle for
hire under this Chapter or Chapter 390, RSMo., or
1.
79.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 640, Taxicabs and Vehicles for
Hire, adopted and/or amended by Ord. No. 7185 § 1, 1-11-2010.
Section
640.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
640.010
AO:785
STREET — Any street, alley, avenue, lane, public place or highway in the
City.
TAXICAB — A vehicle for hire used by a taxicab business.
TAXICAB BUSINESS — A business offered to the public to transport
passengers and/or passengers and their property for a charge or fee
primarily upon the distance or mileage utilized while transporting the
passenger.
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY ("TNC") — A corporation,
partnership, sole proprietorship or other entity that is licensed under
Sections 387.700 to 387.734, RSMo., that uses a digital network to connect
TNC riders to TNC drivers who provide prearranged rides. A TNC shall not
be deemed to own, control, direct, operate, or manage the TNC vehicles or
TNC drivers that connect to its digital network, except where agreed to by
written contract, and is not a taxicab association or a for-hire vehicle owner.
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY (TNC) DRIVER — An individual
who operates a motor vehicle who:
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY (TNC) RIDER ("RIDER") — An
individual or persons who use a TNC's digital network to connect with a
TNC driver who provides prearranged rides to the rider in the TNC driver's
TNC vehicle between points chosen by the rider.
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY (TNC) VEHICLE ("TNC
VEHICLE") — A vehicle that is used by a TNC driver and is:
VEHICLE FOR HIRE — The service or business of transporting persons
and/or persons and their property for consideration, including a taxicab
business, car service, and other similar services but excluding limousines,
courtesy cars, and motor buses. For these purposes, vehicles for hire shall
not include school buses, medical assistance vehicles or other governmentfunded
transportation assistance vehicles.
Section 640.020. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or partnership to operate a
vehicle for hire business, limousine service, motor bus service or chauffeur
agency or drive for said businesses without first obtaining a permit.
2. A shared expense carpool or vanpool arrangement or service.
Receives connections to potential riders from a TNC in exchange for
payment of a fee to the TNC; and
1.
Uses a TNC vehicle to offer or provide a prearranged ride to riders upon
connection through a digital network controlled by a TNC in return for
compensation.
2.
1. Owned, leased, or otherwise authorized for use by the TNC driver; and
Not a taxicab, limousine, or vehicle for hire under provisions of this
Chapter or Chapter 390 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri.
2.
Section
640.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
640.030
AO:786
Section 640.030. Permit Period. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
All permits issued shall be issued for two (2) years with renewal applications
submitted to the City Clerk no later than January 15 of each even-numbered
year.
Section 640.040. Transfer Prohibited. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
A permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall not be transferred or
assigned.
Section 640.050. Display. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle for hire or limousine other than one (1)
operated pursuant to a valid permit to display any markings suggesting or
indicating it is a vehicle for hire. Whenever a vehicle operated as a vehicle
for hire is removed from service, the permit holder shall remove all marking
suggesting it is a vehicle for hire.
Section 640.060. Revocation Or Suspension. [Ord. No. 8052,
2-28-2018]
Section 640.070. Insurance Requirements. [Ord. No. 8052,
2-28-2018]
A. Upon notice and hearing conducted in the manner described in Section
600.250(B) through (J), the City Council may revoke or suspend any
permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, for any of the following reasons:
1. Failure to conduct the permitted business for a period of sixty (60)
days or longer.
2. Violation of the Municipal Code of the City of Maryville or Statutes
of the State.
3. Employment of unlicensed driver or drivers without a State or City
permit.
4. Operation of vehicles without insurance on file as prescribed by
this Chapter.
5. Aiding, abetting, or assisting the promotion or advancement of any
illegal activity, affair, or business.
6. Falsifying or omitting information on any application required by
this Chapter.
7. The violation of any condition or requirement of its permit.
A. Every holder of a permit shall at all times maintain financial
responsibility, as described in Chapter 303, RSMo., for each vehicle for
hire.
Section
640.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
640.070
AO:787
Section 640.080. Effect On Court Proceedings. [Ord. No. 8052,
2-28-2018]
The penalty established by the City Council by the revocation or suspension
of a permit pursuant to this Chapter shall not limit or affect the authority of
any other administrative body or any court to establish additional, separate
penalty or punishment for the same conduct.
Section 640.090. Violations And Penalties. [Ord. No. 8052,
2-28-2018]
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or any Section thereof
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than three (3)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day or part of a day during on or which any
person violates any provision of this Chapter.
B. Every holder of a driver's permit shall at all times carry in the vehicle
for hire operated by such permittee proof of financial responsibility in
accordance with Sections 303.024 and 303.160, RSMo.
C. Evidence of insurance coverage as described in Section 303.024,
RSMo., shall be presented to the City Clerk at the time applicant applies
for a permit. It shall be the responsibility of such permittee to keep the
insurance coverage in full force and effect during the term of the permit
and to present to the City Clerk evidence of any renewal of such
insurance coverage which occurs during the term of such permit. Such
certificate shall provide that thirty (30) days' advance written notice
shall be given to the City in the event of any change in or cancellation of
such insurance.
Section
640.070
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
640.090
AO:788
ARTICLE II
Vehicles For Hire
Section 640.100. Applications. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
Section 640.110. Vehicle For Hire — Investigation Of Application.
[Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
A. Any person desiring to secure a permit to engage in, operate or conduct
a vehicle for hire business within the City shall file with the City Clerk a
written application therefor, giving the following information:
1. The full name and address of the principal place of business and
other pertinent information of the applicant and, if a partnership,
the name and residence address of all partners and, if a
corporation, the name and residence address of the officers and
directors; the trade name under which the applicant does or
proposes to do business; the social security number and date of
birth of the applicant and, if a partnership or corporation, then the
tax identification number of the applicant.
2. Whether or not the applicant, or any persons listed in Subsection
(A)(1) above, have been convicted of the violation of any Federal or
State felony law, or any Federal or State misdemeanor involving the
use or threat of force or violence, sale of drugs, sexual abuse or,
within the previous two (2) years, has been convicted of violating
any provision of this Chapter or has ever had a license or other
permit issued by the City revoked or suspended. The applicant shall
supply a release for a criminal records check by the Missouri State
Highway Patrol or similar agency to verify the information provided
in this Section.
3. Whether or not the applicant or any person listed in Subsection
(A)(1) above has unpaid claims or unsatisfied judgments against
them for damages resulting from the negligent operation of a
vehicle.
4. The number of vehicles proposed to be operated and a complete
identification of each, including the make, model, vehicle
identification number of each vehicle known to be used in the
service and the registered owner. If any of the above information on
the application changes at any time prior to or after the actual
permit is issued, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
provide updated information to the City Clerk prior to the actual
use of the vehicle.
5. Evidence of current proof of financial responsibility as required by
Section 640.070.
A. No permit to operate a vehicle for hire business shall be issued unless
the applicant has been determined by the Director of Public Safety to
Section
640.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
640.110
AO:789
Section 640.120. Permit Fee. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
Upon application or renewal for a vehicle for hire permit, an application fee
in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus an additional five dollars
($5.00) for each vehicle in excess of one (1) is required.
have otherwise met all of the requirements for the license. When such
conditions have been met, the Director advises the City Clerk to issue a
permit.
B. In an effort to offset the expense of the investigation process, applicants
shall pay a non-refundable investigation fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00), whether applying for or renewing a vehicle for hire permit.
C. Grounds to deny a permit to operate shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
1. Whenever an applicant files an incomplete application.
2. Whenever an applicant makes a false declaration on the
application.
3. Any conviction or guilty plea of a Federal or State felony within the
past ten (10) years or any Federal or State misdemeanor involving
the use of threat of force or violence, sale of drugs, or sexual abuse
within the past five (5) years or of the municipal violation of leaving
the scene of an accident, driving while intoxicated (DWI), or failure
to report an accident or any violation of this Article or has had a
permit issued under this Article revoked as a result of an alcoholrelated
offense within the past three (3) years.
4. Whenever an applicant has outstanding judgments against him for
damages resulting from the negligent operation of a vehicle.
5. The applicant has had a previous permit to operate a vehicle for
hire service suspended or revoked in this or any other city or state,
unless the Director finds that the cause of such suspension or
revocation has been removed or is no longer applicable.
6. The Director may, if he/she deems appropriate, give the applicant
an opportunity to correct any problem found prior to rejecting the
application.
7. An applicant who has been denied a permit to operate shall not be
eligible for a permit for a period of one (1) year following the
denial.
Section
640.110
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
640.120
AO:790
ARTICLE III
Vehicles For Hire Drivers
Section 640.130. Driver's Permit Required. [Ord. No. 8052,
2-28-2018]
No person shall drive a vehicle used in a vehicle for hire business within the
City limits, unless such person has in their possession a currently effective
and valid vehicle for hire driver's permit which has been issued as provided
in this Chapter.
Section 640.140. Permit Holder's Responsibility. [Ord. No. 8052,
2-28-2018]
No person, other than the holder of a vehicle for hire driver's permit, shall
be allowed by any person engaged in the operation of a vehicle for hire with
the City to operate or drive a vehicle for hire within the limits of the City.
Section 640.150. Applications. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
Section 640.160. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
A. Any person desiring to be physically in charge of, operate or drive a
vehicle for hire within the City shall file with the City Clerk a written
application therefor, giving the following information:
1. The full name, social security number, copy of current driver's
license, date of birth, residence, and whether such applicant has
been previously permitted and, if so, whether such license has ever
been revoked. Such applicant shall both sign and swear to the truth
of the contents of the application.
2. Whether or not the applicant, or any persons listed in Subsection
(A)(1) above, have been convicted of the violation of any Federal or
State felony law, or any Federal or State misdemeanor involving the
use or threat of force or violence, sale of drugs, sexual abuse or,
within the previous two (2) years, has been convicted of violating
any provision of this Chapter. The applicant shall supply a release
for a criminal records check by the Missouri State Highway Patrol
or similar agency to verify the information provided in this Section.
3. In an effort to offset the expense of the investigation process,
applicants shall pay a non-refundable investigation fee of twentyfive
dollars ($25.00), whether applying for or renewing a driver's
permit.
4. Evidence of current proof of financial responsibility as required by
Section 640.070.
A. Every applicant for a driver's permit shall:
1. Be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of application.
Section
640.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
640.160
AO:791
Section 640.170. Display. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
The holder of a vehicle for hire driver's permit shall have such permit
prominently displayed in the vehicle for hire operated by him at all times
such vehicle for hire is in operation.
Section 640.180. Driver's Permit Fee. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
Upon application for a driver's permit, an application fee in the amount
of twenty dollars ($20.00) is required to cover the cost of preparing the
permit. Each driver's permit will contain a photograph of the permittee for
proper identification.
2. Possess a valid Class "E" Missouri driver's license.
3. Not have been convicted of, plead guilty to, or plead no contest to,
regardless of whether sentence was imposed:
a. Any felony, within the last five (5) years, a material element of
which involves fraud, dishonesty, the use of threat or violence,
the possession or sale of illegal drugs, or stealing,
b. Any misdemeanor, infraction, or ordinance violation, within the
last two (2) years, a material element of which involves fraud,
dishonesty, the use of or threat of violence, the possession or
sale of illegal drugs, or stealing.
c. Any offense involving the operation of a motor vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol and drugs within the last twelve
(12) months, or more than one (1) such offense during the last
five (5) years.
Section
640.160
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
640.180
AO:792
ARTICLE IV
Transportation Network Company Services
Section 640.190. Purpose. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure the safety, reliability and costeffectiveness
of transportation network company (TNC) services within
the jurisdiction of Maryville and to preserve and enhance access to these
important transportation options for residents and visitors to Maryville.
Section 640.200. Not Other Carriers. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
TNCs or TNC drivers are not common carriers, contract carriers or motor
carriers, as defined in this Chapter or Chapter 390, RSMo., taxicab, a
taxicab service or association, or a vehicle for hire service. A TNC driver
shall not be required to register the TNC vehicle such driver uses to provide
prearranged rides as a commercial or vehicle for hire.
Section 640.210. TNC Permit Required. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
A TNC shall not operate in the City of Maryville without first having
obtained a permit from the Missouri Department of Revenue. A TNC must
also maintain an agent for service of process in the State of Missouri.
Section 640.220. Fare Collected For Services. [Ord. No. 8052,
2-28-2018]
On behalf of a TNC driver, a TNC may charge a fare for the services
provided to passengers; provided that, if a fare is collected from a
passenger, the TNC shall disclose to passengers the fare calculation method
on its website or within the software application service. The TNC shall also
provide passengers with the applicable rates being charged and the option
to receive an estimated fare before the passenger enters the TNC driver's
vehicle.
Section 640.230. Identification Of TNC Vehicles And Drivers. [Ord.
No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
The TNC's digital network shall display a picture of the TNC driver and the
license plate number of the motor vehicle utilized for providing prearranged
rides before the rider enters the TNC driver's vehicle.
Section 640.240. Electronic Receipt. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
A. Within a reasonable period of time following the completion of a trip, a
TNC shall transmit an electronic receipt to the passenger on behalf of
the TNC driver that lists:
1. The origin and destination of the trip;
2. The total time and distance of the trip if the fare is based on actual
time and distance traveled; and
Section
640.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
640.240
AO:793
Section 640.250. Limitations On TNCs. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
Section 640.260. Zero Tolerance For Drug Or Alcohol Use. [Ord. No.
8052, 2-28-2018]
Section 640.270. TNC Driver Requirements. [Ord. No. 8052,
2-28-2018]
3. The total fare paid, if any.
A. All TNC drivers shall be independent contractors and not employees of
the TNC if all of the following conditions are met:
1. The TNC does not prescribe specific hours during which a TNC
driver must be logged into the TNC's digital network;
2. The TNC imposes no restrictions on the TNC driver's ability to
utilize digital networks from other TNCs; and
3. The TNC does not restrict a TNC driver from engaging in any other
occupation or business.
4. The TNC and TNC driver agree in writing that the driver is an
independent contractor with respect to the TNC.
5. Except when agreed to by written contract, a TNC driver is not an
agent of the TNC.
A. A TNC shall implement a zero tolerance intoxicating substance policy
for TNC drivers that disallows any amount of intoxication of the TNC
driver while providing transportation network services. The TNC shall
provide notice of the zero tolerance policy on its website, as well as
procedures to report a complaint about a driver with whom a rider was
matched and whom the rider reasonably suspects was under the
influence of drugs or alcohol during the course of the trip.
B. Upon receipt of such rider complaint alleging a violation of the zero
tolerance policy, the TNC shall immediately suspend such TNC ability to
accept trip requests through the TNC's digital network as soon as
possible, and shall conduct an investigation into the reported incident.
The suspension shall last the duration of the investigation.
C. The TNC shall maintain records relevant to the enforcement of this
requirement for a period of at least two (2) years from the date that a
rider complaint is received by the TNC.
A. Before allowing an individual to accept trip requests through a TNC's
digital network, the TNC shall:
1. Require the individual to register with the TNC by submitting
information regarding his or her address, age, driver's license,
motor vehicle registration, automobile liability insurance, and
other information required by the TNC;
Section
640.240
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
640.270
AO:794
Section 640.280. Inspection Requirement. [Ord. No. 8052,
2-28-2018]
A TNC shall not allow a TNC driver to accept trip requests through the
TNC's digital network unless any motor vehicle or vehicles that a TNC
driver will use to provide prearranged rides meets the inspection
requirements of Section 307.350, RSMo.
2. Conduct, or have a third party conduct, a local and national
criminal background check for each applicant that shall include:
a. Multistate/multijurisdiction criminal records locator or other
similar commercial nationwide database with a primary source
search capability; and
b. A check of the United States Department of Justice National
Sex Offender public website; and
3. Obtain and review, or have a third party obtain and review, a
driving history research report for such individual.
B. The TNC shall not permit an individual to act as a TNC driver on its
digital network who:
1. Has had more than three (3) moving violations in the prior threeyear
period, or one (1) major violation in the prior three-year period
(including, but not limited to, attempting to evade a Law
Enforcement Officer, reckless driving, or driving on a suspended or
revoked license);
2. Has been convicted, within the past seven (7) years, of driving
under the influence of drugs or alcohol, fraud, sexual offenses, use
of a motor vehicle to commit a felony, a crime involving property
damage, and/or theft, an act of violence, or an act of terror;
3. Is a match in the United States Department of Justice National Sex
Offender public website;
4. Does not possess a valid driver's license;
5. Does not possess proof of registration for the motor vehicle or
vehicles used to provide prearranged rides;
6. Does no possess proof of automobile liability insurance for the
motor vehicle or vehicles used to provide prearranged rides; or
7. Is not at least nineteen (19) years of age.
C. A TNC driver who is qualified to accept trip requests through a TNC's
digital network under this Section shall not be required to obtain any
other State or local license or permit to provide prearranged rides.
Section
640.270
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
640.290
AO:795
Section 640.290. No Street Hails. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
A TNC driver shall not solicit or accept street hails.
Section 640.300. No Discrimination; Accessibility. [Ord. No. 8052,
2-28-2018]
Section 640.310. Records. [Ord. No. 8052, 2-28-2018]
A. A TNC shall adopt a policy of non-discrimination with respect to riders
and potential riders and notify TNC drivers of such policy.
B. TNC drivers shall comply with all applicable laws regarding nondiscrimination
against riders or potential riders.
C. TNC drivers shall comply with all applicable laws relating to
accommodation of service animals.
D. A TNC shall not impose additional charges for providing services to
persons with physical disabilities because of those disabilities.
A. A TNC shall maintain the following customer records:
1. Individual trip records of riders for at least one (1) year from the
date each trip was provided.
2. Individual records of TNC drivers at least until the one-year
anniversary of the date on which a TNC driver's relationship with
the TNC has ended.
Section
640.290
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
640.310
AO:796
Chapter 700
COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
Section 700.010. Combined System Established. [R.O. 2008
§700.010; Ord. No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
It is hereby found, determined and declared to be necessary for the public
health, safety, welfare and benefit of the City and its inhabitants that
the waterworks and the sewerage system of the City, including all future
improvements and extensions thereto, be combined and that they shall
henceforth be operated and maintained as a Combined Waterworks and
Sewerage System.
Section 700.020. Operation and Maintenance. [R.O. 2008 §700.020;
Ord. No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
Section 700.030. Department of Natural Resources Permit
Requirement. [R.O. 2008 §700.030; Ord. No. 6217 §1, 8-9-1999]
A. Henceforth, from and after the final passage of this Title, (May 11,
1992), the waterworks and the sewerage system of the City, including
all future improvements and extensions thereto, whether to the
waterworks or to the sewerage system or to both, shall be and the same
are combined, and it is hereby declared that said waterworks and said
sewerage system, including all future improvements and extensions
thereto as aforesaid, henceforth shall be operated and maintained as a
Combined Waterworks and Sewerage System.
B. It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the
City to collect rates, fees and charges for the use of and services
provided by the System. The proceeds of such charges so derived will
be used for the purpose of operating and maintaining the System;
paying the principal of and interest on all revenue bonds or other
obligations of the City now outstanding or hereinafter issued or
incurred ("Revenue Bonds", as hereinafter defined) that are payable
solely from the revenue of the System (the "System Revenues", as
hereinafter defined); and providing funds sufficient to meet the
requirements of the ordinances of the City authorizing the issuance of
the Revenue Bonds (the "Bond Ordinances", as hereinafter defined),
including replacement of the System.
A. No individual or entity, including the City of Maryville Water
Department, the Nodaway County Public Water Supply District No. 1,
nor any other person(s) or entity shall construct or attempt to construct
a public water main within the corporate limits of the City of Maryville,
Missouri, unless and until all of the following requirements have been
satisfied:
Section
640.310
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
700.030
AO:797
Section 700.040. Annual Review of Water Rates. [R.O. 2008
§700.040; Ord. No. 6220 §§1 — 3, 9-10-1999]
1. A complete set of construction and building plans and
specifications must be submitted in advance to the engineer
designated by the City of Maryville and receive written approval
from the engineer.
2. Said construction and building plans and specifications must be
submitted to the Missouri Department of Natural Resources Public
Drinking Water Program and said Department of Natural
Resources has issued all appropriate permits required by all
Federal and State laws and/or regulations.
A. In August of every year and in conjunction with the review of the annual
budget, the City Manager shall submit a report to the Council of the
City of Maryville, Missouri, concerning the adequacy of municipal
water rates. The report shall, as a minimum, address the following
concerns:
1. An estimate of the total revenues generated by municipal water
rates during the present budget year from all sources of revenue.
2. An estimate of the municipal water revenues to be generated in the
coming budget year.
3. An estimate of the total expenditures incurred by the water utility
during the present budget year.
4. A statement of all funds placed in a reserve account during the
present budget year for replacement of all equipment and facilities
at the Municipal Water Treatment Plant.
5. A statement of the funds to be placed in the reserve account during
the next budget year for the replacement of all equipment and
facilities at the Municipal Water Treatment Plant.
6. A statement of all funds placed in a reserve account during the
present budget year for replacement of all components of the water
distribution system.
7. A statement of the funds to be placed in the reserve account during
the next budget year for the replacement of all components of the
water distribution system.
B. Based on the above-cited data, the City Manager shall prepare a report
which analyzes the adequacy of the City's water rates to meet the
spending and savings goals for the next budget year. The City Manager
shall make a recommendation for changing water rates adequate to
meet such spending and savings goals.
C. Upon receipt of the City Manager's report, the Council of the City of
Maryville, Missouri shall set municipal water rates to enable the City to
Section
700.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
700.040
AO:798
Section 700.050. Water Conservation Plan. [R.O. 2008 §700.050;
Ord. No. 6298 §1, 6-12-2000; Ord. No. 7509 §1, 3-25-2013]
meet its budgetary goals for spending and payment to all reserve
accounts.
A. General. This Water Conservation Plan provides guidelines for the
implementation of water conservation measures by customers who
receive potable water originating at the Water Treatment Plant of the
City of Maryville, Missouri. In order to provide an adequate supply of
potable water for human consumption, and to protect the health, safety
and welfare of those who rely upon ready availability of water produced
at the Maryville Water Treatment Plant, conservation measures will be
implemented in phases. The use of a graduated process will serve to
address crisis conditions by responding with conservation measures
necessary to address the situation which result in the minimum impact
on water use by customers.
B. Definitions. The following terms as used in this Plan shall have the
following meanings:
BASE MONTH — The most recent, similar non-drought month. The
base month shall be designated by the City Manager upon
implementation of Phase 4 of the Plan. For purposes of illustration, if
the phase was implemented in July 2000, the base month would be the
most recent July or similar water use month which was not impacted by
a drought or other, similar factors.
CITY — The City of Maryville.
CITY MANAGER — The Chief Administrative Officer of the City,
including the City Manager, Acting City Manager or his/her designee.
PLANT — The Maryville Water Treatment Plant.
WATER — Potable (treated) water processed at the Maryville Water
Treatment Plant.
C. Phases Of Conservation.
1. Voluntary conservation — public agencies and large users.
a. Threshold. Based upon information provided by the
Superintendent of the Maryville Water Treatment Center,
Subsection (C)(1) may be implemented at the direction of the
City Manager when the City Manager concludes that the daily
demand for water by customers of the City is anticipated to
exceed the amount of water that can be produced by the plant
during that demand period.
b. Notification. Contact shall be made with the largest users of
water from the City, and with all public agencies and
governmental units who use water treated by the City.
Section
700.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
700.050
AO:799
c. Plan. Customers contacted under this phase shall be requested
to immediately implement voluntary methods to reduce their
use of water which is treated at the Maryville Water Treatment
Plant, including both actual reduction of water use and
implementation of procedures designed to delay water demand
during peak demand periods.
2. Voluntary conservation — all users.
a. Threshold. Subsection (C)(2) may be implemented at the
direction of the City Manager when the actual daily demand for
water by customers of the City exceeds the amount of water
that was produced by the plant during that demand period.
b. Notification. Informational notices and news releases on water
conservation shall be distributed, and such additional contacts
with water users will be made as deemed appropriate.
c. Plan. All who receive water from the Maryville Water
Treatment Plant, including individuals, businesses, industries,
public agencies, governmental units and institutions shall be
requested to immediately implement voluntary methods to
reduce their use of water treated at the Maryville Water
Treatment Plant, including reduction of water use and
implementation of procedures designed to delay water demand
during peak demand periods.
3. Mandatory restriction on outdoor water use.
a. Threshold. Subsection (C)(3) shall be implemented at the
direction of the City Manager when the City of Maryville is
unable to maintain a twenty-four-foot water level at either the
Edwards Street Water Tower, North Water Tower, or South
Water Tower for a continuous period which exceeds twentyfour
(24) hours.
b. Notification. Informational notices and news releases shall be
distributed, and such additional contacts with water users will
be made as deemed appropriate.
c. Plan.
(1) Customers who receive water from the Maryville Water
Treatment Plant shall be directed to implement further
methods of water conservation, including actual reduction
of water demand;
(2) The use of water which has been treated at the Maryville
Water Treatment Plant for any outdoor use is prohibited.
This prohibition includes watering of lawns, gardens,
shrubs, other vegetation, washing of sidewalks, driveways
and motor vehicles. However, this prohibition shall not
Section
700.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
700.050
AO:800
apply to the use of water for washing motor vehicles at
a commercial car wash business, nor the use of water for
the watering of livestock or vegetation at a commercial
business.
(3) All business and commercial customers, industries, public
agencies, governmental units and institutions, and all
large users of water shall be directed to prepare for the
potential of further water restrictions, including being
advised to make arrangements to obtain potable (treated)
water from sources other than the City of Maryville;
(4) Pursuant to ordinance, officers of the Maryville Public
Safety Department shall issue a summons for any violation
of this phase of the Water Conservation Plan.
4. Mandatory restriction to base month demand.
a. Threshold. Subsection (C)(4) shall be implemented at the
direction of the City Manager when the City of Maryville is
unable to maintain a twenty-two-foot water level at either the
Edwards Street Water Tower, North Water Tower, or South
Water Tower for a continuous period which exceeds twentyfour
(24) hours.
b. Notification. Notices shall be issued to all business and
commercial customers, industries, public agencies,
governmental units and institutions and large users of water
produced at the Maryville Water Treatment Plant. Said notices
shall advise each of the requirements of Phase 4, and shall
advise each of their maximum allowable daily and monthly
water use level based upon the applicable base month.
c. Plan.
(1) All restrictions and plans implemented in Subsection
(C)(3) shall continue;
(2) The use of water which has been treated at Maryville
Water Treatment Plant by the commercial car wash
business, for the commercial watering of livestock or for
the commercial watering of vegetation is prohibited;
(3) The use of water treated at the Maryville Water Treatment
Plant on both a daily and monthly basis by any business or
commercial customer, industry, public agency,
governmental unit or institution shall not exceed their
average level of water use during the designated base
month;
Section
700.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
700.050
AO:801
(4) Pursuant to ordinance, officers of the Maryville Public
Safety Department shall issue a summons for any violation
of this phase of the Water Conservation Plan.
d. Penalty. Any water customer who exceeds the base level use
limitation implemented by this phase shall have a surcharge
added to its water bill equal to fifty percent (50%) of the total
monthly bill.
5. Mandatory rationing — reduction to seventy-five percent (75%) of
base month demand (non-domestic users):
a. Threshold. Subsection (C)(5) is implemented at the direction of
the City Manager when the City of Maryville is unable to
maintain a twenty-foot water level at either the Edwards Street
Water Tower, North Water Tower, or South Water Tower for a
continuous period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours.
b. Notification. Notices shall be issued to business and
commercial customers, industries, public agencies,
governmental units and institutions and domestic users,
notifying them of the requirements and penalties associated
with this phase, and insuring that each is aware of its
maximum allowable daily and monthly use level based upon
the applicable base month.
c. Plan.
(1) All restrictions described in Subsection (C)(4) shall
continue;
(2) The use of water treated at the Maryville Water Treatment
Plant on both a daily and monthly basis by any business or
commercial customer, industry, public agency,
governmental unit or institution shall not exceed seventyfive
percent (75%) of its allowable water use level during
the designated base month;
(3) Pursuant to ordinance, officers of the Maryville Public
Safety Department shall issue a summons for any violation
of this phase of the Water Conservation Plan.
d. Penalty. Any water customer who exceeds the limitation to
seventy-five percent (75%) of base water level use
implemented by this phase shall have a surcharge added to the
water bill equal to seventy-five percent (75%) of its total
monthly bill.
6. Cessation of commercial and industrial usage and ration domestic
usage.
a. Threshold. Subsection (C)(6) shall be implemented at the
direction of the City Manager when the City of Maryville is
Section
700.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
700.050
AO:802
unable to deliver treated water to its customers at the level
necessary to provide adequate pressure within the City's water
distribution system in order to prevent back flow situations.
b. Notification. Notices will be made as follows:
(1) All business or commercial customers, industries, public
agencies, and governmental units and institutions will be
notified that their water service by the City of Maryville is
terminated, and they should immediately utilize
alternative sources for potable (treated) water;
(2) Domestic users will be notified of the requirements and
penalties associated with this phase.
c. Plan.
(1) Use of water which has been treated at the Maryville
Water Treatment Plant at any business or commercial
customer, industry, public agency, governmental unit or
institution is prohibited.
(2) The use of water treated at the Maryville Water Treatment
Plant on both a daily and monthly basis by domestic users
shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of their allowable
water use level during the designated base month.
d. Penalty. Any water customer who exceeds the limitation to fifty
percent (50%) of base water level use implemented by this
phase shall have a surcharge added to the water bill equal to
one hundred percent (100%) of its total monthly bill.
Additionally, any user who exceeds this limitation shall be
immediately disconnected from water service.
D. Uses Exempt From This Plan. In addition to any exemptions described
above, the following shall be exempt from the provisions stated in this
Plan, although each exempt user shall be requested to implement
voluntary methods to reduce its use of water treated at the Maryville
Water Treatment Plant, including both actual reduction of water use
and the implementation of procedures designed to delay water demand
during peak periods:
1. St. Francis Hospital & Health Services and any other hospital;
2. All nursing homes and other institutions identified by the City
Manager as being directly involved in the delivery of health care
services;
3. Any specific use as approved by the City Manager, including any
critical system facility which is identified;
4. The Fire Division of the Maryville Public Safety Department;
Section
700.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
700.050
AO:803
Chapter 705
WATER AND SEWER
Editor's Note — Ord. no. 6776 §1, adopted August 22, 2005, repealed ch.
705 and enacted the new provisions set out herein. Former ch. 705 derived
from ord. no. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992; ord. no. 5187 §1, 2-14-1993; ord. no.
5195 §1, 3-14-1994; ord. no. 5383 §1, 2-5-1996; ord. no. 5384 §1, 2-5-1996;
ord. no. 5385 §1, 2-5-1996; ord. no. 5388 §1, 2-26-1996; ord. no. 5569 §1,
7-28-1997; ord. no. 6027 §1, 2-9-1998; ord. no. 6262 §1, 2-28-2000; ord.
no. 6322 §1, 9-11-2000; ord. no. 6398 §1, 8-13-2001; ord. no. 6703 §1,
10-25-2004.
5. The Polk Township Volunteer Fire Department.
Section
700.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
700.050
AO:804
ARTICLE I
Fees, Deposits and Billing
Section 705.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §705.010; Ord. No. 6776
§§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed:
CUSTOMER — A purchaser of utility service.
DEPARTMENT — Utility Service Billing Department.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Finance Department for the City of
Maryville.
ESTIMATED BILL — A bill for utility services calculated using one (1) or
more estimated meter readings for the billing period.
NEW CUSTOMER — A purchaser of utility service not currently receiving
service.
RENDITION OF BILL BY THE CITY — The actual date on which the bill was
mailed by the City.
UTILITY SERVICES — Water service, sewer service or combination thereof.
Section 705.020. Utility Service Required. [R.O. 2008 §705.020;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
Section 705.030. Application for Utility Service. [R.O. 2008
§705.030; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
A. Within sixty (60) days after receiving official notice, the owner of any
house, building or structure used for human occupancy, employment or
recreation located in the City shall install all necessary piping and
plumbing and shall connect the same to the utility service system of the
City in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
B. Without advance written authorization from the City, no customer or
other person shall sell or offer for sale at a profit any utility service
purchased from the City.
C. Any customer reselling utility service shall furnish evidence that the
resale is in compliance with this Code and shall install submeters and
maintain records at the customer's expense for such purpose as
required by the City.
A. Customers shall apply for utility service at the location designated by
the City Manager or his/her designee.
B. Each customer shall complete either the application for utility service
or the application for transfer of utility service, as applicable.
Section
705.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.030
AO:805
Section 705.040. Commencement of Utility Services. [R.O. 2008
§705.040; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
Section 705.050. Utility Service Deposits. [R.O. 2008 §705.050; Ord.
No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009;
Ord. No. 7343 §§1 — 2, 7-25-2011]
C. Prior to receiving utility service, a separate application must be filed for
each service address and the following conditions shall be met:
1. A permanently assigned address number shall be obtained from the
City and be displayed in a visible location on the property.
2. Utility service shall be delivered only upon the City determining
that it is practical to render utility service at such location and that
the customer's application for service has been approved.
D. At the time of the filing of the application, the customer shall fully
satisfy all applicable deposits and fees, including meter charges, main
contribution charges, tapping fees, security deposits, connection fees
and deposits, utility service initiation fees and transfer fees.
E. No customer shall be refused service because of race, gender, creed,
national origin, marital status, number of dependents.
A. Service Initiation Fee. At the time of the application for new utility
service, the customer shall pay a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) service
initiation fee. This provision shall only be applicable to the initiation of
service at a new construction site or service by a new customer.
B. Transfer Fee. Any existing customer requesting a transfer of utility
service to a utility service location which currently receives utility
service shall pay a fifteen dollar ($15.00) transfer fee which shall be
paid prior to the transfer of the service.
A. Requirement. For water and/or sewer service, prior to connection,
reconnection or delivery of utility service, each customer shall pay a
security deposit as a condition of receiving utility service, which deposit
shall not bear interest.
B. Single-Family Use Deposit. A request for utility services for a singlefamily
dwelling or single-family residential unit within a larger
residential building shall include a utility service deposit for water and
sewer service of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) service
deposit fee for a sewer only, single-family residential dwelling shall be
fifty-five dollars ($55.00).
C. Multiple Residential Unit Deposit. A request for utility services for a
multiple residential rental unit complex by a single landlord shall
include a security deposit based upon the following schedule:
Section
705.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.050
AO:806
Number of Units Amount of Security Deposit
1 to 25 $20.00 per unit or $350.00, whichever is
greater
26 to 199 $10.00 per unit or $1,000.00, whichever is
greater
200 or more $3,000.00
D. Non-Residential Service Deposit. Any request for utility services shall
be based on the meter size for the facility serviced as follows:
Meter Size
(inches) Amount of Deposit
3/4 inch $150.00
1 inch $200.00
1 1/2 inch $275.00
2 inch $350.00
4 inch $450.00
6 inch $550.00
E. Deposits For Property Owners Of Multiple Properties. The City shall
have sole discretion to negotiate a reasonable deposit fee on property
owners who own multiple properties which transfer frequently in a
short time frame. The City Manager or his/her designee shall have final
approval of this deposit amount and manner of structuring the fee.
F. Portable Water Meters. If a portable water meter is requested, the
customer shall pay a utility service deposit consistent with the actual
cost of the meter.
G. Deposit Or Refund. After a customer maintains at least three (3)
consecutive years of continuous, timely payments of his/her utility
service account, any security deposit previously paid shall be refunded
as credit to the customer's utility service account. Any customer who so
qualifies shall not be required to maintain a utility service deposit, but
shall pay any applicable service initiation fee or service transfer fee.
After the requirement for a security deposit is terminated as provided
herein, if the utility service of the customer is disconnected for nonpayment
of a utility bill, the requirement for a security deposit shall be
reinstated, and the applicable deposit shall be paid by the customer
prior to reconnection or continuation of the utility service.
H. Utility service deposits may be transferred, waived, or applied to a new
residence or location if the customer is in good standing as described in
Subsection (G) above and relocates, completes the necessary
application and satisfies the applicable fee for service initiation and/or
service transfer fee.
Section
705.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.050
AO:807
Section 705.060. Billing and Payment. [R.O. 2008 §705.060; Ord.
No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Section 705.070. Estimated Bills. [R.O. 2008 §705.070; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
I. Upon termination of utility service, any deposit shall be credited
against the final utility service bill and the balance, if any, shall be
returned to the customer.
J. The City shall maintain a record of all deposits received from
customers, including the name of the customer, the date and amount of
deposit, the location of the premises for which the deposit is initially
made and each successive location to which the deposit is applicable.
A. Except for final bills, utility service billing statements shall be rendered
on the last working day of the month and shall be due and payable on or
before the fifteenth (15th) day of the following month. All applicable
taxes, including sales tax, shall be included in the utility service
charges.
B. Except as otherwise provided, the billing statement shall reflect the
customer's actual utility service usage and shall provide for billing in a
reasonable, predictable manner.
C. Statements and notices shall be deemed to have been rendered when
deposited in the United States mail addressed to the last known address
of such customer as reflected by the records of the Department.
D. The City shall not be bound by utility service billing statements
rendered under mistake as to either quantity and/or nature of service
rendered.
E. In the event the customer pays by check, credit card or debit card
which payment is thereafter rejected or not honored by the financial
institution, the amount shall be deemed unpaid retroactive to the date
the billing statement was initially rendered.
F. Charges for special services may be included on the same billing
statement with the utility service charges if the charges for special
services are separated from the utility charges.
G. The City may divide the service area into sections and/or divide
customers into various classes for the purpose of rendering statements.
Such sections or classes may be changed from time to time to meet the
operating requirements of the City, but shall not affect the amount or
rate of any bill.
A. A utility service billing statement may be rendered based upon
estimated utility service usage when deemed reasonable by the City
including, but not limited to, the following circumstances:
Section
705.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.070
AO:808
Section 705.080. Past-Due Accounts. [R.O. 2008 §705.080; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Section 705.090. Delinquent Accounts. [R.O. 2008 §705.090; Ord.
No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
1. Reading of the utility service measuring device is prevented
because of weather conditions, emergency or work stoppage.
2. The City determines that the customer has failed to provide safe
and reasonable access to the customer's premises for the purpose
of determining the actual utility service usage.
3. The City concludes that the meter or device measuring the
customer's utility usage may provide an inaccurate reading for any
reason including damage, tampering or modification of the device.
B. Each utility service statement shall clearly and conspicuously state if
the amount due is based upon estimated utility service usage.
C. The City shall not use estimated utility service usage to render a final
utility service statement.
A. In determining the date of payment of a utility service bill, the date shall
be the date on which the Department posts the remittance.
B. All utility service statements shall be due and payable in full on or
before the fifteenth (15th) day of the month following the date on which
the statement was scheduled to be rendered.
C. Any utility service account not paid on or before the fifteenth (15th) of
the month shall be deemed past due.
D. The City shall immediately assess a past due fee equal to ten percent
(10%) of the portion of any utility service bill becoming past due, which
additional amount shall immediately be due and payable.
E. If the fifteenth (15th) of the month falls on a weekend, holiday or other
day when the Department is not open to the general public, the
payment due date shall be extended to the close of business of the next
day when the department is open to the general public.
A. If any portion of a past due utility service account remains unpaid as of
close of business the first (1st) day of the month following the month in
which the account became past due, said balance shall be declared
delinquent.
B. Upon the utility service account becoming delinquent, the City shall
assess a fifteen dollar ($15.00) delinquency fee, which additional
amount shall immediately be due and payable.
C. If the first (1st) of the month falls on a weekend, holiday or other day
when the Department is not open to the general public, the payment
Section
705.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.090
AO:809
Section 705.100. Partial Payments. [R.O. 2008 §705.100; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
If a customer makes a partial payment on a utility service account, the
payment amount shall first (1st) be credited against any past due or
delinquent utility service balance.
Section 705.110. Voluntary Termination of Service. [R.O. 2008
§705.110; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
Section 705.120. Collection and Litigation. [R.O. 2008 §705.120;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
due date shall be extended to the close of business of the next day when
the department is open to the general public.
D. In addition to assessing the delinquency fee, the City shall commence
notification to the customer of the City's intent to terminate utility
service to the customer.
A. In the event a customer requests termination of an existing utility
service, the City shall issue a final bill which shall include all amounts
due on that account and all amounts owed by the customer to the City
on that account shall be payable in full.
B. Bills for voluntarily terminated utility service accounts shall be
rendered and be considered past due fifteen (15) days after the date the
bill was rendered and shall be considered delinquent thirty (30) days
after the bill was rendered.
A. For utility service provided to a residence that has its own private water
and sewer lines, such services shall deem to be furnished to both the
customer and owner of the premises receiving such service.
B. When the customer is delinquent in payment for thirty (30) days, the
City shall make a good faith effort to notify the owner of the premises
receiving such service of the delinquency and the amount thereof.
C. The City shall have the power and authority to sue the customer or the
owner of such real estate or both in a civil action to recover any sums
due for services less any deposit that is held by the City plus a
reasonable attorney's fee to be fixed by the court.
D. When a customer's utility service account is delinquent for more than
ninety (90) days, the customer shall be liable for the entire bill, but the
owner of the real estate, if other than the customer, shall not be liable
for sums due for more than ninety (90) days of service.
E. To assist in the collection of any delinquent utility service account, the
City may engage the services of third (3rd) parties including a
Section
705.090
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.120
AO:810
Section 705.130. (Reserved)
Section 705.140. Tampering. [R.O. 2008 §705.140; Ord. No. 6776
§§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Section 705.150. Disconnection of Service. [R.O. 2008 §705.150;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
collection agency, locator service or attorney. All additional collection
or litigation fees incurred by the City, including all court costs and
attorney's fees, shall be paid by the customer.
A. Except for authorized employees or agents of the City, no person shall
disconnect, modify or tamper with any meter or utility service
measuring instrument, connect to any meter or disturb utility service
lines without advance written permission from the City.
B. In the event of any act which has the potential effect of rendering actual
utility use readings inaccurate or of allowing receipt of utility service
without proper payment, upon posting notice on the residence or
location receiving the service or delivering notice to the customer, the
City shall be authorized to immediately disconnect the utility service
and remove City property from the customer's premises.
C. The City may elect to continue utility service or reconnect utility service
at the location of the tampering upon the customer's compliance with
the City Code including payment by the customer whose measurable
demand, usage or bill was affected by such tampering of all applicable
fees or deposits as determined by the City. In addition to any other
amounts required by other provisions of this Chapter, the customer
shall pay the following as determined by the City Manager or his/her
designees:
1. The actual expenses incurred by the City in replacing and/or
repairing City equipment or materials as a result of the tampering
including the meter or service lines, the making of any connection
and the actual employee costs or contracted expenses incurred;
and
2. The amount of any City revenue lost attributable to such
tampering, as determined by the City Manager or his/her designee;
3. The payment of the applicable utility service deposit, if any.
A. The City may discontinue utility service to a customer for any legitimate
business reason including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Non-payment of a delinquent account.
2. Failure to post any required security deposit.
Section
705.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.150
AO:811
Section 705.160. Notice of Disconnection. [R.O. 2008 §705.160;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
Section 705.170. Failure to Provide Access or Correct Name. [R.O.
2008 §705.170; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1
— 2, 4-13-2009]
In the event the applicant has failed to use the applicant's correct name,
has placed the application in the name of a minor when applying for
utility service or has refused to grant access to equipment, the City may
disconnect service immediately.
Section 705.180. Notice of Disconnection. [R.O. 2008 §705.180;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
3. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a settlement
agreement relating to a current or prior utility account.
4. Failure or refusal to grant access at reasonable times for the
purpose of inspection, meter reading, maintenance or replacement
of equipment installed on the premises of the customer.
A. Prior to disconnection of utility service for any reason other than
tampering, failure or refusal to grant access to equipment or failure to
provide correct name of the customer, the City shall provide five (5)
business days' notice of its intent to disconnect utility service. Notice
may be provided either by mailing written notice to the utility service
customer at their address as maintained in the Department or by
posting written notice on the exterior door of the building or residence
receiving the utility service to be disconnected.
B. Such notice shall provide a telephone number and address at which
such disconnection may be contested.
C. When charges for sewer services are in arrears for more than three (3)
months and after the City sends notice to the customer by certified
mail, the City may disconnect the customer's sewer line or request in
writing that the private or public water company discontinue water
service until such time as the sewer charges and all related costs are
paid.
D. Service shall not be disconnected on a day when the offices of the
Department are not available to the public for the purpose of
reconnecting service.
A. The notice of disconnection shall contain the following information:
1. Name and address of the customer.
2. Statement of the reason for the discontinuance.
Section
705.150
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.180
AO:812
Section 705.190. Postponement or Suspension of Disconnection.
[R.O. 2008 §705.190; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No.
7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Section 705.200. Disconnection and Fees. [R.O. 2008 §705.200; Ord.
No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Section 705.210. Reconnection. [R.O. 2008 §705.210; Ord. No. 6776
§§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
3. Date after which service shall be discontinued unless action is
taken by the customer.
4. Terms under which connection may be avoided by the customer
and cost of reconnection.
5. A telephone number and address where the disconnection can be
contested.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, the City shall
postpone the discontinuance of utility service to a residential customer
for a period not to exceed twenty-one (21) days if the City determines
that the disconnection will aggravate an existing medical emergency of
the customer, of a member of the customer's family or other permanent
resident of the premises where service is rendered.
B. If the City is advised prior to the date of discontinuance that any portion
of the utility service bill is in dispute, the Department shall record the
date, place and time the complaint was made and enter into the
resolution process with the customer.
A. If the provisions of this Chapter have been met, the City may disconnect
utility service at the customer's delinquent service address.
B. Immediately prior to the disconnection of service, the individual
designated to perform such function shall place a notice upon the
premises to be disconnected or deliver such notice to a responsible
person then upon the premises, giving notice of action about to be
taken, the reason for action and address and phone number where
inquiries may be made.
C. A disconnection fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be charged to the
customer's utility service account upon the dispatch of an employee or
designee to disconnect the customer's utility service for any involuntary
reason even if disconnection does not occur.
A. Upon the customer's request, the City shall promptly restore utility
service if the cause for discontinuance of service has been eliminated,
all fees and deposits have been paid including applicable restoration
charges and, if required, satisfactory credit arrangements have been
made.
Section
705.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.210
AO:813
Section 705.220. Refusal of Service After Disconnection. [R.O. 2008
§705.220; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
Section 705.230. Refunds. [R.O. 2008 §705.230; Ord. No. 6776 §§1
— 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
A customer shall give notice containing the address to which any final utility
service refund is to be sent. Said notice shall be provided to the Department
within sixty (60) days of the date utility service is terminated. In the event
the customer fails to provide such notice, the deposit or portion remaining
after satisfaction of any utility bills and fees shall be deemed to have been
forfeited to the City.
Section 705.240. Adjustment of Water Bills. [R.O. 2008 §705.240;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
B. In the event the customer seeks reconnection at a location following
involuntary disconnection, a reconnection fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00)
shall be satisfied.
C. A reconnection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid in advance by
any customer when a utility service reconnection occurs at the
customer's request on a weekend, a City holiday or any other time
outside the regular working hours of the City personnel completing the
reconnection. Reconnection outside of regular working hours shall be
in the sole discretion of the City Manager or his/her designee and a
utility service customer shall not be entitled to a reconnection outside
of regular working hours without the consent of the City.
A. The City may at its option refuse to render utility service to any
customer whose utility service has been disconnected until:
1. The customer has paid in full all applicable charges for all utility
service previously provided by the City at the customer's premises
and paid for all damage to water meters or property of the City;
2. The customer's water piping and service pipes at the customer's
sole expense have been placed in a condition acceptable to the
City;
3. The customer has provided reasonable access to read the meters;
4. The customer has paid all appropriate charges including all
deposits and utility service fees.
A. Any water bill found to be in error may be adjusted by the City Manager
or his/her designee as follows:
1. Faulty meters. If a meter is found to be in error, then the customer's
utility service bill shall be adjusted to the corrected amount,
Section
705.210
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.240
AO:814
whether said adjustment results in an increase or decrease of the
total bill. Adjustment shall not be made to any bill for a utility
service period more than sixty (60) days prior to the date of the
meter removal and testing. Should the meter fail to register, the
quantity of water used shall be by determining the amount used
during the same period of the preceding year or the average
amount for the three (3) month period immediately preceding the
failure.
2. Hidden leaks.
a. If a utility service customer is the owner of the premises at
which a hidden leak is discovered or has responsibility
pursuant to contract to maintain water pipes at the premises
and the customer verifies that the hidden leak was repaired
within five (5) working days after being notified of or
discovering the hidden leak, then the customer's water bill may
be adjusted in accordance with the additional provisions of this
Section.
b. If a utility service customer is not the owner of the premises at
which a hidden leak is discovered and does not have
responsibility pursuant to contract to maintain water pipes, in
the event the customer verifies that notification of the owner of
the premises occurred within forty-eight (48) hours of the
discovery of the hidden leak, then the customer's water bill
may be adjusted in accordance with the additional provisions
of this Section.
c. As used in this Section, the term "hidden leak" shall be
understood to be an underground leak from a water line
occurring at a location between the meter set and the first (1st)
connection to the wall of the residence or structure.
d. The amount of refund shall be calculated by reimbursing the
customer for an amount equal to one-half (½) the customer's
normal charge for the water usage. Said water bill adjustment
shall be for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days prior to the
repair of the leak in the case of the owner of the premises or
for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days prior to the
notification of the owner if the customer is not the owner of the
premises.
e. The amount of refund shall be determined by computing the
water usage at the premises for the immediately preceding
ninety (90) days as an average monthly use. This average
usage amount shall be deducted from the usage during the
time period in question. Absent other information, the
difference between these two (2) amounts shall be understood
to be the amount lost as a result of the leak.
Section
705.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.240
AO:815
Section 705.250. Customer Complaint Procedure. [R.O. 2008
§705.250; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
f. The maximum refund shall be four hundred fifty dollars
($450.00). Refunds shall be given as credit against the existing
customer's utility service bill and the balance refunded by
check, money order or other transfer of funds to the customer.
g. Adjustments shall not be made for hidden leaks at any
structure more than once every twenty-four (24) months,
notwithstanding any changes in ownership. As used in this
Section, the word "structure" shall be understood to be the
location receiving the water. However, in the case of duplexes
or apartments, the entire building or complex shall be treated
as one (1) structure.
A. The department shall cause to be established procedures which will
ensure the prompt, efficient and thorough receipt, investigation and
resolution of all customer inquiries, service requests and complaints
regarding residential utility service and charges.
B. The department shall establish personnel procedures which, as a
minimum, ensure that:
1. Qualified personnel shall be available and prepared at all times
during normal business hours to receive and respond to all
customer inquiries, service requests and complaints. The
department shall make reasonable arrangements to ensure that
customers unable to communicate in the English language receive
assistance.
2. Qualified personnel shall be available during normal business
hours to receive and initiate response to customer contacts
regarding any discontinuance of service or emergency condition.
3. Qualified personnel responsible for and authorized to enter into
such written agreements on behalf of the City shall be available at
all times during normal business hours to respond to customer
inquiries and complaints.
C. The complaint regarding utility service may be initiated in person, by
telephone or in writing.
D. Upon making the complaint, the customer shall make payment in full of
the non-disputed portion of the utility service bill, fees and deposits. In
the event the customer fails to make payment of the non-disputed
amount within three (3) business days from the date of registering the
complaint, the customer shall have waived any right to continuance of
service and discontinuance of service may proceed.
Section
705.240
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.250
AO:816
Section 705.260. Settlement Agreements. [R.O. 2008 §705.260; Ord.
No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Section 705.270. Waiver of Liability. [R.O. 2008 §705.270; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, in the event the
City terminates service due to delinquency of payment by a customer, the
City shall not be liable for civil or criminal damages.
Section 705.280. through Section 705.290. (Reserved)
E. Failure of the customer to enter into negotiation with the department
within the time period established by the City to resolve a dispute or
enter into a settlement agreement shall constitute a waiver of the
customer's right to continuance of service and the City may then
proceed to discontinue service.
A. When the City Manager or his/her designee and a customer arrive at a
mutually satisfactory settlement of any disputed amount or the
customer does not dispute liability to the utility but claims inability to
pay the outstanding bill in full, the City Manager or his/her designee
and the customer may enter into a written settlement agreement. The
decision to enter into a settlement shall be at the sole discretion of the
City.
B. If a customer is in compliance with the terms and conditions of a
settlement agreement, service shall not be discontinued for having a
delinquent account.
C. If the customer fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a
settlement agreement, service may be discontinued.
D. If a customer complaint or dispute involves the same question or issue
presented in a prior complaint or dispute, the City Manager or his/her
designee may utilize the facts found in the prior complaint or dispute in
resolving the current dispute.
Section
705.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.280
AO:817

ARTICLE II
Rates and Charges
Section 705.300. Water Rates and Charges. [R.O. 2008 §705.300;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 6871 §§1 — 2,
10-23-2006; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009; Ord. No. 7262 §§1 —
2, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 7343 §§1 — 2, 7-25-2011; Ord. No. 7555 §§1
— 3, 8-26-201380; Ord. No. 8144, 11-26-201881]
A. For utility bills rendered for metered water usage during the month of
January 1, 2019, and for services rendered thereafter, the following
shall be the schedule of monthly charges for water service, to wit:
1. Rates For Users Within City Limits.
a. For the first one hundred (100) cubic feet or fraction thereof:
five dollars and twenty-three cents ($5.23) (minimum charge).
b. For the next four thousand nine hundred (4,900) cubic feet or
fraction thereof: four dollars and seventy-six cents ($4.76) per
one hundred (100) cubic feet.
c. For all in excess of five thousand (5,000) cubic feet, at the rate
of: four dollars and sixty-nine cents ($4.69) per one hundred
(100) cubic feet.
2. Rates For Users Outside City Limits.
a. For the first ten thousand (10,000) cubic feet or fraction
thereof: the City rate plus ten percent (10%).
b. For all in excess of ten thousand (10,000) cubic feet: four
dollars and eighty-one cents ($4.81) per one hundred (100)
cubic feet.
3. Rates For Public Water Supply District — Nodaway County.
a. For each one thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction thereof (to
be known as the "prevailing rate"): six dollars and forty-six
cents ($6.46) per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
4. Rates For Unannexed Users In Service Territory Acquired From
Public Water Supply District No. 1 — Nodaway County.
a. For the first one hundred (100) cubic feet or fraction thereof:
ten dollars and forty-five cents ($10.45) (minimum charge).
80.Editor’s Note: Section 3 provided that this ordinance would be effective for utility bills for
metered water usage beginning 9-1-2013.
81.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it would be effective for utility bills for
metered water usage beginning 1-1-2019.
Section
705.300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.300
AO:819
Section 705.310. Sewer Rates and Charges. [R.O. 2008 §705.310;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 6876 §§1 — 2,
11-6-2006; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009; Ord. No. 7343 §§1 —
2, 7-25-2011; Ord. No. 7555 §§1 — 3, 8-26-201382; Ord. No. 7815 §§1
— 3, 12-14-201583; Ord. No. 8144, 11-26-201884]
b. For the next four thousand nine hundred (4,900) cubic feet or
fraction thereof: nine dollars and fifty-three cents ($9.53) per
one hundred (100) cubic feet.
c. For all in excess of five thousand (5,000) cubic feet, at a rate of:
nine dollars and thirty-seven cents ($9.37) per one hundred
(100) cubic feet.
5. Monthly minimum charge for customers with meters other than
five-eighths (5/8) or five-eighths (5/8) by three-fourths (3/4) inch
size:
Size of Meter
(inches) Monthly Minimum Charge
3/4 $6.42
1 $10.24
1 1/4 1 1/2 $20.46
2 $24.90
3 $49.81
4 $99.64
6 $199.25
6. Rates For Bulk Sales. Eight dollars ($8.00) per one thousand
(1,000) gallons or any fraction thereof.
7. Charges For Private Fire Hydrants And Automatic Sprinkler
Systems.
a. Three dollars and eighty-nine cents ($3.89) per month for each
fire hydrant which shall include water consumed in the proper
use of such fire.
b. Three dollars and eighty-nine cents ($3.89) per month for up to
one hundred (100) sprinkler heads, plus an additional monthly
charge of three cents ($0.03) for each head in excess of one
hundred (100) which shall include water consumed in the
proper use of such system.
82.Editor’s Note: Section 3 provided that this ordinance would be effective for utility bills for
metered water usage beginning 9-1-2013.
83.Editor’s Note: Section 3 provided that this ordinance would be effective for utility bills for
metered water usage beginning 1-1-2016.
Section
705.300
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.310
AO:820
A. For utility bills rendered for the collection and treatment of sewerage
on or after January 1, 2019, each user shall pay for the sewerage
collection and treatment services provided by the City based on the
user's use of the water system as determined by water meters
acceptable to the City.
B. Except for unannexed customers in the service territory acquired from
the Public Water Supply District 1 — Nodaway County, the minimum
charge per month for the collection and treatment of sewerage shall be
fourteen dollars and eighty-one cents ($14.81) for the first one hundred
(100) cubic feet for residential and non-residential customers. In
addition, each customer shall pay a user charge rate of three dollars
and ninety-two cents ($3.92) per one hundred (100) cubic feet of water
above the minimum as determined in Section 705.300.
C. The following rates shall be charged to all unannexed customers of the
City for the service territory acquired from the Public Water Supply
District 1 — Nodaway County:
1. The minimum charge per month for the collection and treatment of
sewerage shall be twenty-nine dollars and sixty-one cents ($29.61)
for the first one hundred (100) cubic feet for residential and nonresidential
customers.
2. In addition, each customer shall pay a user charge rate of seven
dollars and eighty-three cents ($7.83) per one hundred (100) cubic
feet of water above the minimum as determined in Section 705.300.
D. As used in this Section, the phrase "the service area acquired from the
Public Water Supply District No. 1 — Nodaway County" shall be
understood to mean those portions purchased by the City of Maryville
from Public Water Supply District No. 1 by the Territorial Agreement
and Contract Modification Extension, dated December 31, 1999,
November 4, 2010, or April 11, 2011, and referred to therein but not
limited to as Park Territory, Harmony Hills Subdivision Territory,
Southeast Territory, City Lagoon Territory and Industrial Territory, all
as described on the attachments to the agreement.
E. It shall be the policy of the City not to provide water or sewer service to
any property outside the City limits unless and until an agreement is
accepted by the City Council concerning the annexation of said
property.
F. Should a property receive water and/or sanitary sewer service through
a City Council and property owner executed agreement and not comply
with the requirements of an agreement between the property owner
and the City, the property shall be charged fees in accordance with
Sections 705.300(A)(4) and 705.310(C) for water and/or sanitary sewer
service, respectively.
84.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it would be effective for utility bills for
metered water usage beginning 1-1-2019.
Section
705.310
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.320
AO:821
Section 705.320. Large Commercial, Industrial, Public Institution
— All Users — Basis of Sewer Charge. [R.O. 2008 §705.320; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Any user of water, other than a domestic or residential water user, who uses
water for commercial purposes, industrial purposes and public institutional
purposes, and said water is not discharged into the sewerage system of the
City, may have said water metered through a submeter in order to obtain
credit for sewer charge. The charge then made to said customer shall be
based on the amount of water furnished customer during the month, less
the amount recorded by the submeter which was not discharged into the
sewerage system of the City.
Section 705.330. through Section 705.390. (Reserved)
Section
705.320
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.330
AO:822
ARTICLE III
Connection
Section 705.400. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §705.400; Ord. No. 6776
§§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
terms used in this Article shall be as follows:
BACKFLOW PREVENTOR — See Section 515.020.
BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20°),
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BOND ORDINANCES — The ordinances duly adopted by the Governing
Body of the City which authorize the issuance of revenue bonds.
BRANCH SERVICE PIPING — A type of water service consisting of a
tapping sleeve and valve, a valve box and meter stop valves and drain
connections. The connection can be used for domestic water service or
private fire protection service.
CORPORATION TAP — The cutting of threads directly into the walls of a
water main and the insertion of a corporation cock or corporate saddle. This
type of tap is used to provide a tap service connection.
CUSTOMER — Any person, persons, firm, agency, institution or corporation
legally using utility service supplied by the City.
CUSTOMER'S SERVICE PIPE — A pipe with appurtenances used to conduct
water from the point of connection to the street service connection to
that portion of the interior piping of a building which is regulated by the
Plumbing Code.
DEPOSIT — A cash deposit made by an applicant prior to connection of
water service or sewer service and held in escrow by the City as a security
or guarantee of payment of bills until the final bill or unless sooner returned
to the customer.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The executive appointed by the City
Manager who directs the combined waterworks and sewerage system.
INSPECTION — An investigation and review of work performed by others
under a permit by the Water Department.
MAIN CONTRIBUTION CHARGE — A charge for connecting to City water
mains based on the front footage of a lot or parcel of land on which a
building, for which applicant desires water service, is located.
METER — A mechanical device or devices to measure and record the
quantity of water supplied to the customer.
METER SET — An assembly connected in the service line which consists of
a meter well or pit, yoke, piping, valves, bypass (when required), cover, lid
and meter.
Section
705.400
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.400
AO:823
NON-RESIDENTIAL CONTRIBUTOR — Any contributor to or user of the
system whose lot, parcel of real estate or building is served by a water
meter larger than three-fourths (¾) inch.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Wastewater that has a BOD
concentration of not more than three hundred (300) mg/l and a suspended
solids concentration of not more than three hundred (300) mg/l.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE — All expenditures during the useful
life of the system for materials, labor, utilities and other items which are
necessary for managing and maintaining the system to achieve the capacity
and performance for which the system was designed and constructed;
provided however, that the terms "operation and maintenance" shall also
have the meaning given to them by the bond ordinances and in the event
of any conflict in the meaning hereinabove prescribed and the term of the
bond ordinances, the bond ordinances shall govern.
PREMISES — A dwelling, apartment building, building or group of buildings
on a lot, tract or other parcel of land, under single ownership or lease,
eligible for individually metered water service.
PRIVATE WATER MAINS — A water conduit whose ownership is other than
the City of Maryville.
REPLACEMENT — Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life
of the system to maintain the capacity and performance for which the
system was designed and constructed; provided however, that the term
"replacement" shall also have the meaning given to it by the bond
ordinances and in the event of any conflict in the meaning hereinabove
prescribed and the terms of the bond ordinances, the bond ordinances shall
govern.
RESIDENTIAL CONTRIBUTOR — Any contributor to or user of the system
whose lot, parcel or real estate or building is served by a three-fourths (¾)
inch water meter or less.
REVENUE BONDS — All bonds or other obligations of the City now
outstanding or hereinafter issued which are payable solely from system
revenues.
SERVICE INITIATION FEE — A charge which is applicable to an application
for new water service to premises never before connected with the City's
water system.
SERVICE MAIN — A water conduit, two (2) inches or larger, that supplies
water directly to a customer through service connection.
SHALL — Is mandatory; MAY — is permissive.
SS (denoting SUSPENDED SOLIDS) — Solids that either float on the
surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which
are removable by laboratory filtering.
STANDARD FIRE HYDRANT — A Mueller or equivalent traffic fire hydrant
which has a valve of five and one-fourth (5¼) inch or larger, two and one-
Section
705.400
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.400
AO:824
half (2½) inch nozzles and one (1) four and one-half (4½) inch nozzle with
National Standard threads, conforming to A.W.W.A. Standard C-502.
STREET SERVICE CONNECTION — A pipe with appurtenances used to
conduct water from the main to the point of connection to the customer's
service pipe, including tap service connections or branch service piping.
SYSTEM — The sewerage system of the City consisting of all properties
and assets, real and personal and tangible and intangible, of the City now
or hereafter existing, which are held or used for the purpose of collecting
and treating sewerage including, but not limited to, the City's treatment
facilities and all collection lines and equipment connected therewith.
SYSTEM REVENUES — All income and revenues derived by the City from
the operation of the system.
TAP SERVICE CONNECTION — A type of water service consisting of a
corporation cock, copper pipe, curb stop and box, when required, and meter
yoke with a meter stop and waste valve.
TREATMENT FACILITIES — That part of the system consisting of any
devices and systems for the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation
of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or liquid industrial wastes. These
include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems,
individual systems, pumping, power and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extensions, improvement, remodeling, additions and
alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply
such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works,
including site acquisition of the land, that will be an integral part of the
treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from
such treatment (including land for composting sludge, temporary storage
of such compost and land used for the storage of treated wastewater
in land treatment systems before land application); or any other method
or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating
or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in
combined stormwater and sanitary sewer systems.
USEFUL LIFE — The estimated period during which the treatment facilities
will be operated.
USER CHARGE — That portion of the total system revenues which is
levied and collected in a proportional and adequate manner to pay the
cost of operation and maintenance, to pay the principal of and interest on
the revenue bonds and to meet all requirements of the bond ordinances,
including the cost of replacement.
UTILITY — The Water Department or combined waterworks and sewerage
system of the City.
UTILITY SERVICE — Either water service, sewer service or the combination
of both water service and sewer service.
WATER DEPARTMENT — The City of Maryville, Missouri, the combined
waterworks and sewerage system or a combination of one (1) or both
thereof together with their officers, agents and employees.
Section
705.400
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.400
AO:825
WATER MAIN — The water pipe, fitting, valves and boxes installed as an
integral part of the distribution system, but not including fire hydrant units
and water service piping.
WATER METER — A water volume measuring and recording device
furnished and/or installed by the City of Maryville or furnished and/or
installed by a user and approved by the City of Maryville.
WATER SERVICE LINE — The piping installed from the water main to
that portion of the interior piping of a building which is regulated by the
Plumbing Code.
WATER SERVICE PERMIT — The written document issued by the City
Manager or his/her duly authorized representative authorizing work to be
performed.
Section 705.410. House Numbers Required. [R.O. 2008 §705.410;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
Section 705.420. Advance Payments Required. [R.O. 2008 §705.420;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
A. Permanently assigned house numbers shall be obtained from the City
building inspection office before application for a utility service
connection is accepted and shall be suitably displayed on the property
in a visible location before the utility service connection is installed.
B. Application for utility service outside City limits shall not be accepted
without an agreement that pre-dates this Title.
C. No meter is to be set at premises without proper and correct
identification of the premises.
D. If a house number of identification is changed for any reason, the Water
Department office shall be notified of such change.
A. Prior to supplying water service, all advance payments must be paid or
satisfactory arrangements made for the payment thereof. The following
are hereby deemed advanced payments:
1. Main contribution charge. No person shall be allowed to connect to
a City water main without first filing a written application to do so
with the City Manager or his/her authorized representative. If said
written application is accepted by the City Manager or his/her
authorized representative, such connection shall be permitted after
the applicant has first paid the City the charge of three dollars fifty
cents ($3.50) per foot for the front footage of the lot, lots or parcels
that abut the main and on which a building for which the applicant
desires water service is located; provided, no front footage
connection charge shall be required for new water service
connection to mains installed at the expense of a developer or
Section
705.400
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.420
AO:826
Section 705.430. Customer's Piping to Conform. [R.O. 2008
§705.430; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
All water piping and equipment on the customer's premises must conform
to the Plumbing Code of the City and no water service, either within or
without the City limits, will be furnished where an inspection reveals lack
of conformance to the Plumbing Code; provided however, that the City shall
not be deemed to have assumed hereby any duty or responsibility to inspect,
repair or maintain any water piping or equipment on the customer's side of
the point of delivery as hereinafter defined in these rules and regulations.
Section 705.440. Basis of Service — Resale Prohibited. [R.O. 2008
§705.440; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
With the exception of wholesale water customers as determined by the City,
all water service shall be furnished on a metered basis to each customer and
shall be for the sole use of such customer on the premises described in the
application for water service and shall not be submetered for the purpose
of reselling the water. The Director of Public Works or such other officers
or representatives of the City as may be designated from time to time shall
cause all water meters to be read and bills for utility services to be rendered
monthly as services accrue.
Section 705.450. Premises Served. [R.O. 2008 §705.450; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
subdivider, except when a water main extension contract between
the City and a developer or subdivider requires such front footage
connection charge.
2. Tapping fee: See Section 705.730.
3. Plumbing permits: See Section 500.090.
4. Meter charge: See Section 705.950.
5. Security deposits: See Section 705.050.
B. If there is a main readily accessible to the property to be connected and
the City Manager or his/her authorized representative approves the
application and all advance payments have been received or
satisfactory arrangements made therefor, water service will be
provided to the applicant's property. If the application is rejected, the
City shall return the advance payments to the applicant.
A. A separate meter shall be installed for each dwelling, apartment
building, business establishment or property served with water. Each of
the following types of facilities shall comprise a metering unit and be
metered individually.
Section
705.420
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.450
AO:827
Section 705.460. Access to Premises. [R.O. 2008 §705.460; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Section 705.470. Damages by Customer. [R.O. 2008 §705.470; Ord.
No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
1. Apartment building.
2. Boarding or lodging house.
3. Commercial business property — separate meter required for each
business establishment.
4. Industrial or manufacturing plant.
5. Dwelling, single-family.
6. Each dwelling unit in a duplex.
7. Hotel or motel.
8. Mobile home park.
B. Owners of multiple-family dwelling buildings or apartments with two
(2) or more dwelling units and mobile home parks may install a single
water meter for each dwelling unit or mobile home.
A. The customer shall provide the City's duly authorized representative
access to the customer's premises at all reasonable hours for the
purpose of reading meters; examining, testing, changing or moving any
water equipment, meters, apparatus or piping of the City; measuring
the customer's water demand; or inspecting for cross-connections.
B. The customer shall agree that he/she will not permit any person who is
not an agent of the City, or otherwise lawfully entitled to do so, to
inspect, remove or tamper with the City's meters, material or
appliances installed on his/her premises.
A. Nothing shall be attached or fastened to or placed upon any meter,
fixture or equipment of the City Water Department, unless prior
permission in writing shall have been given by the City; and the City
shall not be liable for any injury, damage or loss arising out of or
resulting from any such attachment to its meters, fixtures or
equipment.
B. Customers shall be held responsible for damage to meters, fixtures and
equipment left by the City in their care, when such damage is caused
directly or indirectly by the customer or his/her officers, agents or
employees.
Section
705.450
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.480
AO:828
Section 705.480. Notice of Defects. [R.O. 2008 §705.480; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Each customer shall notify the City promptly of any defect in water piping
equipment or apparatus of the City or any existing condition which might
affect water service to the customer or might be dangerous to persons or
property.
Section 705.490. Illegal Devices. [R.O. 2008 §705.490; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Section 705.500. Change in Requirements. [R.O. 2008 §705.500;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
The customer shall notify the City immediately of any change or changes in
connected load or in water equipment on the customer's premises, which
might affect water service to such customer or to any other water customer
of the City; and the City shall have no duty, obligation or responsibility
arising out or resulting from the customer's failure to so notify the City.
Section 705.510. Maintenance of Meters. [R.O. 2008 §705.510; Ord.
No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
A. No customer shall have on his/her premises any water piping
connection, apparatus or device which prevents the water meter or
meters on such premises from registering or recording properly all
water used or to be used or which enables such customer to obtain or
use any water without same having been registered or recorded by a
water meter or meters of the City.
B. The City shall have the right, upon discovering the use of such illegal
devices, to discontinue water service to such customer immediately and
without notice.
A. Any customer of the City whose meter is located within the confines of
any building or any other location, i.e., tiles, etc., other than a City
approved meter set or pit, shall pay for the costs of the labor and parts
necessary for the repair of the meter damaged by freezing and the
water customer shall pay the costs of labor and parts necessary for the
repair of the meter, regardless of location, if damaged by hot water
backing up into the meter or any other acts or omissions of the
customer or his/her employees.
B. If repairs to a meter are made as a result of any damage by any of the
causes mentioned in Subsection (A) hereof, the customer shall be sent
an itemized statement of the labor and repairs necessary to repair the
meter and if said statement is not paid within thirty (30) days after the
rendition thereof, the City shall disconnect the customer from utility
service. If the service is disconnected, the customer shall pay the
Section
705.480
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.510
AO:829
Section 705.520. Limit of City Responsibility. [R.O. 2008 §705.520;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
Section 705.530. Limit of Liability. [R.O. 2008 §705.530; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
The City shall not be liable for any injury, damage or loss resulting from
the use of water on the customer's premises or from the presence, location,
maintenance or use of any water piping, fixtures or equipment on the
customer's premises.
Section 705.540. Continuity of Service — Limit of Responsibility.
[R.O. 2008 §705.540; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No.
7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
regular charge for disconnection and connection if he/she desires to
pay the account and receive utility service.
A. The City shall have no duty, obligation or responsibility with respect to
water piping, appliances, equipment or apparatus on the premises of
any utility customers, other than to provide a water meter and maintain
a street service connection from the distribution system of the City
waterworks to the point of connection.
B. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to impose or place upon the
City any obligation, responsibility or duty to inspect, maintain or repair
any water piping, apparatus, appliance or equipment (excepting only
such metering facilities, if any, owned by the City as may be installed on
the customer's premises) on the customer's side of the point of
connection.
C. No authorized representative of the City shall have any right or
authority to make any promise, commitment or agreement not
expressly authorized in this Article.
A. The City shall make every reasonable effort to eliminate interruption of
service and when such interruption does occur, will endeavor to
establish service with the shortest possible delay. Whenever the service
is interrupted, all customers affected by such interruption will be
notified in advance whenever it is possible to do so.
B. The City reserves the right to shut off the water in its mains, at any
time, without notice for making repairs, extensions or alterations, but
will so far as possible notify customers of the intent to shut off.
C. The City shall not be responsible for any damage occasioned by the shut
off of water mains for the purpose of making repairs, extensions or
connections or for any other reason beyond the control of the City. No
claim shall be made against the City and no person shall be entitled to
any damages by reason of the breaking of any pipe or by reason of any
Section
705.510
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.540
AO:830
Section 705.550. Private Contracts. [R.O. 2008 §705.550; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Nothing in this Article shall prohibit the City from entering into private
contracts for the construction of water mains or sewer lines that may be
necessary or expedient to the best interests of the City.
Section 705.560. Premises Outside City. [R.O. 2008 §705.560; Ord.
No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
The City shall not receive application for water and/or sewerage services
outside the City limits.
Section 705.570. Unlawful Acts. [R.O. 2008 §705.570; Ord. No. 6776
§§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
other interruption of the supply of water caused by mechanical
breakdown or by other causes beyond control of the City.
D. The City will not be responsible for damages caused by turbid water
which may be occasioned by cleaning of pipes or stand pipes or the
opening or closing of any gates or hydrants or any other cause which is
not the result of negligence on the part of the City.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any water main or to
turn water on or off at any street valve, corporation cock, curb box, fire
hydrant or other street connection or disconnect or remove or change
any meter or to make any connection to the waterworks system without
written permission from the City Manager or his/her authorized
representative.
B. It shall be unlawful to reconnect service when it has been disconnected
for non-payment of a bill for service, until such bill has been paid in full,
including the cutoff and re-connection fee.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, without written consent of the City
Manager or his/her authorized representative, to open any fire hydrant
except for the legitimate purpose of extinguishment of fire.
D. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to trespass upon the
dam or embankment enclosing any of the waterworks reservoir system,
except for the sole purpose of fishing from such reservoir.
E. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to drive or cause to be
driven any vehicle over or on the embankments of the reservoirs.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into any finished water
storage facility of the City, such as, but not limited to, the elevated
storage tanks and clear walls of the City.
Section
705.540
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.570
AO:831
Section 705.580. Lead Ban. [Ord. No. 7416 §1, 5-14-2012; Ord. No.
7664 §1, 8-25-2014]
G. No person shall climb upon or mark upon any part of the City's
waterworks system, unless specifically authorized to do so by the City
Manager or his/her authorized representative.
H. Any person committing unlawful acts prohibited by this Section shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation and upon conviction shall be imposed a
fine as the Municipal Code provides.
A. General Policy.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is:
a. To ban the use of lead materials in the public drinking water
system and private plumbing connected to the public drinking
water system; and
b. To protect City residents from lead contamination in the City's
public drinking water system and their own private plumbing
systems.
2. Application. This section shall apply to all premises served by the
public drinking water system of the City of Maryville, Missouri.
3. Policy.
a. This section will be reasonably interpreted by the Water
Purveyor. It is the Purveyor's intent to ban the use of leadbased
material in the construction or modification of the City's
drinking water system or private plumbing connected to the
City system. The cooperation of all consumers is required to
implement the ban.
b. If, in the judgment of the Water Purveyor or his/her authorized
representative, lead-based materials have been used in new
construction or modifications after January 1, 1989, due notice
shall be given to the consumer. The consumer shall
immediately comply by having the lead-based materials
removed from the plumbing system and replaced with leadfree
materials. If the lead-based materials are not removed
from the plumbing system, the Water Purveyor shall have the
right to discontinue water service to the premises.
B. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and enforcement of this Section:
CONSUMER — The owner (or person in control of any premises in the
event the property is the estate of a deceased person) supplied by or in
any manner connected to a public water system;
Section
705.570
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.580
AO:832
Section 705.590. through Section 705.599. (Reserved)
LEAD FREE —
LEAD-BASED MATERIALS — Any material containing lead in excess of
the quantities specified in the definition of "lead free."
PUBLIC DRINKING WATER SYSTEM — Any publicly or privately owned
water system supplying water to the general public which is
satisfactory for drinking water to the general public which is
satisfactory for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes and meets the
requirements of the Missouri Department of Natural Resources; and
WATER PURVEYOR — The owner, operator, or individual in responsible
charge of a public water system.
When used with respect to solder and flux, refers to solders and
flux containing not more than two tenths percent (0.2%) lead; and
1.
When used with respect to pipes and pipe fittings, refers to pipes
and pipe fittings containing not more than twenty-five onehundredths
of a percent (0.25%) lead.
2.
C. Lead Banned From Drinking Water Plumbing.
1. No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises where lead-based materials were used in new
construction or modifications of the drinking water plumbing after
January 1, 1989.
2. If a premises is found to be in violation of this Section, water
service shall be discontinued until such time that the drinking
water plumbing is lead free.
Section
705.580
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.590
AO:833

ARTICLE IV
Services
Section 705.600. Restrict Water Use. [R.O. 2008 §705.600; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
In order to maintain proper and sufficient pressures in the distribution
system for fire protection and other purposes, the City reserves the right,
at all times, to determine, limit and regulate, in a responsible and nondiscriminating
manner, the maximum amounts of water a customer may
use.
Section 705.610. Pressure Regulators. [R.O. 2008 §705.610; Ord.
No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
The City will not install nor maintain pressure regulators, either for the
purpose of regulating sustained high pressure or fluctuating pressure.
Section 705.620. Backflow Prevention. [R.O. 2008 §705.620; Ord.
No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
A. Backflow Control By Containment.
1. Class I backflow hazards. The customer or the customer's
authorized representative shall construct or install a departmentapproved
air-gap separation or reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention assembly on the customer service line in
accordance with Section 705.430(B) when:
a. The supplier of water or local governmental agency (if one
exists) requires protection from an actual or potential Class I
backflow hazard at any facility;
b. Modification is made to the customer water system at an
existing facility, which is designated an actual or potential
backflow hazard by Subsection (A)(3). If an addition or
modification requiring a separate customer service line is
made to an existing facility, the new service line as well as the
existing customer service line shall be equipped with a
Department-approved backflow prevention assemblies;
c. A new customer service line connection is made to a facility
which is considered an actual or potential backflow hazard by
Subsection (A)(3); or
d. A backflow incident occurs which introduces a contaminant
into the public or customer water system which may create a
health hazard.
2. Following is a list of facilities, not all inclusive, considered to be
actual or potential Class I backflow hazards.
Section
705.600
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.620
AO:835
a. Aircraft and missile manufacturing plants.
b. Automotive plants including those plants which manufacture
motorcycles, automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
construction and agricultural equipment.
c. Potable water dispensing stations which are served by a public
water system.
d. Beverage bottling plants including dairies and breweries.
e. Canneries, packing houses and reduction plants.
f. Car washes.
g. Chemical, biological and radiological laboratories including
those in high schools, trade schools, colleges, universities and
research institutions.
h. Hospitals, clinics, medical buildings, autopsy facilities,
morgues, mortuaries and other medical facilities.
i. Metal or plastic manufacturing, fabrication, cleaning, plating
or processing facilities.
j. Plants manufacturing paper and paper products.
k. Plants manufacturing, refining, compounding or processing
fertilizer, film, herbicides, natural or synthetic rubber,
pesticides, petroleum or petroleum products, pharmaceutical,
radiological materials or any chemical which would be a
contaminant to the public water system.
l. Commercial facilities that use herbicides, pesticides, fertilizers
or any chemical which would be a contaminant to the public
water system.
m. Plants processing, blending or refining animal, vegetable or
mineral oils.
n. Commercial laundries and dye works.
o. Sewage, stormwater and industrial waste treatment plants and
pumping stations.
p. Waterfront facilities including piers, docks, marinas and
shipyards.
q. Industrial facilities which recycle water.
r. Restricted or classified facilities or other facilities closed to the
supplier of water or the department.
s. Fire sprinkler systems using any chemical additives.
Section
705.620
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.620
AO:836
t. Auxiliary water systems.
u. Irrigation systems with facilities for injection of pesticides,
herbicides or other chemicals or with provisions for creating
back pressure.
v. Portable tanks for transporting water taken from a public
water system.
w. Facilities which have pumped or repressurized cooling or
heating systems that are served by a public water system,
including all boiler systems.
3. Class II backflow hazards. The customer or the customer's
authorized representative shall install, as minimum protection for
Class II backflow hazards, a department-approved double-check
valve assembly on the customer service line in accordance with
Subsection (B)(2)(a), (c), (d), (e) when:
a. The supplier of water or local governmental agency (if one
exists) requires protection from an actual or potential Class II
backflow hazard at any facility.
b. Modification is made to the customer water system at an
existing facility which is designated an actual or potential
backflow hazard by Subsection (A)(4). If an addition or
modification requiring a separate customer service line is
made to an existing facility, the new service line, as well as the
existing customer service line, shall be quipped with
department-approved backflow prevention assemblies.
c. A new customer service line connection is made to a new
facility which is considered an actual or potential backflow
hazard by Subsection (A)(4).
4. Following is a list of facilities, not all inclusive, considered to be
actual or potential Class II backflow hazards:
a. Tanks to store water from the public water system for fire
fighting only, unless such tanks meet the requirements of the
department for construction to maintain bacteriological quality
of the water.
b. Fire sprinkler systems not using chemical additives; or
c. Cross-connections that could permit introduction of
contaminants into the public or customer water system and
create a nuisance, be aesthetically objectionable or cause
minor damage to the public water system or its appurtenances.
5. Customer facilities not designated a backflow hazard by Subsection
(A)(2) or (3) may be designated a backflow hazard by written
notification from the supplier of water or the department to the
Section
705.620
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.620
AO:837
customer. The notice shall specify the nature of the customer
activity which necessitates designation of the facility as a backflow
hazard, the type of backflow protection required and the date by
which the customer shall install or construct this assembly on the
customer service line to the facility.
6. The department may issue a letter exempting a customer from the
requirements of Subsections (A)(1) and (3) if the customer can
show to the satisfaction of the department, the local governmental
authority (if one exists) and the supplier of water that the activities
taking place at the customer's facility and the materials used in
connection with these activities or stored on the premises cannot
endanger the health of customers or degrade the water quality of
the public water system should backflow occur. An exemption shall
remain valid for no more than three (3) years following the date of
issuance. An exemption shall be void if it is determined that the
customer facility has become a backflow hazard.
B. Standards of Construction and Installation.
1. Construction. The discharge pipe of an air-gap shall terminate a
minimum of two (2) pipe diameters of the discharge pipe above the
flood level rim of the receiving vessel; in no case shall the distance
be less than one (1) inch.
2. Installation.
a. Only those models of double-check valve assemblies and
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies
which are on the approved list maintained by the department
are acceptable.
b. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies
shall be installed with no plug or additional piping affixed to
the pressure differential relief valve port and with the pressure
differential relief valve port a minimum of twelve (12) inches
above floor level. Additionally, the assembly shall be installed
at a location where any leakage from the pressure differential
relief valve port will be noticed, that allows easy access to the
assembly for maintenance and testing and that will not subject
the assembly to flooding, excessive heat or freezing.
c. All double-check valve assemblies shall be installed at a
location that allows easy access to the assembly for
maintenance and testing and that will not subject the assembly
to excessive heat or freezing.
d. It is the basic requirement to have backflow prevention
assemblies installed on the customer water system
immediately inside the wall where the customer service line
enters the building. If it is not possible to install the backflow
Section
705.620
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.620
AO:838
prevention assembly as described previously, then installation
shall be at the approval of the department.
3. No bypass piping shall be allowed around a backflow prevention
assembly.
C. Customer Responsibilities.
1. The customer shall furnish, install and maintain in working order at
all times any backflow prevention assembly required by this rule.
2. To ensure that each backflow prevention assembly required by this
rule is in working order, the customer shall have each assembly
inspected and tested by a certified backflow prevention assembly
tester at the time of construction or installation, at the following
intervals and in the following manner:
a. Air-gaps shall be inspected each year by a date which is no
later than thirty (30) days past the anniversary of the original
inspection test date to ensure that they continue to meet the
requirements of Subsection (B)(1).
b. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies
also shall be tested each year by a date which is no later than
thirty (30) days past the anniversary of the original inspection
test date to ensure that:
(1) The pressure differential relief valve operates to maintain
the zone between the two (2) check valves at least two (2)
pounds per square inch less than the supply pressure.
(2) The No. 2 check valve is leaktight against reverse flow
under all pressure differentials; and
(3) The static pressure drop across the No. 1 check valve is at
least three (3) pounds per square inch greater than the
pressure differential between the supply pressure and the
pressure in the zone required to open the pressure
differential relief valve.
c. Double-check valve assemblies shall be tested each year by a
date which is no later than thirty (30) days past the anniversary
of the original inspection test date to ensure that both the No.
1 and No. 2 check valves are leaktight against reverse flow
under all pressure differentials.
3. The customer shall permit access to the premises by the certified
backflow prevention assembly tester, supplier of water and
department representatives, at reasonable times and upon
presentation of identification, for inspection of the customer water
system or testing of backflow prevention assemblies installed in
accordance with this rule.
Section
705.620
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.620
AO:839
4. Those customers granted an exemption in accordance with
Subsection (B)(6) of this rule shall report to the supplier of water
any proposed change in process, plumbing or materials used or
stored at the exempted facility at least fourteen (14) days prior to
making the change. Failure to do so shall void the exemption.
D. Certified Backflow Prevention Assembly Tester Duties.
1. All backflow prevention assembly testers shall be certified through
a department-approved program and be listed with the
department. All certified backflow prevention assembly testers
shall be recertified every three (3) years through a departmentapproved
program. Evidence of recertification must be provided to
the department for consideration to be included on a list of certified
backflow prevention assembly testers made available to the public.
2. All certified backflow prevention assembly testers shall report to
the appropriate governmental authority (if one exists), to the
supplier of water, the customer and, if requested, the department
the results of inspections or tests conducted in compliance with
Subsection (F)(2). Reports of tests shall contain the signature of the
certified backflow prevention assembly tester attesting to the
compliance of the assembly with established operational
requirements. Routine reports shall be submitted within thirty (30)
days after making the inspection or test.
E. Responsibilities Of The Supplier Of Water.
1. Because backflow may cause a health hazard through transmission
of contaminants via the public water system, the supplier of water
shall remove the water meter or otherwise sever the public water
supply from the customer service line serving a facility when the
supplier of water:
a. Has knowledge that the customer is causing a crossconnection.
b. Has knowledge that the customer is failing or refusing to
proceed without delay to correct any violation of the provisions
of this rule after having been notified to do so.
c. Is so ordered by the appropriate local governmental authority
(if one exists); or
d. Is so ordered by the department because of violation of any
provision of this rule by the customer.
2. The supplier of water shall retain records of the reports of
inspections, tests and repairs on Class I and Class II devices for a
period of five (5) years.
3. The supplier of water may develop, for use within his/her service
area, written procedures to implement the provisions of this rule.
Section
705.620
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.620
AO:840
Section 705.630. through Section 705.690. (Reserved)
In developing such procedures, the supplier of water will be
permitted to take into account existing backflow prevention
programs and incorporate ordinances, regulations or requirements
of appropriate local governmental authorities. The supplier of
water may submit the procedures to the department for approval.
4. The supplier of water shall make record of the date of the initial
inspection or test of Class I and Class II backflow prevention
devices; that date shall become the annual due date for subsequent
inspection or test reports submitted by the certified backflow
prevention assembly tester. If subsequent reports are not received
by the supplier of water on or before forty-five (45) days following
this due date, the supplier of water shall promptly notify the
customer, the local governmental agency (if one exists) and the
department.
F. Responsibilities Of The Department Of Natural Resources.
1. All certified backflow prevention assembly tester programs shall be
submitted to the department for approval. Names of persons
satisfactorily completing approved certification programs will,
upon request, be added to a list of certified backflow prevention
assembly testers and will be made available to the public upon
written request.
2. The department shall maintain a current list of approved backflow
prevention assemblies and shall make this list available to the
public upon written request.
3. The department shall prepare and make available on request, the
appropriate forms needed to assist the supplier of water or the
local governmental authority (if one exists) in the implementation
of the provisions of this rule.
Section
705.620
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.630
AO:841

ARTICLE V
Water Service Permits
Section 705.700. Issuance of Permits Prior to Work. [R.O. 2008
§705.700; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
No work in connection with the tapping of any main or the introduction of
water to any premises shall be done, nor shall any water service be altered,
repaired, replaced, extended, nor fixture nor appurtenances added thereto
or detached therefrom, without prior issuance of a permit authorizing the
performance of such work. When a plumber must perform emergency work
during other than normal working hours, the plumber shall secure a permit
on the next regular working day.
Section 705.710. Application for Permit. [R.O. 2008 §705.710; Ord.
No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005]
Applications for permits shall be made by the owner of the premises or
his/her agent to the Director of Public Works or his/her authorized
representative. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plan,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the Director of Public Works or his/her authorized representative.
Section 705.720. Issuance of Permit. [R.O. 2008 §705.720; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Permits shall be issued to a licensed plumber or a property owner, provided
said property owner furnishes satisfactory evidence that he/she intends to
do the proposed work himself. Permits shall not be transferable and shall
only be valid for the applicant to whom issued and for the work described
thereon.
Section 705.730. Permit Fees. [R.O. 2008 §705.730; Ord. No. 6776
§§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009;Ord. No. 7343
§§1 — 2, 7-25-2011]
A. A permit fee shall be paid at the time the application is filed, except that
permit fees for licensed plumbers, upon the approval of the Director of
Public Works, may be paid within thirty (30) days according to the
following schedule of fees:
1. Water/sewer service connection for the main, including private fire
connection. (A three-quarter-inch water meter must be purchased
from the City. Other meter sizes may be purchased from the City.
All meters shall read in cubic feet.)
Section
705.700
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.730
AO:843
Size and Type of Tap
Amount of Service
Connection Fee
3/4 inch corporation tap $400.00 + meter cost
3/4 or 5/8 inch corporation tap for
areas in the service area acquired
from the Public Water Supply
District No. 1 - Nodaway County
$2,000.00 + meter cost
1 inch corporation tap $500.00 + meter cost
1 1/4 inch corporation tap $600.00 + meter cost
1 1/2 inch corporation tap $700.00 + meter cost
2 inch branch tap $800.00 + meter cost
4 inch branch tap $1,200.00 + meter cost
6 inch branch tap $2,400.00 + meter cost
8 inch branch tap $4,800.00 + meter cost
2. Shutdown of water main (at customer's request): fifty dollars
($50.00).
3. Outside meter relocation: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
4. Abandonment of service: three hundred dollars ($300.00).
5. Water/sewer service inspection (each trip): ten dollars ($10.00).
6. Water/sewer service connection for the main, including private fire
connection. (A three-quarter-inch water meter must be purchased
from the City. Other meter sizes may be purchased from the City.
All meters shall read in cubic feet.)
As used in this Section, the phrase "the service area acquired from
the Public Water Supply District No. 1 — Nodaway County" shall
be understood to mean those portions purchased by the City of
Maryville from Public Water Supply District No. 1 by the Territorial
Agreement and Contract Modification Extension, dated December
31, 1999, November 4, 2010, or April 11, 2011 and referred to
therein but not limited to as Park Territory, Harmony Hills
Subdivision Territory, Southeast Territory, City Lagoon Territory
and Industrial Territory, all as described on the attachments to the
agreement.
B. Sewer Tap Fee.
1. Residential per unit: six hundred dollars ($600.00).
2. Non-residential.
Section
705.730
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.730
AO:844
Nonresidential Connection
Type of Installation Flow GPD Fee Per Unit
Club building 500 $3,000.00
Bar, per seat 50 (minimum
$2,000)
$60.00
Beauty/barber shop, per
wet chair
333 (minimum
$2,000)
$300.00
Bowling alley, per lane 125 (minimum
$2,000)
$150.00
Car wash
Per bay self operated 100 (minimum
$2,000)
$120.00
Automatic 166 $200.00
Church, per seat 5 $6.00
Coin laundry, per
machine
400 $400.00
Commercial laundry, per
machine
640 $750.00
Country club
Per member or 100 $120.00
Per 100 square feet 250 $300.00
Hospital, per bed 200 $500.00
Industrial, per employee 35 (minimum
$2,000)
$42.00
Mobile home park, single
or double wide
300 $600.00
Motel, hotel and apts.
without washer/dryer
hookups, per unit
225 $400.00
Apartments with washer/
dryer hookups, per unit
300 $500.00
Nursing home, per bed 125 $300.00
Office, per 1,000 square
feet
175 (minimum
$2,000)
$350.00
Medical, per 1,000
square feet
500 $750.00
Residence, per unit,
includes:
Condos/townhomes 400 $600.00
Multifamily1
Section
705.730
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.730
AO:845
Nonresidential Connection
Type of Installation Flow GPD Fee Per Unit
Per unit 1 to 2
bedroom
300 $600.00
3 bedroom 400 $600.00
Restaurant, per seat
With drive-in 55 $30.00
Without drive-in 25 $25.00
Service station/fuel
center
Regular pump $250.00
Truck pump $300.00
School2
Per student 17 $20.00
With gym 21 $25.00
Stores, shopping center
Per 1,000 square feet 100 (minimum
$2,000)
$120.00
Theater, per seat 5 (minimum $2,000) $5.00
Auditorium convention
center, assembly hall (no
food service), per capita
10 (minimum
$2,000)
$12.00
Warehouse per 1,000
square feet
25 (minimum
$2,000)
$30.00
NOTES:
1 Includes duplex, triplex, quadraplex as well as apartments.
2 Includes day care centers.
3. Any non-residential sewer tap fee installation not listed above shall
be determined by the City Manager, City Engineer, and/or Public
Works Director.
4. All fees set above in Section 705.730(A) shall be twenty percent
(20%) higher if located outside the City.
C. Permit fees required for street excavation, street cleanup, and
materials removal shall be in addition to the fees specified herein. In
addition to the specified fees below, if the City performs any of these
services, a charge of eighty-eight dollars ($88.00) an hour will be levied
with a minimum fee of eighty-eight dollars ($88.00).
1. Roadway surface.
Section
705.730
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.730
AO:846
Section 705.740. Temporary Services. [R.O. 2008 §705.740; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Section 705.750. Inspections. [R.O. 2008 §705.750; Ord. No. 6776
§§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
a. Concrete or asphalt permanent street: four dollars and fifty
cents ($4.50) per square foot.
b. Non-permanent streets: three dollars ($3.00) per square foot.
c. Excavation/street cuts: ten dollars ($10.00).
d. Subgrade fill: forty-six hundredths (0.46) per cubic foot.
D. The permittee will be required to expose the water main and/or sewer
and prepare the site to meet City specifications. The City will furnish
the necessary corporation for the service connection.
E. The permittee will be required to expose the water main and prepare
the site to meet City specifications. The permittee will be required to
furnish an approved tapping sleeve and valve at his/her cost.
A. Water service for a building under construction may be provided to the
general contractor for a period of up to six (6) months upon application
for such service and payment of all necessary fees and charges. At the
termination of construction and delivery of the building to the owner,
the contractor shall notify the Water Department, requesting the
service be changed to the name of the owner. The general contractor
shall be responsible for the cost of all water consumed during the time
service is provided in his/her name. If the general contractor does not
desire water service or in the case there is no general contractor, any
plumber or owner may request temporary service in the same manner
as a general contractor.
B. Temporary water service may be provided by the installation of a
portable meter box attached to a fire hydrant upon special permission
of the Director of Public Works and completion of the required
application form.
C. Temporary water service shall be treated as a regular service for water
connection and all applicable tap and rate fees shall apply.
A. Inspections shall be required on all work performed under a Water
Department permit and shall be completed following twenty-four (24)
hour notice by the plumber that construction is complete.
B. Inspections will be performed only during normal working hours.
C. Requests for inspections may be made in person or by telephone to the
Director of Public Works.
Section
705.730
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.750
AO:847
Section 705.760. through Section 705.790. (Reserved)
D. Service line excavations and trenches presented for inspection shall be
free of water, earth, debris or other matter that would hinder the
inspector. The service pipe shall not be covered before it has been
inspected. Service lines to be inspected shall be under line pressure.
The inspector may make as many inspections as he/she deems
necessary to obtain compliance with this Section.
Section
705.750
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.760
AO:848
ARTICLE VI
Taps and Service Connections
Section 705.800. General Requirements for Taps. [R.O. 2008
§705.800; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
Section 705.810. Requirements for Corporation Taps. [R.O. 2008
§705.810; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
A. Tapping shall be performed by the City only as authorized by the
Director of Public Works or his/her representative or designee.
B. Taps shall be located within the property lines of the building or
premises to be served. The words "within the property lines" shall be
interpreted to mean that portion of the main that is intersected by an
extension of the side lot lines of the premises served in a direction
perpendicular to the centerline of the street in which the main is
located.
C. The responsibility for excavation and the protection of same shall rest
on the permit holder.
D. Excavations must be free of water and debris so that the tapper can
perform his/her task without delay. Should the work be in such
condition as to necessitate an additional trip by the tapper, the licensed
plumber shall be charged the inspection fee for such additional trips.
E. The Water Department shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours'
notice in advance of the time a tape is to be made. Taps will not be made
on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays.
F. The service trench shall not be backfilled until after the tap has been
completed and the installation approved by the Director of Public Works
or his/her authorized representative. Street cuts shall be made in such
a manner to minimize damage to the street and other immediate areas.
The person making the excavation shall refill the trench as soon as
possible with materials accepted by the City. Surfaces of street cuts
shall be replaced as responsible for removing any residual materials
and clean site. If excavation fill and/or surface repair is performed by
City personnel, the following fees will be levied in accordance with
Section 705.730.
A. No corporation tap shall be larger than one (1) inch diameter, except
that on mains four (4) inches or smaller in diameter, no corporation tap
shall be smaller than three-fourths (¾) inch in diameter.
B. Corporation taps shall be made so that the corporation cock is inserted
at approximately forty-five degrees (45°) from the top of the main.
C. Manifold or "spider" taps for service connections shall not be permitted.
Section
705.800
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.810
AO:849
Section 705.820. Requirements for Installation of Service
Connections. [R.O. 2008 §705.820; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2,
8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Section 705.830. Special Requirements for Tap Services. [R.O. 2008
§705.830; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
D. A corporation tap shall not be closer than eighteen (18) inches to a bell,
spigot, another tap, valve or blow-off.
E. The main must be exposed for a distance of two (2) feet on both sides of
the tapping point to maintain proper distance as required in Subsection
(D) above and extend three (3) feet from the face of the main. The main
must be uncovered completely around.
F. The tap excavation must be of sufficient size to permit the tapper to
attach and operate the tapping machine. Tunneling to provide access
for the tap is not acceptable.
G. If corporation taps cannot be made in accordance with the foregoing
requirements because of obstructions or conditions that cannot be
changed, the matter in which the tap is to be made shall be determined
by the Director of Public Works.
A. Service lines shall be installed on the property being served and in a
manner that satisfies the requirements of this Code.
B. In no case shall a property owner extend his/her service piping across a
street or alley or to an adjacent building for the purpose of supplying
water service to the adjacent property, even though such adjacent
property is owned by the same party.
C. Service lines are to run perpendicular to the main.
D. No pipes or conduits will be permitted in the same trench with the
service line.
E. No service line shall be installed closer than ten (10) feet horizontally or
twelve (12) inches vertically from a sewer.
F. Service lines shall have a cover of not less than forty-two (42) inches or
more than five (5) feet.
G. No service line shall be less than three-fourth (¾) inch inside diameter.
H. Service lines from the tap to the meter shall conform to Section
515.050.
A. The connection of tap service connection to the corporation cock shall
be made by means of an approved adapter.
Section
705.810
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.830
AO:850
Section 705.840. Partial Service Permitted. [R.O. 2008 §705.840;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
When service piping is installed for future use, it shall be installed as far
as the property line and plugged and marked in a manner approved by the
Director of Public Works. An extension permit will be required to complete
the service.
Section 705.850. Multiple Services. [R.O. 2008 §705.850; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
B. The lines shall be laid with an expansion loop located as near to the
corporation cock as possible. This loop shall be in the form of a half S
bend and be at least six (6) inches off the centerline of the run to
provide excess material for settlement and flexibility.
C. No coupling of any type will be permitted between the corporation cock
and curb stop or meter yoke where the distance is less than fifty (50)
feet. Only three (3) part flared union couplings will be permitted in
making connections in copper pipe over fifty (50) feet long.
D. No sweat joints will be permitted on any portion of the service line.
E. All tap service connections shall be fitted with a two (2) headed curb
stop located on the property line opposite the tap connection unless the
meter yoke for an outside meter set is located on the property line, in
which case a curb stop will not be required.
F. Each curb stop (if required) must be fitted with an adjustable, two (2)
section curb box of gray cast iron. The curb box must have an internal
diameter of not less than three (3) inches on the lower section, a closed
base to hold the curb stop in center and permit an adjustment of not
less than one (1) foot in length.
G. Each tap service connection shall be fitted with a stop and waste valve
immediately upon entering a building.
A. A "multiple service" is a service having one (1) connection to the main
and branching on public property before entrance to a single building.
Multiple service piping must meet the following requirements and shall
apply to new construction in the following manner:
1. Each branch shall have a separate curb stop or shut-off valve on the
meter yoke.
2. Each branch shall have a separate meter.
3. Each branch shall require a separate permit.
4. Size of water service required for multiple dwellings:
Section
705.830
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.850
AO:851
Section 705.860. Maintenance of Services. [R.O. 2008 §705.860;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
The Water Department shall maintain all service lines from the main to and
including the first (1st) valve but not the house side connection thereto.
In the case where no valve is located in the service line and the meter is
located in the private property of the owner, it shall be the responsibility of
the owner to maintain the service line from the main to the building served.
Section 705.870. Abandonment of Service — Generally. [R.O. 2008
§705.870; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
Section 705.880. Abandonment of Service — How Performed. [R.O.
2008 §705.880; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1
— 2, 4-13-2009]
Section 705.890. Abandonment of Service for Building Demolition.
[R.O. 2008 §705.890; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No.
7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Number of Units Size of Water Line
2 1 inch
3 — 4 1¼ inch
5 — 6 1½ inch
A. When the premises previously served have been abandoned or
demolished; or
B. On application for permit by the owner of the premises served.
A. The disconnection of service at the main as provided in this Code shall
be accomplished in the following manner:
1. On tap service connections, the corporation cock shall be
uncovered and turned off, the service line disconnected and the
corporation capped.
2. On branch service connections, the abandonment shall be
performed in a manner specified by the Director of Public Works.
A. When a building is to be razed, all unnecessary services to the premises
shall be abandoned in accordance with the following:
1. The work shall be performed by a licensed plumber upon securing
the appropriate permit.
2. The licensed plumber shall perform the work of capping the
corporation cock, removal of the curb box, removal of meter set
and lid and the return of said materials to the Water Department.
Section
705.850
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.890
AO:852
Inspection of said work shall be made before backfilling. For
branch services, disposition of the meter pit shall be made as
directed by the Director of Public Works.
3. The work shall be performed at the expense of the property owner.
Section
705.890
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.890
AO:853

ARTICLE VII
Meters and Metering
Section 705.900. General Requirements for Meter Sets. [R.O. 2008
§705.900; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
Section 705.910. Outdoor Meter Sets — Small Meters. [R.O. 2008
§705.910; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
A. All meters shall be set in an approved, non-hazardous place and
accessibility shall be maintained at all times. Residential (location
optional), industrial (location optional), commercial (when appropriate
shall be indoors, with remote read out) outside installation shall be with
City approved meter pit. The water meter shall be protected from any
damage or freezing and be readily accessible in an unlocked room or
enclosure.
B. Meter well or meter pit, lids and covers shall be as specified by the
Director of Public Works and be protected from damage by traffic and
be of sufficient strength to withstand traffic loads.
C. All meters shall be set in a horizontal position.
D. The size of the meter shall be the same size as the service line installed
and in no case shall the meter be larger than the service line.
E. Meter sets for meters two (2) inches in diameter and larger shall
require a bypass with a sealed bypass valve.
F. Meter sets for meters two (2) inches in diameter and larger shall
require a flexible coupling installed on the building side of the meter
and isolating valve.
G. The licensed plumber shall furnish and install all required pipe, fittings,
valves, meter well or pit covers and lids.
H. The Water Department shall install the meter.
I. Regardless of the meter location, the customer shall be responsible for
damage to the meter or its appurtenances caused by the customer's
negligence or failure to properly safeguard and protect such meter and
appurtenances from hazards.
J. All meter wells or pits shall be located to prevent an accumulation of
water within the tile or pit to be properly drained.
A. All outdoor meter sets for meters one (1) inch and smaller shall conform
to the following:
1. Meter sets shall be placed on public property near the property
line.
Section
705.900
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.910
AO:855
Section 705.920. Outdoor Meter Sets — Large Meters. [R.O. 2008
§705.920; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
Section 705.930. Indoor Meter Sets. [R.O. 2008 §705.930; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
All indoor meter sets are prohibited.
Section 705.940. Present Meter Locations Not in Compliance. [R.O.
2008 §705.940; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1
— 2, 4-13-2009]
All present meter sets, whether indoor or outdoor, not in compliance with
the Sections of this Article shall be improved or relocated, to be in
compliance within thirty (30) days following written notice from the
Director of Public Works. Such improvements shall be of the expense of the
customer.
Section 705.950. Meters. [R.O. 2008 §705.950; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 —
2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
2. The shut-off valve shall be between eighteen (18) and twenty-four
(24) inches of the lid.
3. All materials for meter sets shall conform to current Water
Department specifications.
4. Maintenance and testing of meters will be performed by the Water
Department.
5. All meter pits, customer tiles and sets shall be maintained by the
customer.
6. The customer shall be responsible for taking necessary precaution
to prevent pipes and meters from freezing in cold weather for all
installations that are not approved by or do not conform to Water/
Wastewater Maintenance Department specifications. If an
unapproved meter or a meter located indoors is damaged by
freezing, the costs of materials for such repairs shall be charged to
the customer.
A. All outdoor meter sets for meters one and one-half (1½) inches and
larger shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Large meters shall be located near the property line, by a driveway
and be accessible to Water Department vehicles.
2. Pit and materials for meter sets shall be as approved by the
Director of Public Works and plans and specifications shall be
furnished by a licensed plumber or contractor for approval.
Section
705.910
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.950
AO:856
Section 705.960. Testing and Non-Registration of Water Meter.
[R.O. 2008 §705.960; Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No.
7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Section 705.970. through Section 705.990. (Reserved)
A. Meters larger than three-fourth (¾) inch may be furnished and paid for
by the customer. Only meters which read in cubic feet measurements
and are approved by the City of Maryville Water/Wastewater
Maintenance Department shall be installed (gallons prohibited).
B. All meters shall be maintained and removed by the Water Department
at its expense insofar as ordinary wear is concerned, but damage due to
hot water, freezing or external causes arising out of or caused by the
customer's negligence or carelessness shall be paid for by the
customer.
A. The City Water Department may remove any meter for routine tests,
repairs and replacement. Meter tests shall be subject to the following:
1. Whenever, upon test by the Water Department, any water meter is
found to have an average error of not more than four percent (4%),
such meter shall be considered to be accurate and correct and no
adjustment shall be made in any charge or bill for service prior to
the date of such test. If, upon test by the Water Department, any
water meter is found to have an average error of more than two
percent (2%), such meter shall be corrected or replaced, at the
option of the Water Department and an appropriate correction or
charge in keeping with the percentage error found upon testing
shall be made in the bills or charges for water service measured
through said meter during a period of not more than sixty (60) days
prior to the date of such test.
2. The customer shall have the right to request a special meter test at
any time. If the special test made at the customer's request
discloses that the meter is registering correctly or within two
percent (2%) of normal, the customer shall pay the sum of three
hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for the expense of testing such
meter. The expense of all other tests shall be borne by the Water
Department.
Section
705.950
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.970
AO:857

ARTICLE VIII
Water for Fire Protection
Section 705.1000. Water Provided. [R.O. 2008 §705.1000; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Water shall be provided for fire fighting by the Department of Public Safety
or through private fire connections without charge.
Section 705.1010. Fire Hydrants. [R.O. 2008 §705.1010; Ord. No.
6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2, 4-13-2009]
Section 705.1020. Private Fire Connections. [R.O. 2008 §705.1020;
Ord. No. 6776 §§1 — 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 7102 §§1 — 2,
4-13-2009]
A. Fire hydrants shall be installed in all mains as required by the City
Manager or his/her authorized representative.
B. Fire hydrants shall conform to all specifications of the City and the
American Waterworks Association and shall be spaced so that no
property is more than three hundred (300) feet in distance from a
hydrant.
C. Relocation of a fire hydrant located on a City right-of-way or easement
may be made by the Water Department upon written request of an
owner of property adjacent to said hydrant and the deposit of the
estimated cost of relocation, plus overhead, with the Water
Department. Provided, the Water Department reserves the right to
refuse to relocate the fire hydrant if, in its opinion, such relocation
would be detrimental to the safety, convenience or protection potential
of the hydrant.
A. Private fire connections for sprinkler systems or other fire protection
devices may be installed and maintained at the entire cost and expense
of the owner of the premises. Said services shall be used exclusively for
the extinguishment of fires and will not be metered, but will be charged
as provided in Article II (Rates and Charges) of Chapter 705.
B. All materials for such private fire connections must be approved by the
City Manager or his/her authorized representative and the service must
be provided with suitable valves, including backflow device, outside the
building under the exclusive control of the Water Department.
C. All sprinkler pipes and other fire connection pipes shall be so placed as
to be readily inspected. If concealed or arranged with other pipes so as
not to be readily inspected, or if any unauthorized connections are
made or are in existence, a meter shall be installed at the expense of the
customer.
D. No private fire connections shall be made on water mains of less than
six (6) inches diameter.
Section
705.1000
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.1020
AO:859
E. The City Water Department does not assume liability as an insurer of
property or persons and the installation of a private fire connection
does not guarantee, provide or entitle the owner that any special
service, pressure, capacity or facility will be provided or maintained. All
private fire service shall be subject to the ordinances and changing
conditions of the City as the same exist day to day.
Section
705.1020
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
705.1020
AO:860
Chapter 710
SEWERS — DISCHARGE OF NON-INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Section
705.1020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.1020
AO:861

ARTICLE I
Discharge of Sewage and Industrial Wastes
Section 710.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2008 §710.010; Ord. No. 5050
§1, 5-11-1992]
A. Unless otherwise indicated by specific context, the meaning and terms
used in this Article shall be as follows:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended (33 United States Code
1251, et seq.).
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Director of the Missouri Department of
Natural Resources.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — An
authorized representative of an Industrial User who may be:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (B.O.D., BOD) — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of decomposed organic
matter by standard methods procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20)
organic matter by standard methods procedure in five (5) days at
twenty degrees Celsius (20°C) expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil waste or other
drainage pipes inside walls of a building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning two (2) feet outside the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (C.O.D., COD) — The measure of the
oxygen-consuming capacity of organic and inorganic matter present
in wastewater expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidant as under standard laboratory procedure expressed in
milligrams per liter (mg/l).
CITY — The Municipality of Maryville, Missouri, for the purpose of
administering this Article represented by the Director of Public Works.
A principal executive officer of at least the level of Vice President,
if the Industrial User is a corporation;
1.
A general partner or proprietor if the Industrial User is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
2.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated
above, if such representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge
originates.
3.
Section
710.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.010
AO:863
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer designed and intended to receive and
convey both wastewater and stormwater, including roof and street
drainage.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The combination of individual samples of
water or wastewater taken at selected intervals (generally hourly or
some similar specified period), to minimize the effect of the variability
of the individual sample. Individual samples may have equal volume or
may be roughly proportional to the flow at the time of sampling.
CONNECTION — The attachment of a building sewer to the City's
public sewer at a "Y" branch or the drilling of a proper opening on the
sewer main and the placement of an approved collar receptacle secured
by epoxy cement. This work does not include any excavation or backfill
at the site.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The City is the "Control Authority", through
the Director of Public Works as described in the provisions of 40 CFR
403.11.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as airconditioning,
cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the ground or surface water of the State of
Missouri.
DIRECTOR — The executive of the Department of Public Works who
supervises the operation of the Combined Waterworks and Sewerage
System of the City of Maryville.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may
be used as designation for the Regional Administrator or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
GARBAGE — Solid waste from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling,
storing and sale of products.
GOVERNING BODY — The City Council of the City of Maryville,
Missouri.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a
one (1) time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any wastes from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic
pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b) or
(c) of the Act (33 United States Code 1317), into the POTW (including
holding tanks discharged into the public sewer).
Section
710.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
710.010
AO:864
INDUSTRIAL LIQUID WASTE — All waterborne solids, liquids or
gaseous wastes resulting from any industrial, manufacturing or food
processing operation or process, or from the development of any
natural resource, or any mixture of these with water or domestic
wastewater as distinct from normal domestic wastewater. Industrial
manufacturing processes shall include, but are not limited to: Food and
allied products, tobacco manufacturers; textile mill products; apparel
and other finished products, furniture and fixtures; printing; publishing
and allied industries; chemicals and allied products; petroleum refining
and related industries; rubber and miscellaneous plastics products;
leather and leather products; stone, clay, glass, and concrete products;
primary metal industries; fabricated metal products; machinery and
transportation equipment; electrical machinery, equipment and
supplies; transportation equipment; professional, scientific and
controlling instruments; photographic and optical goods; watches and
clocks; miscellaneous manufacturing industries.
INTERFERENCE — According to 40 CFR 403.3(i), "interference" is
defined as a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, both inhibits or disrupts the POTW;
its treatment processes or its sludge processes, use, or disposal; and
therefore, causes a violation of the POTW's National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or prevents sewage
sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified applicable Federal
Statutes, regulations or permits.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Revision Required — "Industrial user" is defined
in 40 CFR 403.3(h) as a source of indirect discharge. "Indirect
discharge" is defined in 40 CFR 403.3(g) as the discharge of pollutants
into a POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Sections
307(b), (c) or (d) of the Clean Water Act (CWA).
MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM — All sanitary sewers, pumping stations,
sewage treatment plants, main sewers, interceptor sewers, outfall
sewers, and work for the collection, transportation, wastes thereto,
necessary in the maintenance and operation of the same.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRE-TREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT
STANDARD — Any (present or future) regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317)
which applies to a specific category of Industrial Users.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or
NPDES PERMIT — A discharge permit issued by the Approval Authority
pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any (present or future) regulation
developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section
403.5.
Section
710.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.010
AO:865
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or ground water.
NEW SOURCE — "New source" is defined in 40 CFR 403.3(k) as a
facility from which there is, or may be, a discharge of pollutants,
construction of which began after the publication of the proposed pretreatment
standards pursuant to Section 307(c) of the CWA, which will
apply to the facility if the standards are promulgated, provided certain
location and construction criteria are met.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Waterborne wastes normally
discharging from the sanitary sewer of buildings (including apartment
houses and motels), office buildings, factories and institutions, free
from storm surface water and industrial wastes. Normal domestic
wastewater for the City shall be wastewater with an average
concentration of five (5) day BOD established at two hundred
milligrams per liter (200 mg/l); the average concentration of suspended
solids is established at three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l).
PASS THROUGH — Under 40 CFR 403.3(n), "pass through" is defined
as a discharge which exists the POTW in quantities or concentrations
which, alone or with discharges from other sources, causes a violation
of the POTW's NPDES Permit.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental agency or any other legal entity of their local
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine; the singular shall include the plural where indicated by
the context.
pH — The negative logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of
the hydrogen ions in grams per liter of a solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage which has been
shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under
the flow conditions normally prevailing in sewers, with no particle
greater than one (1) inch in any dimension.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
wastewater, garbage, wastewater sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, City and agricultural
waste discharged into water.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological, thermal, and radiological integrity of
water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
PRE-TREATMENT REQUIREMENT — "Pre-treatment requirement" is
defined in 40 CFR 403.3(r) as any substantive or procedural pre-
Section
710.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
710.010
AO:866
treatment requirement, other than a national pretreatment standard,
applicable to IUS.
PRE-TREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the removal of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or
in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into
the POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes or process changes by other means,
except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d).
PRE-TREATMENT STANDARD — Any (present or future regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to
Industrial Users.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
shall have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — The treatment
works as defined by Section 212 of the Act; which is owned by the
City of Maryville, Missouri. This definition includes any devices and
systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of
City wastewater of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and
other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a wastewater
treatment plant. For the purposes of this Article, "POTW" shall also
include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons
outside the City who are users of the City's POTW.
RECEIVING STREAM — Any natural watercourse into which sewage is
discharged.
RECORDS — Such books, documents, papers, apparatus, data,
readings, records of analysis, plans and graphs as may be required for
the proper operation of the publicly owned treatment works.
SANITARY SEWAGE — (See Normal Domestic Wastewater).
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and/or industrial
wastes to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally
admitted.
SEWAGE — Any combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
buildings, industrial establishments, institutions, manufacturing plants,
processing plants, commercial establishments, or other places in which
such wastes are produced, together with such ground, surface, storm
or other water as may be present.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL — Is mandatory; MAY — is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — As per 40 CFR 403.3(t),
"significant industrial user" is defined as:
1. Any Categorical Industrial User (CIU).
Section
710.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.010
AO:867
SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE — Pursuant to 40 CFR
403.8(f)(2)(vii), an IU is in "significant non-compliance" if its violation
meets one or more of the specific criteria listed in this Section. If the
POTW determines that an IU is in Significant non-compliance (SNC),
that user must be included on the annual publication list. In Section
10-326.d of the ordinance, the City uses an old Federal definition which
defines "significant violation" as "a violation which remains uncorrected
forty-five (45) days after non-compliance, which is part of a pattern
of non-compliance over a 12-month period, which involves a failure to
accurately report non-compliance".
SLUG — Any discharge of wastewater, sewage, or industrial liquid
wastes which, for a given pollutant parameter, exceeds for any period
longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than (5) times its average
twenty-four (24) hour concentration during normal operation.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — Classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1971.
STANDARD METHODS — The laboratory procedures set forth in the
latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater", as prepared, approved and
published jointly by the "American Public Health Association" and
"American Waterworks Association" and "Water Pollution Control
Federation".
STATE — The State of Missouri.
STORM SEWER OR STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries
stormwater, surface water, drainage and some industrial water
discharges, such as cooling and air-conditioning water, but excludes
sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or
are suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
Any other IU which:
Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000)
gallons or more of process wastewater per day;
a.
Contributes a process wastewater which makes up five percent
(5%) or more of the dry weather average hydraulic or organic
capacity of the POTW;
b.
Is designated as such by the Control Authority on the basis that
it has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the POTW's
operation or to violate a pre-treatment standard or
requirement.
c.
2.
Section
710.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
710.010
AO:868
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in (present or future) regulations promulgated by the
Administrator of the EPA under the provision of Section 307(a)(1) of the
Act.
TRAP — A device for retaining sand, slit, grit mineral material,
petroleum solvent, grease or oil by gravity differential separation from
wastewater and of a design and capacity approved by the City.
UNPOLLUTED WATER AND WASTE — Any water or waste containing
none of the following: Emulsified grease or oil, acid, or alkali, phenols
or other substances imparting taste and odor in receiving water; toxic
poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and
noxious or odorous gases. It shall contain not more than ten (10)
milligrams per liter (10 mg/l) of suspended solids or five (5) day BOD.
The color shall not exceed fifty (50) standard color units.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the City's POTW.
WASTEWATER — (See "SEWAGE.")
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices
and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge.
Sometimes synonymous with waste treatment plant or wastewater
treatment plant.
WATERCOURSE — A natural surface drainage channel for stormwater
and ground water in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface, or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through or border upon the State of
Missouri or any portion thereof.
B. Unless the context of usage indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
in the Article not defined in this Section shall be defined in the Glossary:
Water and Wastewater Control Engineering, prepared by the Joint
Editorial Board of the American Public Health and Association,
American Society of Civil Engineers, American Waterworks Association
and Water Pollution Control Federation, copyright 1969.
C. Abbreviations shall have these designated meanings:
1. BOD: Biochemical Oxygen Demand (five (5) day, unless otherwise
noted as "Ultimate BOD")
2. CFR: Code of Federal Regulations
3. COD: Chemical Oxygen Demand
4. EPA: Environmental Protection Agency
Section
710.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.010
AO:869
Section 710.020. Use of Sewers Required — Unlawful Acts. [R.O.
2008 §710.020; Ord. No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
Section 710.030. Toilet Facilities and Sewer Connection Required.
[R.O. 2008 §710.030; Ord. No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment or recreation or other purpose, situated within the City, is
hereby required, at their expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this Article, within ninety (90) days after
the date of official notice to do so; provided that said public sewer is within
one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
Section 710.040. Private Sewage Disposal. [R.O. 2008 §710.040;
Ord. No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
5. L: Liter
6. mg: Milligrams
7. mg/l: Milligrams Per Liter
8. DNR: (Missouri) Department of Natural Resources
9. NODES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination system
10. POTW: Publicly Owned Treatment Plant
11. USC: United States Code
12. SIC: Standard Industrial Classification
13. SWDA: Solid Waste Disposal Act.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the City
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, to perform any of the
following:
1. Deposit in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property
any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable
waste.
2. Discharge to any natural outlet or storm sewer any sewage,
industrial wastes, polluted water, or any other substance which
constitutes a nuisance or hazard to the public health or welfare,
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance
with subsequent provisions of the Article.
3. Construct, install or maintain any privy, privy vault, cesspool or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage, except
private sewage disposal systems as hereinafter provided.
Section
710.010
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
710.040
AO:870
Section 710.050. Building Sewers and Connections. [R.O. 2008
§710.050; Ord. No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992; Ord. No. 5099 §1, 11-9-1992;
Ord. No. 5532 §1, 5-27-1997]
A. Exclusion thereof, no private sewage disposal system construction shall
be permitted within the City Limits.
B. Abandonment. At such times as public sanitary sewer becomes
available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as
provided in Section 710.020(2), a direct connection shall be made to the
public sewer within sixty (60) days in compliance with this Article, and
the private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of
sludge, and filled with a suitable material. (Concrete)
A. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer.
B. Connection Permit Required. No unauthorized person shall uncover,
make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any
public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the Director of Public Works. There shall be three (3)
classes of building sewer connection permits:
1. For residential services;
2. For commercial service; and
3. For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
C. No permit shall be issued for connection of a building sewer to any
public sewer required to be constructed pursuant to a permit issued by
an agency of the State of Missouri, until such public sewer has been
approved and accepted by the City and a State of Missouri operating
permit has been issued.
D. Application for Permit. In any case, the application for such a permit
shall be made on a form furnished by the City which the applicant shall
supplement by any plans, specifications or other information as are
deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works.
E. Costs. All costs and expense incident to the installation and connections
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of a building sewer.
F. Regulations and Code Applicable. The size, slope, alignment, materials
of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the
Section
710.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.050
AO:871
trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the Plumbing Code or
other applicable rules and regulations of the City. Whenever possible,
the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation
below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain
is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
G. Prohibited Connections To Building Sewer. No person shall make
connection of roof, downspout, areaway drains or other sources of
surface runoff to a building sewer or building drain, which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
H. Connections, How Made. The connection of the building sewer into the
public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Plumbing Code
and other applicable rules and regulations of the City. All such
connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any deviation from
the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Director of Public Works before installation. Each connection shall be
made at the "Y" branch designated for that property, unless a "Y"
branch is not provided or cannot be located within five (5) feet of the
point of measurement furnished by the City. Any connection not made
at a designated "Y" branch shall be made with a tapping saddle "Y" in
the upper quadrant of the sewer pipe. The breaking of a sewer pipe for
insertion of a connection fitting shall be made under the supervision of
a City.
I. Inspection. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall give notice
to the City when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. Such notice shall be given at least
twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of the work. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the Director of
Public Works or his/her duly authorized representative.
J. Protection of Excavations. All excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so
as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the Director.
K. Damage from Sewers. The property owner shall take all risk or damage
that may result from water backflow into their premises from the public
sewers. To prevent such backflow, the owner shall, at his/her own cost,
install in the building drain or building sewer a self-acting valve in all
cases where a backflow from the public sewers may be anticipated. The
owner shall keep the valve in condition for service at all times.
L. Information Furnished. The City shall furnish all information is its
possession as to the position, depth and grade of public sewers and the
position of "Y" branches.
Section
710.050
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
710.050
AO:872
Section 710.060. Excluded Waters. [R.O. 2008 §710.060; Ord. No.
5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged stormwater, surface
water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters may
be accepted, under special circumstances, following review and approval by
the Director of Public Works.
Section 710.070. Discharge of Stormwater. [R.O. 2008 §710.070;
Ord. No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Director of Public Works. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Director
of Public Works, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
Section 710.080. Prohibited Discharges. [R.O. 2008 §710.080; Ord.
No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
M. Property Lines. All appurtenances to building drains and building
sewers, including catch basins, manholes, cleanouts, backwater valves
and fittings, shall be located within the property served by such drains
or sewers.
N. Maintenance of Building Sewer. The property owner shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the building sewer or building drain
from the point of connection to the public sewer to the premises served
thereby, including the connection with the public sewer.
O. Abandonment of Building Sewer. Any building sewer, which is
discontinued shall be disconnected at the public sewer. The public
sewer will be repaired to prevent infiltration of ground water in a
manner satisfactory to the Director of Public Works.
P. Open Connections. It shall be unlawful for any person constructing a
sewer, house, building connection or industrial connection to a sanitary
sewer leaving such connection open, unsealed or incomplete allowing
storm or surface water to enter into any sanitary sewer within the City.
All such openings will be tightly sealed at all points whenever work is
not in progress on such sewer connections.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in
the opinion of the Director of Public Works, that such wastes can harm
the POTW or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitutes a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of
these wastes, the Director of Public Works will give consideration to
Section
710.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.080
AO:873
such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows
and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
nature and capacity of the POTW, degree of treatability of wastes in the
wastewater treatment works and other pertinent factors. But in no case
will a federally mandated prohibition be altered to be less stringent.
The substances which must be considered include, but are not limited
to, the following:
1. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no
time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard
meter, at the point of discharge into the POTW (or at any point in
the system) be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading
over ten percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) of the
meter. Flash point limit of less than 140°F (60°C) shall be observed.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to: Gasoline, fuel
oil, hexane, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers,
alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates,
bromates, carbides and hydrides.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or in interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with the POTW, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals; create a public nuisance, or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
works. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any
pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307 (a) of the Act.
3. Any herbicides and pesticides.
4. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than
9.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the
POTW.
5. Solids, natural man-made fibers, insoluble or emulsified oils, fats,
greases, slurries or viscous substances in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the POTW such as, but
not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, paraffin, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, sawdust, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, bones, spent lime, grinding
compounds, grass clippings, spent grain, spent hops, asphalt
residues, chemical residues, acid residues, entrails, paint residues,
whey, food processing bulk solids, etc., either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
Section
710.080
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
710.080
AO:874
6. Septic tank sludge, and all other trucked or hauled wastes, except
that such sludge may be discharged at selected locations as
designated for this purpose by the Director of Public Works.
7. Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludge or scums to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance, discharged to
the POTW, cause the POTW to be in non-compliance with sludge or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control
Act or State criteria applicable to the sludge management method
being used.
8. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
Permit or the receiving water quality standards.
9. Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user
knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW.
In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain
concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed, for any time
period longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the
average twenty-four (24) hour concentration, quantities or flow
during normal operation. As specified in 40 CFR 403.5(b)(4), the
discharge of any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants
(such as Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD), released in a
discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference, is prohibited. The Federal regulations also provide an
affirmative defense for a user if that user meets both parts of a twopart
test set out in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(2). The user must satisfy two
conditions:
a. It did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge
would cause pass through or interference; and
b. It was in compliance with existing limits for each pollutant in
its discharge; or, if a limit was not enacted for such
pollutants(s), its discharge directly before and during the pass
through or interference did not change substantially from its
prior discharge(s) which occurred when the POTW remained in
compliance with its NPDES Permit.
10. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the wastewater treatment works resulting in
introduction into the wastewater treatment plant which exceeds
forty degrees Celsius (40°C), one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit
(104°F).
Section
710.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.080
AO:875
11. Any water or waste containing fats, grease, wax, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit
(32°F) and one hundred fifty degrees Celsius (150°C), zero (0) and
sixty-five degrees Celsius (65°C).
12. Any waters or wastes containing reducing substances of an organic
or inorganic nature, toxic or non-toxic, which exert an immediate
chlorine demand, shall not be discharged into the POTW or if the
discharge of such agents will prevent the achievement of an
adequate chlorine residual in the effluent of the wastewater
treatment works.
13. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odorproduct
substances, in concentrations exceeding limits established
by the Director, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet
the requirements of the State, Federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. In no case
shall any waste contain phenolic compounds in excess of five-tenths
milligrams per liter (0.5 mg/l) expressed as phenols.
14. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentrations as may exceed limits established by the Director of
Public Works in compliance with applicable State and Federal
regulations.
15. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or
as dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chlorine
and sodium sulfate).
b. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
16. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
17. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipment with a motor of
three-fourth (¾) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public Works.
18. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
19. Any wastes containing sulfides in excess of ten milligrams per liter
(10 mg/l) expressed as hydrogen sulfide.
Section
710.080
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
710.080
AO:876
Section 710.090. Grease, Oil and Sand Traps. [R.O. 2008 §710.230;
Ord. No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
Grease, oil and sand traps shall be provided when, in opinion of the Director
of Public Works, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or
other harmful ingredients; except that such traps shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All traps shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Director of Public Works and shall be located as
to be readily and easily accessible for clearing and inspection. Grease, oil
and/or sand traps shall be installed in all new automotive service stations,
garages, restaurants and other new facilities where a heavy discharge of
grease and oil is to be expected.
Section 710.100. Confidentiality. [R.O. 2008 §710.240; Ord. No.
5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
20. Levels of chlorinated solvents which, in the opinion of the Director
of Public Works, result in conditions defined under Section
710.080(22) of this Article.
21. Waters or wastes containing substances which could interfere with
the normal operation of the POTW, and/or contaminate the
resulting sewage sludge or otherwise pass through the POTW,
untreated, into the receiving stream.
22. Any waters or wastes containing in excess of limits of iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic
substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine demand
following limits for the specified parameter:
Cyanides as CN 1.2 mg/l
Arsenic as As 0.5
Cadmium as Cd 0.69
Chromium as Cr 2.77
Copper as Cu 3.38
Lead as Pb 0.69
Zinc as Zn 2.61
Nickel as Ni 3.98
Mercury as Hg 0.02
Silver as Ag 0.43
Surfactant 100.0
Iron as Fe 15.0
Boron as B 1.0
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the
Section
710.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.100
AO:877
public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Governing Body that release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets of the user.
(Note: 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vii) and 40 CFR 403.14)
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this Article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NODES) Permit, and/or the pre-treatment programs; provided
however, that such portions of or part shall be available for use by the
State or any State agency in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information.
Section
710.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
710.100
AO:878
ARTICLE II
Rates and Charges
Section 710.110. Measurement Through Water Meters. [R.O. 2008
§710.270; Ord. No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
The quantity of water used upon any premises furnished with sewerage
services by the Combined Waterworks and Sewerage System of the City
shall be measured by the water meter or meters serving the premises;
provided however, that if any occupant or owner of any premises connected
with the sewerage system of the City shall purchase water from a source
other than the City's Combined Waterworks and Sewerage System, than
such occupant or owner shall, at his/her expense, install and maintain on
said premises a water meter or meters satisfactory to the Superintendent
of the Combined Waterworks and Sewerage System of the City, or other
representative of the City, which meter shall measure all water received on
said premises from all sources, and, in such case, the sewerage rates to
be charged such customer shall be based upon the aggregate quantity of
water received on said premises as measured by said meter or meters. The
Superintendent of the Combined Waterworks and Sewerage System of the
City or other representative of the City shall have access to the premises
of such customer at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting and
testing said water meter or meters and reading of the records thereof.
Section 710.120. Basis of Sewer Charge. [R.O. 2008 §710.275; Ord.
No. 5133 §1, 5-10-1993; Ord. No. 5533 §1, 5-27-1997]
Residential Sewer Charge. Residential customers living in individually
metered dwelling units shall be billed beginning on May first (1st) of each
year and for the succeeding twelve (12) months at an average monthly
amount established from the water metered in the previous October,
November, December, January and February. New customers who did not
have water service at their current address for the period of December
through March will be billed based upon the quantity of water metered
during the month.
Section 710.130. Free Service Prohibited. [R.O. 2008 §710.280; Ord.
No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
No sewerage service shall be furnished or rendered free of charge to any
person.
Section 710.140. Reading Water Meters, Rendering Bills. [R.O.
2008 §710.290; Ord. No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
The Superintendent of the Combined Waterworks and Sewerage System
of the City and the City Clerk or such other officers or representatives
of the City as may be designated from time to time shall cause all water
meters to be read and bills for sewerage services to be rendered monthly as
services accrue. All bills shall be due and payable from and after the date
Section
710.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.140
AO:879
such bills are rendered, at the office of the City Clerk or other designated
representative by the City Council, during the regular hours of business.
The City Clerk or other representative of the City may calculate the amount
of each bill of the customer for water and water services, and render such
customer a combined bill for such water and sewerage services.
Section 710.150. Unpaid Bills — Penalty. [R.O. 2008 §710.300; Ord.
No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
Section 710.160. Liability for Services — Sums Due — Recovery.
[R.O. 2008 §710.310; Ord. No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
The occupant and user of the premises receiving sewerage services or
water and sewerage services combined and the owner of said premises
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for such services rendered on
said premises. The City shall have power to sue the occupant or the owner,
or both, of such real estate in a civil action to recover any sums due for
such services, plus a reasonable attorney's fee to be fixed by the court.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section to the contrary, when
an occupant is delinquent more than ninety (90) days, the owner shall not
be liable for sums due for more than ninety (90) days of service. Any notice
of termination of service shall be sent to both the occupant and owner of the
premises receiving such service. The provisions of this Section shall apply
only to residences that have their own private water and sewer lines. In
instances where several residences share a common water or sewer line,
the owner of the real property upon which the residences sit shall be liable
for water and sewer expenses.
Section 710.170. Application for Services. [R.O. 2008 §710.320;
Ord. No. 5050 §1, 5-11-1992]
Application for sewerage services to existing premises not connected with
the City's sewerage system shall be made to the City Clerk or other person
designated by the City Council, by the occupant or owner of the premises
A. If any bill for sewerage services shall be and remain due and unpaid
after the fifteenth (15th) day following the date of the rendition thereof,
an additional charge of ten percent (10%) thereof shall be added
thereto.
B. If any bill for sewerage services shall be and remain past due and
unpaid as long as thirty (30) days, water service to such premises shall
be disconnected and shall not be re-connected until all past due bills for
both water services and sewerage services are paid in full, together
with the disconnect charge and the re-connection charge of three
hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to
notify the Superintendent of the combined water and sewer system of
any delinquency in the payment of a sewage bill, and said
Superintendent shall proceed immediately to disconnect the water
service to the premises so in arrears.
Section
710.140
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
710.170
AO:880
to be served. Accompanied by an application fee of three hundred dollars
($300.00); thereupon such applicant shall have the right to connect with the
sewerage system of the City, all costs of such connection to be borne by
such applicant.
Section 710.180. Private Contracts, City Authority. [R.O. 2008
§710.330; Ord. No. 5534 §1, 5-27-1997]
Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the City from entering into private
contracts for the construction of sewer lines that may be necessary or
expedient to the best interests of the City.
Section
710.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.180
AO:881
Chapter 715
SEWERS — DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Section
710.180
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
710.180
AO:882
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 715.010. Purpose And Policy. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-201785]
Section 715.020. Administration. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of
this Chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent may be delegated as the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent deems appropriate.
A. This Chapter shall apply to all industrial users of the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works, and sets forth uniform requirements for industrial
users of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works for the City of Maryville
and enables the City of Maryville to comply with all applicable State
and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code
Section 1251, et. seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40
Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this Chapter
are:
1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works that will interfere with its operation;
2. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works that will pass through the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works, inadequately treated, into receiving water, or
otherwise be incompatible with the Publicly Owned Treatment
Works;
3. To protect both Publicly Owned Treatment Works personnel, who
may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment, as well as the general public;
4. To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and
sludge from the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
5. To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works; and
6. To enable the City of Maryville to comply with its National
Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and
disposal requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to
which the Publicly Owned Treatment Works is subject.
85.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 715, Sewers — Discharge Of Industrial Waster, containing
Sections 715.010 through 715.975, was repealed 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 8020.
Section
715.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.030
AO:883
Section 715.030. Abbreviations. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
The following abbreviations, when used in this Chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
*BMP: Best management practices
*BOD: Biochemical Oxygen Demand
*CFR: Code of Federal Regulations
*EPA: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
*gpd: Gallons per day
*mg/l: Milligram per liters
*NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
*POTW: Publicly Owned Treatment Works
*RCRA: Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
*SIC: Standard Industrial Classification
*TSS: Total Suspended Solids
*U.S.C: United States Code
Section 715.040. Definitions. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
Unless provisions explicitly state otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this Chapter, shall have meanings hereinafter
designated.
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — State of Missouri, Missouri DNR, P.O. Box 176,
Jefferson City, MO 65102-0176.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER — Any of the following
individuals described in paragraphs 1 through 3, below, may designate
another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing,
specifies the individual or person responsible for the overall operation
of the facility from which the discharge originates or which has overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written
authorization is submitted to the Director, Public Works with a copy
provided to the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent. Unless otherwise
designated the authorized representative of the user shall be determined as
follows:
If the user is a corporation:
The president, vice president, secretary or a treasurer of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
a.
1.
Section
715.030
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.040
AO:884
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMP — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section 2.1 A and B [40
CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five (5) days at twenty degree Centigrade (20°
C.), usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act
which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
CITY — The City of or the City Council of Maryville, Missouri.
CITY OF MARYVILLE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SUPERINTENDENT —
The person designated by the City of Maryville to supervise the operations
of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by
this Chapter, or a duly authorized representative.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the Regional Water
Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of the
agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source
if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of
the Act.
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or
The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or
operations facilities employing more that two hundred fifty (250)
persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding
twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00), if authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
b.
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
2.
If the user is a Federal, State, or local government facility, the director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operations
and performance of the activates of the government facility.
3.
Section
715.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.040
AO:885
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of pollutants
into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section
307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT — The
maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time,
determined from the analysis of any discreet or composite sample collected,
independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling
event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and, is a
cause of a violation of the City of Maryville's NPDES permit or prevents
sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following
statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more
stringent State or local regulations:
Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II
commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA); and State regulations contained in any State sludge management
plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the
Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection,
Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
MEDICAL WASTES — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is a
discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the
publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c)
of the Act which will be applicable to such sections if such standards
are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that Section, provided
that:
The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
a.
The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
b.
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
c.
1.
Section
715.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.040
AO:886
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.
p.H. — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
PASS THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the City of Maryville's NPDES permit, including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, government
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State, and local government
entities.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source should be
considered.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in
a modification rather that a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces,
or adds to the existing process or production equipment.
2.
Construction of a new source as defined under this Subsection has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(1)
Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(2)
a.
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operations within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies
do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
b.
3.
Section
715.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.040
AO:887
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agriculture and
industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., p.H.,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
eliminations of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES —
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances which
appear in Section 715.100.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW — A "treatment works,"
as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1292) which is
owned by the City of Maryville. This definition includes any devices or
systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and
reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any
conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE — Gray water and/or human excrement (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
1. A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
A user that:
Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or
more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);
a.
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent
(5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or
b.
Is designated as such by the City of Maryville on the basis that
it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operations or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
c.
2.
Section
715.040
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.040
AO:888
SLUG LOAD or SLUG — Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards as set forth in
this Chapter.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
United States Office of Management and Budget.
STORM WATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
precipitation, or resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
USER or INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which contribute to the POTW.
Section 715.050. through Section 715.090. (Reserved)
Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection (2) has
no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operations
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City of
Maryville may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a
petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40
CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a
significant industrial user.
3.
Section
715.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.050
AO:889

ARTICLE II
General Sewer Use Requirements
Section 715.100. Prohibited Discharge Standards. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
A. General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, State, or local pretreatment standards
or requirements.
B. Specific Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
1. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flash
point of less that one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140° F.)
(60° C.) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
2. Wastewater having a p.H. less that 5.5 or greater than 9.5, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or
equipment.
3. Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in
no case solids greater than one (1) inch or two and one-half (2.5)
centimeters in any dimension.
4. Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW.
5. Wastewater having a temperature greater that one hundred four
degrees Fahrenheit (104° F.) or forty degrees Celsius (40° C.), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting
in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104° F.) (40° C.).
6. Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
7. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
8. Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at the discharge points
designated by the Wastewater Collection Superintendent in
accordance with the procedures of this Chapter.
Section
715.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.100
AO:891
Section 715.110. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
[Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
9. Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
10. Swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, non-contact
cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent.
11. Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
12. Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent in a wastewater discharge
permit.
13. Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
14. Fats, oils, greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations
greater than one hundred (100) mg/l.
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this Section shall not
be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to
the POTW.
A. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated.
1. Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may
impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with
40 CFR 403.6(c).
2. When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent shall impose an alternate
limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
3. A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered
by the EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment
standard.
4. A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
Section
715.100
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.120
AO:892
Section 715.120. State Pretreatment Standards. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
The Missouri State Pretreatment Standards are hereby incorporated by
reference as if fully set forth herein. A copy of said Standards is located and
may be reviewed at the Office of Public Works, City Hall, 415 North Market
Street, Maryville, Missouri.
Section 715.130. Local Limits. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017; Ord. No.
8116, 8-13-2018]
The following pollutant limits are established to protect against passthrough
and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing
in excess of the following [instantaneous maximum allowable limits]:
Pollutant Limit Pollutant Limit
Arsenic 0.269 mg/l zinc 2.986 mg/l
p.H. >=5.5, <=9.5 cadmium 0.077 mg/l
BOD5 See below copper 0.47 mg/l
chromium 6.026 mg/l lead 0.183 mg/l
mercury 0.001 mg/l nickel 1.117 mg/l
oil and grease 75 mg/l silver 0.205 mg/l
molybdenum 0.249 mg/l total suspended
solids
805 mg/l
cyanide 1.072 mg/l selenium 0.121 mg/l
BOD5 shall not exceed one thousand one hundred forty-one (1,141) pounds
per day and shall be distributed at the discretion of the pretreatment
coordinator via pretreatment program permits to each significant
industrial user as necessary. The sum total of each permitted limit for
BOD5 shall not exceed the mass value of one thousand one hundred
forty-one (1,141) pounds per day. At the discretion of the pretreatment
coordinator BOD5 limits established in pretreatment permits may be
imposed as BOD5 concentrations using appropriate conversion methods.
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to
the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal
unless indicated otherwise. The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent
may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the
concentration-based limitations above.
Section 715.140. Right Of Revision. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
The City of Maryville reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements
on discharges to the POTW.
Section
715.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.150
AO:893
Section 715.150. Dilution. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
No user shall increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation, unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement. The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may impose mass
limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate.
Section 715.160. through Section 715.190. (Reserved)
Section
715.150
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.160
AO:894
ARTICLE III
Pretreatment Of Wastewater
Section 715.200. Pretreatment Facilities. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
Chapter and shall achieve: compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibited discharge standards of this
Chapter, within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State, or the
City of Maryville Wastewater Treatment Superintendent, whichever is most
stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing
such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent and Code Enforcement Officer of
the City of Maryville for review, and shall be acceptable to the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent before such facilities are constructed. The
review of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user
from the responsibility to produce a discharge acceptable to the City of
Maryville under the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 715.210. Additional Pretreatment Measures. [Ord. No.
8020, 11-13-2017]
Section 715.220. Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans. [Ord.
No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
A. Whenever deemed necessary, the Wastewater Collection
Superintendent may require users to restrict their discharge during
peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged
only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage waste streams for industrial waste streams,
and require such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of
this Chapter.
B. Whenever deemed necessary for the proper handling of wastewater
containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand there shall be
provided by user, grease, oil, and sand interceptors, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of type and capacity authorized by the City of Maryville
Municipal Code and shall be so located to be easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned
and repaired regularly, at the user's expense.
A. At least once every one (1) year, the Wastewater Treatment Supervisor
shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an
accidental discharge/slug control plan. Based upon evaluation, the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may require any user to
develop, submit for approval and implement such a plan. Alternatively,
Section
715.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.220
AO:895
Section 715.230. Hauled Wastewater. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may develop such a plan for
any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall, at a minimum,
address the following:
1. Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
2. Description of stored chemicals;
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by
Section 715.525.
4. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures shall include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants,
including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
A. Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the Wastewater Collections Superintendent, and at such
times as established by the Wastewater Collections Superintendent.
Such waste shall comply with the provisions of Sections 715.100
through 715.150, and any other requirements established by the City of
Maryville. The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may require
septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
B. The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent shall require haulers of
industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may require generators of
industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The
Wastewater Treatment Supervisor may also prohibit the disposal of
hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is
subject to all other requirements of this Chapter.
C. Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the Wastewater Collection System Superintendent. No
load may be discharged without prior consent of the Wastewater
Treatment Supervisor. The Wastewater Treatment Supervisor may
collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with
applicable standards. The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may
require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any
load prior to discharge.
D. Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of
the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
Section
715.220
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.230
AO:896
Section 715.240. through Section 715.290. (Reserved)
and address of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of
waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected
waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous
wastes.
Section
715.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.240
AO:897

ARTICLE IV
Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
Section 715.300. Wastewater Discharge Permit Application. [Ord.
No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
Any individual, partnership or corporation required to seek a water
discharge permit shall do so by filing an application on the form provided by
the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent. Said application shall be filed
at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the date the discharge
will commence. Upon filing of said application, the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent shall either grant or deny said application within thirty (30)
days of completion of the request.
Section 715.310. Wastewater Analysis. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
When required by the discharge permit or when requested by the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent, a user shall submit information on
the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days
of the request. The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent is authorized
to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to
update this information.
Section 715.320. Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement. [Ord.
No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
Section 715.330. Wastewater Discharge Permit — Existing
Connections. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was
discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
Chapter who wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall apply
to the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent for a wastewater discharge
A. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent, except that a significant
industrial user that has filed a timely application may continue to
discharge for the time period specified therein.
B. The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may require other users to
obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the
purposes of this Chapter.
C. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this Chapter.
Obtaining a Maryville wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a
permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State
pretreatment standards or requirements, and with any other
requirements of Federal, State or municipal law.
Section
715.300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.330
AO:899
permit in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. Said application
shall occur within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this
Chapter. Said applicant shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to
continue after one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this
Chapter except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued
by the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent.
Section 715.340. Wastewater Discharge Permit — New Connections.
[Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to
begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit
prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application
for this wastewater discharge permit must be filed in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter and must be filed at least one hundred
eighty (180) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or
recommence.
Section 715.350. Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
Contents. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
A. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit
a permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be
processed and will be returned to the user for revision. The Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent may require all users to submit as part of an
application the following information:
1. All information required by Section 715.500(B);
2. Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or
stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
3. Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed
or actual hours of operation;
4. Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and
rate of production;
5. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
6. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size,
location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;
7. Time and duration of discharges; and
8. Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent to evaluate the wastewater
discharge permit application.
Section
715.330
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.360
AO:900
Section 715.360. Application Signatories And Certification. [Ord.
No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be
signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a
system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry if the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible
for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of
my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that
there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including
the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."
Section 715.370. Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions. [Ord. No.
8020, 11-13-2017]
The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished
by the user, and may require additional information. Within thirty (30)
days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application
the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent will determine whether or not
to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent may deny an application for a wastewater discharge permit
and shall advise the applicant of the reason(s) for the denial.
Section 715.380. through Section 715.390. (Reserved)
Section
715.360
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.380
AO:901

ARTICLE V
Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
Section 715.400. Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration. [Ord. No.
8020, 11-13-2017]
A permanent wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a period
of five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. At the discretion
of the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent, if the operation is not fully
developed and the application provides a specific date of completion of
the project, a temporary wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a
period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days from the effective date
of the permit. An applicant may seek one (1) extension of the temporary
wastewater discharge permit for an additional period of one hundred eighty
(180) days. Said extension shall be granted only by the Director of Public
Works and shall be granted only for good cause shown by the applicant.
Section 715.410. Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents. [Ord. No.
8020, 11-13-2017]
A. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are
deemed reasonably necessary by the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, to protect the
quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant effluent, to
protect worker health and safety, to facilitate sludge management and
disposal, and to protect against damage to the POTW.
1. Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
a. A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit
duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years;
b. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the City of Maryville
in accordance with this Chapter and the provisions for
furnishing the new owner with a copy of the existing
wastewater discharge permit;
c. Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards,
including BMPs; .
d. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State,
and local law; and
e. A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not
extend the time for compliance beyond that required by
applicable Federal, State, or local law.
Section
715.400
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.410
AO:903
Section 715.420. Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification. [Ord.
No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
2. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but based upon the
situations unique to the applicant, need not be limited to the
following conditions:
a. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time
of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization;
b. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
c. Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent
accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;
d. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans
to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
e. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
f. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities and equipment;
g. A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve the permittee of the responsibility for
compliance with all applicable Federal and State pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the
term of the wastewater discharge permit;
h. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent to ensure compliance with this
Chapter and State and Federal laws, rules, and regulations;
and
i. Legal authority to control slug discharges where a slug
discharge plan is deemed necessary.
A. A wastewater discharge permit may be modified by the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent for good cause shown, including the
following reasons:
1. To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
Section
715.410
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.420
AO:904
Section 715.430. Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer. [Ord. No.
8020, 11-13-2017]
2. To address significant alterations or addition to the user's
operations, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the
time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
3. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
4. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the City of Maryville POTW, City of Maryville personnel, or the
receiving waters;
5. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
6. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;
7. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
8. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permits; or
9. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator.
Any person, partnership or corporation aggrieved by the wastewater
treatment Superintendent's refusal to modify the wastewater discharge
permit may avail themselves of the appeal procedures as set forth in this
Chapter.
A. If the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days' advance notice to the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent and the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer, the
wastewater discharge permit may be transferred to a new owner or
operator. The notice to the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent must
include a written certification by the new owner or operator which:
1. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility's operation and processes;
2. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
3. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit. Failure to provide advance notice of
a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the
date of the facility transfer.
Section
715.420
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.440
AO:905
Section 715.440. Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation. [Ord.
No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
A. The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent in consultation with the
Director of Public Works may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the reasons set forth in this
Section. In the event of an emergency situation when the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent is unable to consult with Director of Public
Works, the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may revoke the
wastewater discharge permit for good cause but shall document his/her
attempts to consult with the Director of Public Works and the reason(s)
said consultation did not occur prior to the revocation. Reasons for
revocation of the wastewater treatment permit include:
1. Failure to notify the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent of
significant changes to the wastewater prior to the discharge
change;
2. Failure to provide prior notification to the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to Section
715.520;
3. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
4. Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
5. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
6. Refusing to allow the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent timely
access to the facility premises and records;
7. Failure to meet effluent limitations;
8. Failure to pay fines;
9. Failure to pay sewer charge;
10. Failure to meet compliance schedule;
11. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
12. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
13. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this Chapter.
Section
715.440
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.440
AO:906
Section 715.450. Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance. [Ord.
No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit
application, a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the
expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. Said
application shall be submitted on the form supplied by the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent.
Section 715.460. Regulation Of Waste Received From Other
Jurisdictions. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership, unless said transfer is in
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. All wastewater discharge
permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new
wastewater discharge permit to that user. A person, partnership or
corporation aggrieved by revocation of its water discharge permit may
avail themselves of the appeal procedures as set forth in this Chapter.
A. If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, or
County contributes wastewater to the POTW, upon approval by the City
Council, the City of Maryville may enter into an intermunicipal
agreement with the consenting municipality.
B. Prior to entering into an agreement required by Subsection (A), above,
the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent shall request the following
information from the contributing entity:
1. A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged
to the POTW by the contributing entity;
2. An inventory of all users located within the contributing entity that
are discharging to the POTW; and
3. Such other information as the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent may deem necessary.
C. An intermunicipal agreement, as required by Subsection (A), above,
shall contain the following conditions:
1. A requirement for the contributing entity to adopt a sewer
ordinance which is at least as stringent as this Chapter and local
limits which are at least as stringent as those set forth in this
Chapter. The requirement shall specify that such Chapter and
limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the
City of Maryville's ordinance or local limits;
2. A requirement for the contributing entity to submit a revised user
inventory on at least an annual basis;
Section
715.440
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.460
AO:907
Section 715.470. through Section 715.490. (Reserved)
3. A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by
the contributing entity; which of theses activities will be conducted
by the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent; and which of these
activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing entity and
the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent;
4. A requirement for the contributing entity to provide the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent with access to all
information that the contributing entity obtains as part of its
pretreatment activities;
5. Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
entity's wastewater at the point of discharge to the POTW;
6. Requirements for monitoring the contributing entity's discharge;
7. A provision ensuring the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent
access to the facilities of users located within the contributing
entity's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection,
sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent; and
8. A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of
the intermunicipal agreement.
D. In the event that the City of Maryville has entered into an
intermunicipal agreement with a consenting municipality, the City of
Maryville shall have full rights and authority to take all legal actions
necessary to impose or enforce terms of the pretreatment standards
and requirements directly against non-compliant dischargers, in the
event contributing jurisdiction is unable or unwilling to take such
action. Such action shall include the fines and jail terms as set forth in
this Chapter, as well as any other procedures envisioned by the terms of
this Chapter.
Section
715.460
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.470
AO:908
ARTICLE VI
Reporting Requirements
Section 715.500. Baseline Monitoring Reports. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
A. Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision
on a category determination under 40 CFR 6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent a report which contains the information listed in
Subsection (B), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement
of their discharge, new sources and sources that become categorical
users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard shall submit to the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent a
report which contains the information listed in Subsection (B), listed
below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends
to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall
give estimates of their anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be
discharged.
B. Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
1. Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
2. Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
3. Description Of Operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of
discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
4. Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to
allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR
403.6(e).
5. Measurements Of Pollutants.
a. The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process.
b. Where required by the standards or by the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent, the results of sampling and
analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass
of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term
Section
715.500
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.500
AO:909
Section 715.505. Compliance Schedule Progress Reports. [Ord. No.
8020, 11-13-2017]
average concentrations, or mass where required, shall be
reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with the
analytical requirements of this Chapter.
c. Sampling must be performed in accordance with the sample
collection procedures of this Chapter.
6. Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis. If pretreatment standards are not being met on a consistent
basis, said certification shall state whether additional operation
and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required to
meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
7. Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or operation
and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment
standards, the report shall state the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or operation
and maintenance. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later that the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
Section must meet the requirements set out in Section 715.505.
8. Signature And Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must
be signed and certified as true, accurate and complete. It shall be
in violation of this Chapter to submit a baseline monitoring report
that is not true, accurate and complete.
A. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by Section 715.500(B)(7):
1. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment facilities
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards. Such events include but are not limited to, hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing
contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation;
2. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
3. The user shall submit a progress report to the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent not later than fourteen (14) days
following each date in the schedule, and following the final date of
compliance. Said report shall include whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
Section
715.500
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.505
AO:910
Section 715.510. Reports On Compliance With Categorical
Pretreatment Standard Deadline. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new
source within ninety (90) days following commencement of the introduction
of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment
standards and requirements shall submit to the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent a report containing the information described in Section
715.500(B)(4 — 6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c),
this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term
production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit
of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include
the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All
compliance reports must be signed and certified as true, accurate and
complete. It shall be in violation of this Chapter to submit a compliance
report that is not true, accurate and complete.
Section 715.515. Periodic Compliance Reports. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule; and
4. In no event shall more that thirty (30) days elapse between such
progress reports to the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent.
A. At a frequency determined by the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent but in no case less than twice per year (in June and
December), all significant industrial users shall submit a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
All periodic compliance reports must be signed as true, accurate and
complete. It shall be a violation of this Chapter to submit a periodic
compliance report that is not true, accurate and complete.
B. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at
all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
C. If a user subject to the reporting requirements in this Section monitors
any pollutant more frequently than required by the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent by using the sample collection procedures
prescribed in this Chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the report.
Section
715.505
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.515
AO:911
Section 715.520. Reports Of Changed Conditions. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
Section 715.525. Reports Of Potential Problems. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
D. Report best management practices that are currently employed.
A. At least thirty (30) days before the change, each user must notify the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent of any planned, significant
changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the
nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater.
1. The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may require the user to
submit such information as deemed necessary to evaluate the
changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater
discharge permit application.
2. In response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions, the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may issue a
wastewater discharge permit under Section 715.360 or modify an
existing wastewater discharge permit in accordance with the
procedures of this Chapter.
3. For purposes of this requirement, significant changes, include, but
are not limited to, flow increases of twenty percent (20%) or
greater, or the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
A. In the case of any discharge that may cause potential problems for the
POTW, which shall include accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine,
episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug
load, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent of the incident. This notification shall
include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
B. Unless waived by the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent, the user
shall submit within five (5) days following such discharge, a detailed
written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage
to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any fines,
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
Chapter.
C. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to notify in the event
of a discharge described in Subsection (A), above. Employers shall
Section
715.515
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.525
AO:912
Section 715.530. Reports From Unpermitted Users. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports as required by the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent.
Section 715.535. Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And
Reporting. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent within twenty-four (24) hours of
becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling
and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent within thirty (30) days after becoming aware
of the violation. However, the user is not required to repeat the sampling
and analysis if the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent monitors at the
user's facility at least once a month, or if the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent samples between the user's initial sampling and when the
user receives the results of this sampling. If the POTW performs the
sampling and a violation is indicated, the industry is responsible for the
resampling within thirty (30) days. The POTW sampling holds precedent
over any sampling performed by the industry. This sampling is conducted
once per year during the annual inspection or when cause is given to the
POTW.
Section 715.540. Discharge Of Hazardous Waste. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
The City of Maryville POTW does not allow the discharge of any hazardous
waste into the POTW.
Section 715.545. Analytical Requirements. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
Unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard, all pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be
submitted as a part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report
shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40
CFR Part 136. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
preformed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
Section 715.550. Sample Collection. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are
advised of the notification procedure.
D. An industry must report with five (5) days the change in potential for a
slug discharge (i.e. increased storage facilities or new facilities).
Section
715.525
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.550
AO:913
Section 715.555. Timing. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked by the United States Postal Service. For reports which are not
mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States
Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
Section 715.560. Record Keeping. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this Chapter shall retain
and make available for inspection and copying all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities and for BMPs required by
this Chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant
to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements. Records shall include the date, the exact place, method,
and type of sampling; the name of the person(s) taking the sample; the
dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytic
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the period of any litigation concerning
the user or the City of Maryville, or where the user has been specifically
A. Except as indicated in Subsection (B), below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. However, in the event flow proportional sampling is not
feasible, the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may authorize the
use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab
samples if the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative
sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may
be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
B. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides,
and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
techniques.
C. New industries must submit a baseline report and a ninety (90) day
compliance report. The User shall take a minimum of one (1)
representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with
the requirements of this Subsection. Samples should be taken
immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or
immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment
exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater
prior to pretreatment the uer should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream
formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the
Pretreatment Standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass
limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this
adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the
Control Authority.
Section
715.550
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.560
AO:914
notified of a longer retention period by the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent.
Section 715.570. through Section 715.590. (Reserved)
Section
715.560
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.570
AO:915

ARTICLE VII
Compliance Monitoring
Section 715.600. Right Of Entry — Inspection And Sampling. [Ord.
No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
Section 715.610. Search Warrants. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
If the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent has been refused access to
a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause that there may be a violation of this Chapter;
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program of the City of Maryville designed to verify
compliance with this Chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder; or to
A. The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent shall have the right to enter
the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying
with all requirements of this Chapter and any wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of inspection, sampling, record examination and copying,
and the performance of any additional duties.
1. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent will be permitted to enter without delay
for the purpose of performing specific responsibilities.
2. The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent shall have the right to
set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices
as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's
operations.
3. The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may require the user to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All
devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated at least annually to insure their accuracy.
4. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent. The cost of clearing such
access shall be born by the user.
5. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent access to the user's premises shall be a violation of
this Chapter.
Section
715.600
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.610
AO:917
protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then
the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may seek issuance of a search
warrant.
Section 715.620. Confidential Information. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
Unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent that the release
of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State
law, information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit application, wastewater discharge permits,
and monitoring programs, and from the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to
the public without restriction. Wastewater constituents and characteristics
and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized
as confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction. Any such non-disclosure request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated
by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret process shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but
shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies
for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Section 715.630. Publication Of Users In Significant Non-
Compliance. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
A. The Wastewater Superintendent shall publish annually, in a newspaper
of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time
during the previous twelve (12) months, were in Significant Noncompliance
with applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
The term Significant Non-compliance shall be applicable to all
Significant Industrial Users (or any other Industrial User that violates
Subsections (C), (D) or (H) of this Section) and shall mean:
1. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all the
measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken
during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, including Instantaneous
Limits as defined in Section 715.040;
[Note: Required Streamlining Rule Change, see 40 CFR 403.3(1)]
2. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater
measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-
Section
715.610
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.630
AO:918
Section 715.640. through Section 715.690. (Reserved)
month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement including Instantaneous
Limits, as defined by Section 715.040, multiplied by the applicable
criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);
[Note: Required Streamlining Rule Change, see 40 CFR 403.3(1)]
3. Any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement as
defined by Section 715.040 (Daily Maximum, long-term average,
Instantaneous Limit, or narrative standard) that the Wastewater
Superintendent determines has caused, alone or in combination
with other discharges, Interference or Pass Through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
[Required Streamlining Rule Change, see 40 CFR 403.3(1)]
4. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted
in the Wastewater Superintendent's exercise of its emergency
authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
5. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual
wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting
construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
6. Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical Pretreatment Standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
7. Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or
8. Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of Best
Management Practices, which the Wastewater Superintendent
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
Section
715.630
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.640
AO:919

ARTICLE VIII
Affirmative Defenses To Discharge Violations
Section 715.700. Affirmative Defenses To Upset. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
A. For the purposes of this Section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary non-compliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance
to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
non-compliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of Subsection (C) below, are met.
C. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:
1. An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
2. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and
3. The user has submitted the following information to the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent within twenty-four (24)
hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is
provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five
(5) days; and
a. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
b. The period of non-compliance, including exact dates and time;
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance is
expected to continue; and
c. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the non-compliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the burden of proof shall be upon the
user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset.
E. Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.
Section
715.700
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.700
AO:921
Section 715.710. Affirmative Defenses To Prohibited Discharge
Standards. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
Section 715.720. Affirmative Defenses To Bypass. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
F. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary
to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or
fails.
A. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought against it for non-compliance with the general discharge
standards prohibitions of this Chapter or the specific discharge
standard prohibitions of this Chapter, if it can prove that it did not know,
or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or
interference and that either:
1. A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was
in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass
through or interference; or
2. No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the
City of Maryville was regularly in compliance with its NPDES
permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with
applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
A. For the purpose of this Section:
1. "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from
any portion of a user's treatment facility.
2. "Severe Property Damage" means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the
absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean
economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of Subsection (C) and (D) of
this Section.
C.
Section
715.700
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.720
AO:922
Section 715.730. through Section 715.790. (Reserved)
1. If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent at least
ten (10) days before the date of the bypass.
2. A user shall submit oral notice to the Superintendent of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes
aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided
within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact
dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or
planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the
bypass.
3. If the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours,
the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may waive the written
report requirement on a case-by-case basis.
D.
1. Bypass is prohibited, and the Superintendent may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
a. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventative maintenance; and
c. The user submitted notices as required under paragraph C of
this Section.
2. The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may approve an
anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent determines that it will meet
the three (3) conditions listed in Subsection (D)(1) of this Section.
Section
715.720
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.730
AO:923

ARTICLE IX
Rates, Charges And Fees
Section 715.800. Wastewater Treatment Rates. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
Section 715.810. Pretreatment Charges And Fees. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
A. Section 710.270 of the Municipal Code of the City of Maryville is
adopted herein by reference as if fully set forth.
B. Commercial, Industrial, Public Institutional Sewer Charge. Any user of
water other than a domestic or residential water user who uses water
for commercial or industrial purposes and said water is not discharged
into the sewer system of the City may have said water metered through
a subtracting meter in order to obtain credit for the sewer charge. The
charge then made to said customer shall be based upon the amount of
water furnished the customer during the month, less the amount
recorded by the subtracting meter which was not discharged into the
sewerage system of the City.
C. Sections 710.290 through 710.320 of the Municipal Code of the City of
Maryville, are adopted herein by reference as if fully set forth.
A. The City of Maryville does hereby adopt reasonable fees for
reimbursement of cost of setting up and operating the City of
Maryville's Pretreatment Program which include the following:
1. Fees for wastewater discharge permit application including the
cost of processing such applications:
a. One hundred dollars ($100.00).
2. Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures
including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge,
and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users:
a. Collections Of Samples — Bi-Annual.
(1) Forty dollars ($40.00) per year.
(a) Two hundred dollars ($200.00) per five (5) year
permit.
b. Analyzing Discharge — Bi-Annual.
(1) Five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year.
(a) Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per
five (5) year permit.
c. Reviewing Monitoring Reports Submitted By Users — Bi-
Annual.
Section
715.800
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.810
AO:925
Section 715.820. through Section 715.890. (Reserved)
(1) Thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
(a) One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per five (5) year
permit.
3. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction:
a. As incurred by the City of Maryville.
4. Fees for filing appeals:
a. As incurred by the City of Maryville.
5. Other fees as the City of Maryville may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the
matters covered by this Chapter and are separate from all other
fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the City of Maryville.
Section
715.810
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.820
AO:926
ARTICLE X
Administrative Remedies
Section 715.900. Notification Of Violation. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
When the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement; the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may
serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten (10) days of
the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required
actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent. Submission of this plan does not relieve the user of liability
for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this Section shall be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user.
Section 715.905. Consent Orders. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any user responsible for non-compliance.
Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to
correct the non-compliance within a time period specified by the document.
Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative
orders issued pursuant to this Chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.
Section 715.910. Compliance Orders. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
When the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may
issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that
the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does
not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also
may contain other requirements to address the non-compliance, including
additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize
the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order
may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment
standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of
liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
Section
715.900
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.915
AO:927
Section 715.915. Cease And Desist Orders. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
Section 715.920. Emergency Suspensions. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
A. When the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations
are likely to recur, the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may issue
an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations
and directing the user to:
1. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
A. After informal notice to the user, the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge, whenever
such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. After
notice and opportunity to respond, the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge,
where that discharge threatens to interfere with the operation of the
POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the
environment.
1. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may take such steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its
receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The
Wastewater Treatment Superintendent may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent that the
period of endangerment has passed.
2. A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. Said
statement shall be submitted to the Wastewater Treatment
Section
715.915
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.920
AO:928
Section 715.925. Termination Of Discharge. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
Superintendent ten (10) days prior to the date of any show cause
or termination hearing.
Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to
any emergency suspension under this Chapter.
A. Any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
1. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
2. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
3. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
4. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
5. Violation of the pretreatment standards of this Chapter.
Subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, such user will be notified
of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity
to show cause in writing why the proposed action should not be taken.
However, exercise of this option by the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent shall not be a bar to, nor a prerequisite for taking any other
action against the user.
Section
715.920
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.925
AO:929

ARTICLE XI
Enforcement Remedies
Section 715.930. Water Supply Severance. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of
this Chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the
user may be severed at the direction of the City Council of the City of
Maryville. Service will only recommence at the user's expense and after
user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply with all applicable
standards or requirements.
Section 715.935. Public Nuisances — Reimbursement. [Ord. No.
8020, 11-13-2017]
A violation of any provision of this Chapter, a wastewater discharge permit,
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected
or abated as directed by the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent. Any
person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of
the City Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the City of
Maryville for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said
nuisance.
Section 715.940. Injunctive Relief. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
At the direction of City Council, and in addition to or as an alternative
remedy from the provisions otherwise noted herein, when a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter; a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder; or, any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the City Attorney may seek the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or
compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit,
order, or other requirement imposed by this Chapter or by the activities of
the user. The City Attorney may also seek such other action as is appropriate
for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement that the user
conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not
be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a
user.
Section 715.945. Violation. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
Violation of this Chapter includes any user who knowingly makes any
false statements, representations, certifications in any application, record,
report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained,
pursuant to this Chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under this Chapter.
Section
715.930
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.950
AO:931
Section 715.950. Penalty. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this Chapter.
Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be judged guilty of a
misdemeanor and punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00) or be punished by incarceration for a period not to exceed ninety
(90) days, or by both such fine and incarceration. Each day's violation of, or
failure, refusal, or neglect to comply with any provision of this Chapter shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Section 715.955. Remedies Non-Exclusive. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
The remedies provided for in this Chapter are not exclusive. The City of
Maryville may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
non-compliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally
be in accordance with the City of Maryville's enforcement response plan.
However, the City of Maryville may take other action against any user when
the circumstances warrant, and is empowered to take more than one (1)
enforcement action against any non-compliant user.
Section
715.950
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.955
AO:932
ARTICLE XII
Appeal
Section 715.960. Appeal Of Wastewater Treatment Superintendent
Decision. [Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
Section 715.965. Appeal Of Director Of Public Works Decision.
[Ord. No. 8020, 11-13-2017]
A. Any individual, company, or corporation aggrieved or prejudiced by
decision of the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent, or his/her
designee, concerning this Chapter shall be entitled to request or review
of said decision. Said review shall be conducted by the Director of
Public Works pursuant to the following procedure:
1. The Public Works Department shall maintain a form for requesting
review before the Director of Public Works.
2. Said request shall be filed within ten (10) days of the applicant's
receipt of notice of the decision which is being reviewed. Said
request for review shall state the specific manner in which the
decision of the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent is alleged to
be in error.
3. Upon receipt of the request for review, the Director of Public Works
shall immediately notify the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent
and the Superintendent shall have five (5) days in which to submit a
written response of said request for review.
4. Within ten (10) days after receiving the response of the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent, or within fifteen (15) days of the filing
of the notice of appeal, if no such response is submitted, the
Director of Public Works shall render a decision affirming,
reversing, or modifying the decision of the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent. In the alternative, if he/she deems it appropriate,
the Director of Public Works may decline to render a decision and
direct the matter be submitted to the City Manager for a review
conducted pursuant to the following Sections.
A. Any individual, company, or corporation aggrieved or prejudiced by
decision of the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee,
concerning this Chapter shall be entitled to request or review of said
decision. Said review shall be conducted by the City Manager pursuant
to the following procedure:
1. The Public Works Department shall maintain a form for requesting
review before the City Manager.
2. Said request shall be filed within ten (10) days of the applicant's
receipt of notice of the decision which is being reviewed. Said
request for review shall state the specific manner in which the
decision of the Director of Public Works is alleged to be in error.
Section
715.960
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.965
AO:933
Section 715.970. Appeal Of City Manager Decision. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
3. Upon receipt of the request for review, the City Manager shall
immediately notify the Director of Public Works and the Director
shall have five (5) days in which to submit a written response of
said request for review.
4. Within ten (10) days after receiving the response of the Director of
Public Works, or within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the notice of
appeal, if no such response is submitted, the City Manager shall
render a decision affirming, reversing, or modifying the decision of
the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent or the Director of Public
Works. In the alternative, if he/she deems it appropriate, the City
Manager may decline to render a decision and direct the matter be
submitted to the City Council and a review conducted pursuant to
the following Section.
A. Any individual, company, or corporation aggrieved or prejudiced by the
decision of the City Manager concerning this Chapter shall be entitled
to request review of said decision. Said review shall be conducted by
the City Council pursuant to the following:
1. City Clerk shall maintain a form requesting a review before the City
Council.
2. Said request shall be filed within fifteen (15) days of the applicant's
receipt of notice of the decision of the City Manager which is
alleged to be in error.
3. The notice of appeal shall state the specific reason why the decision
of the City Manager is alleged to be in error.
4. Upon receipt of the appeal, the City Clerk shall immediately notify
the City Manager of the receipt of the appeal and the City Manager
shall have a period of five (5) days in which to prepare a written
response to said appeal. A copy of said response shall be provided
to appellant.
5. The hearing shall be held before the City Council not less than
twenty-one (21) days after receipt by the City Clerk of the request
for review, unless extended by the City Council upon mutual
agreement of the parties or for good cause shown.
6. At the hearing, the City Council shall have the right to examine the
drawings, diagrams, books, records, and papers pertinent to the
issues before it. The City Council shall have the power to issue any
necessary subpoenas over the signature of the City Clerk and to
issue all necessary processes to subpoena witnesses, to compel by
subpoena duces tecum issued over the signature of the City Clerk,
the production of books, records, papers and other evidence; and to
administer oaths and to take testimony.
Section
715.965
MARYVILLE CITY CODE Section
715.970
AO:934
Section 715.975. Appeal Of City Council Decision. [Ord. No. 8020,
11-13-2017]
Following any decision or ruling by the City Council relating to this Chapter,
any individual, company, or corporation aggrieved or prejudiced by said
decision or ruling may seek judicial review of the matter provided by law.
The City Council may stay enforcement of its decision or ruling for a period
of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, pending the filing or final disposition
of an application for judicial review.
7. The individual, company or corporation aggrieved shall have the
full right to be represented by counsel and may produce witnesses
and cross-examine all witnesses who may appear against him/her
at any hearing held hereunder. Witnesses may appear voluntarily at
such hearings and testimony. Before any witness shall testify in any
such hearing or proceedings, said witness shall be sworn to tell the
truth by the Mayor or Acting Mayor.
8. All decision, findings, and orders of the City Council to the
proceeding shall be in writing. Parties to the proceedings shall be
notified of the decision by the City Council by certified mail to the
address listed on the request for review.
9. Based on the evidence produced at the hearing, the City Council
shall issue an order as supported by the evidence, including the
following:
a. Affirm the decision of the City Manager, Director of Public
Works or Wastewater Treatment Superintendent;
b. Reverse the decision of the City Manager, Director of Public
Works or Wastewater Treatment Superintendent;
c. Affirm or reverse the decision of the City Manager, Director of
Public Works or Wastewater Treatment Superintendent with
such modifications to the appealed decision as Council deems
appropriate and is supported by the evidence.
Section
715.970
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.975
AO:935