
CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF MAPLEWOOD, MISSOURI



Published by Order of the City Council



Adopted: August 10, 2010

Effective: August 25, 2010












OFFICIALS

of the CITYOF
MAPLEWOOD,  MISSOURI

AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION



James White

Mayor



Karen Wood (Deputy Mayor), Ward 1 David Cervin, Ward 1
Tim Dunn, Ward 2 Fred Wolf, Ward 2
Barry Greenberg, Ward 3 Shawn Faulkingham, Ward 3 City Council


Martin Corcoran

City Manager



Craig Biesterfeld

City Attorney



Karen  Scheidt City Clerk PREFACE
 

This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Maplewood, Missouri.

Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code, as supplemented through June 12, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.

The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code.

Chapter and Section Numbering System

The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of c h a p t e r 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of c h a p t e r 6 is 6 - 1 . Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6 - 1 and 6 - 2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-
1.5.	New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters.

Page Numbering System

The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion  of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes:


CHARTER	
CHT:1

RELATED LAWS	
RL:1

SPECIAL ACTS	
SA:1

CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE	
CHTCT:1

RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE	
RLCT:1

SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE	
SACT:1

CODE	
CD1:1

CODE APPENDIX	
CDA:1

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES	
CCT:1

STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE	
SLT:1

CHARTER INDEX	
CHTi:1

CODE INDEX	
CDi:1



Indexes
 

The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested.

Looseleaf Supplements

A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be
distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.

Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.

Acknowledgments

This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and Howard George, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.

The publisher is most grateful to Martin Corcoran, City Manager, and Craig Biesterfeld, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs.

Copyright

All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Maplewood, Missouri. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Maplewood, Missouri.

© Copyrighted material.
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Maplewood, Missouri. 2010.


BILL NO. 5770	ORDINANCE NO. 5573




AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF MAPLEWOOD, MISSOURI; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE.

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MAPLEWOOD:

 S e c t i o n  I .  The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Maplewood, Missouri," published by Municipal Code Corporation (2010), consisting of chapters 1 through  5 6 , each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the Code of Ordinances of the City of Maplewood, Missouri.

 S e c t i o n I I . All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before February 23, 2010, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.

 S e c t i o n I I I . The repeal provided for in Section II hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.

 S e c t i o n I V . Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or a jail sentence not to exceed three months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.

 S e c t i o n V . Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.
 

 S e c t i o n V I . Ordinances adopted after February 23, 2010, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.

 S e c t i o n V I I . This ordinance shall be in full force and effect fifteen (15) days after its passage and approval. Passed this 10 th day of August, 2010
/s/ J a m e s W h i t e 	
Mayor


Attest:

/s/ K a r e n R . S c h e i d t 	 Acting City Clerk


Approved this 10 th day of August, 2010

/s/ J a m e s W h i t e 	 Mayor


Attest:

/s/ K a r e n R . S c h e i d t 	 Acting City Clerk



PART I - CHARTER

In order to provide for the government of the City of Maplewood, and secure the benefits and advantages of constitutional home rule under the Constitution of the State of Missouri, the people of Maplewood adopt the following Charter:

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, NAME AND BOUNDARIES



Sec. 1.1. - Incorporation, name and boundaries.

The inhabitants of the City of Maplewood, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity, under the name of the City of Maplewood. The present corporate limits are set forth in Section 2 of Ordinance No. 1909, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk.

ARTICLE II. - POWERS



Sec. 2.1. - Powers.

The city shall have all powers which the General Assembly of the State of Missouri has authority to confer upon any city, provided such powers are consistent with the Constitution of this state and are not limited or denied either by this Charter or by statute. The city shall, in addition to its home rule powers, have all powers conferred by law. It is specifically intended that this Charter include among the city powers all powers that may be necessary to further the purposes of Section 82.240 of the Missouri Revised Statutes (RSMo 82.240).

Sec. 2.2. - Construction.

The powers of the city shall be liberally construed. The specific mention of a particular power in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting the powers of the city.

ARTICLE III. - THE COUNCIL



Sec. 3.1. - Where powers vested.
 

Except as this Charter provides otherwise, all powers of the city shall be vested in the council. The council shall provide for the exercise of these powers and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the city by law. The council shall be the legislative body.

Sec. 3.2. - Composition; eligibility; election and terms.

 
(a)





(b)
 
Composition. There shall be a city council of seven members; six of whom shall be nominated and elected by the qualified voters of their respective wards, as provided in s e c t i o n 3 . 2 (c). The seventh member of the council shall be the mayor, who shall be elected as hereinafter set forth in article 4.
The city shall be divided into three wards and each ward shall be represented by two council members.

Eligibility. To be eligible to hold the office of council member, a candidate other than the mayor, shall be at the time of his election:
 

1.	A qualified voter of the city;

2.	A resident of the city for at least one year prior to the election;

3.	A resident of the ward he seeks to represent.
 

(c)
 

Election and terms. Council members, other than the mayor, shall be elected to serve staggered four year terms; except for three additional new council members, one from each ward, who shall be elected at a special election to be held the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November 1978. There shall be no primary election required. The three persons from each ward receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected. The three persons elected at this special election shall assume office at the next regular council meeting following their election and shall serve a short term until their successors are elected to four year terms at the municipal election of April 1979 and assume their office. Every two years, commencing with municipal elections of April 1979, three council members, one from each ward, will be elected to four-year terms. Council members holding office at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall complete their unexpired terms. A council member's four-year term of office shall commence at the first regular meeting of the council following his election and shall end when his successor shall have been duly elected and qualified.
 

Sec. 3.3. - Compensation; expenses.

Each council member shall receive $25.00 for each regular or special session of the council attended, but no council member shall receive more than
$625.00 in any one year of service.

Five years after the adoption of this Charter, the council may determine the annual compensation of council members by ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such compensation shall become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of council members elected at the next regular election, provided that such election follows the adoption of such ordinance by at least six months. Council members shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office, as approved by the council.

Editor's note— Since enactment of this Charter, the compensation stated in this section has been and continues to be amended from time to time by ordinance.


Sec. 3.4. - Prohibitions.

 
(a)





(b)



(c)
 
Holding other office. Except where authorized by law, or pursuant to an agreement between the city and another entity of government, no council member shall hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which he was elected to the council, and no former
council member shall hold any compensated appointive city office or employment until one year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected to the council.
Appointments and removals. Neither the council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or employees whom the city manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the city manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees.
Interference with administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under s e c t i o n 3 . 8 , the council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately.
 

Sec. 3.5. - Vacancies; forfeiture of oice; illing of vacancies.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Vacancies. The office of mayor or council member shall become vacant upon his death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law, or forfeiture of his office.
Forfeiture of office. The mayor or a council member shall forfeit his office if he:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
 

Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law; Violates any express prohibition of this Charter;
Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; Is in default to the city; or
 

(5)
 

Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the council without being excused by the council.
 

(c)
 

Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the council, or in the office of the mayor, shall be filled by the council by a majority vote of all its remaining members (including the mayor), for a period running to the next regular election unless such period exceeds 180 days. In the latter case, the council shall make arrangements for a special election to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. Said election shall be held within 60 days of the time the vacancy occurs. Any person appointed to the council pursuant to this section shall possess those qualifications for the office as set forth in s e c t i o n 3 . 2 (b).
 

Sec. 3.6. - Judge of qualiications.

The council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members and of the grounds for forfeiture of their office and for that purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of evidence. Action of the council shall be by resolution and a copy of the resolution shall be delivered to the council member affected thereby.

Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the council member affected, he may file with the council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a council meeting not earlier than 15 days nor later than 30 days after the request is filed. The council member affected may file  with the council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing. Decisions made by the council under this section shall be subject to review by the court.

Sec. 3.7. - City clerk.

The council shall appoint an officer who shall have the title of city clerk. He shall keep the journal of council proceedings, authenticate by his signature all ordinances and resolutions, and record them in full in a book kept for that purpose. He shall perform such other duties as may be required by law, by this Charter, or by the council. The city clerk shall hold office at the pleasure of the council and the council shall also determine the compensation of the city clerk.

Sec. 3.8. - Investigations.

The council may make investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any city department, office or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days.

Sec. 3.9. - Independent audit.

The council shall provide for an independent audit of all city accounts at least annually. Such audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of such accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or any of its officers. A copy of the report prepared by the certified public accountant or firm of such accountants shall be kept in the city clerk's office and shall be open to public inspection.

Sec. 3.10. - Legislative proceedings.

 
(a)





(b)


(c)
 
Meetings. The council shall meet regularly at least once each month at such times and places as the council may prescribe by rule. The mayor upon his own motion may, or at the request of three members of the council shall, call a special meeting of the council for a time not earlier than three hours after notice is given to all members of the council then in the city. Special meetings of the council may also be held at any time by the consent of all members of the council, and such consent may be given either prior to or during the special meeting.
Rules and journals. The council shall determine its own rules and order of business. It shall cause a journal of its proceedings to be kept and this journal shall be open to public inspection.
Voting. Voting shall be by roll call except on procedural motions, and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal. In all roll call votes the names of the members of the council shall be called in alphabetical order and the name to be called first shall be advanced one position alphabetically in each successive roll call vote. A majority of members of the council shall constitute a quorum for its business, but a smaller number may meet and compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and subject to the penalties prescribed by the rules of the council. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire council shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance or resolution.
If a councilman has a conflict of interest and has declared the same at the time of the vote he shall be excused from voting and his abstention shall not be counted either for or against the proposition.

Any ordinance that would amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the boundaries of zoning districts, the uses, regulations or restrictions shall require five affirmative votes of the council:
 

(1)

(2)
 

In the case of an adverse report by the planning and zoning commission; or

If a protest against such proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal shall be presented in writing to the city clerk, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of ten percent or more either of the area of the land (exclusive of streets, places and alleys)
 

included within such proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal, or within an area of land determined by lines drawn parallel to and 300 feet (exclusive of streets, places and alleys) distant from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed or affected by amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal.

Any ordinance that would amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the boundaries of zoning districts, the uses, regulations or restrictions and which receives an affirmative recommendation from the planning and zoning commission shall require four affirmative votes by the council.
 

(d)

















(e)










(f)





(g)


(h)
 

Form of ordinances. Proposed ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced in the council only in written or printed form. The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the council shall be:
Be It Ordained By the Council of the City of Maplewood.

The enacting clause of all ordinances submitted by initiative shall be: Be It Ordained By the People of the City of Maplewood.
No ordinance, except those making appropriations of money and those codifying or revising existing ordinances, shall contain more than one subject that shall be clearly expressed in its title. Ordinances making appropriations shall be confined to the subject matter of the appropriations.

An ordinance may incorporate or adopt by reference, without setting forth in full, the provisions of technical codes, statutes, prior ordinances, St. Louis County ordinances and other matters of public record, provided that at least three copies of the material to be adopted are filed with the city clerk at least 15 days prior to the passage of the ordinance adopting said material. The copies of material to be adopted by reference shall be retained by the city clerk so long as the ordinance remains in effect.

Procedure. Except in the case of emergency ordinances, every proposed ordinance shall be read by title in open meeting three times before final passage. The first and second reading may be at the same meeting; however, at least one week shall lapse between introduction and final passage, unless the ordinance is declared to be an emergency.
A copy of each proposed ordinance shall be provided for public inspection at the office of the city clerk until it is finally adopted or fails of adoption. Persons interested in a proposed ordinance shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the council in accordance with such rules and regulations as the council may adopt. If the council adopts an amendment to a proposed ordinance that constitutes a change in substance, the proposed ordinance as amended shall be placed on file for public inspection in the office of the city clerk for one additional week before final passage. No ordinance shall be finally passed except at a regularly scheduled meeting of the council.

Emergency ordinances. An ordinance may be passed as an emergency measure on the day of its introduction if it contains a declaration describing in clear and specific terms, the facts and reasons constituting the emergency and receives the vote of five-sevenths of the members of the council.
An ordinance granting, reviewing, or extending a franchise shall not be passed as an emergency ordinance.

Effective date. Every adopted ordinance shall become effective at the expiration of fifteen (15) days after adoption or at any later date specified therein. Emergency ordinances shall become effective upon adoption or at any later date specified therein.
Authentication and recording. All ordinances and resolutions adopted by the council shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and city clerk. The city clerk shall record in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the council. All ordinances shall be placed on file for public inspection in the office of the city clerk.
 

Sec. 3.11. - Revision or ordinances.

Within three years after adoption of this Charter, all ordinances and resolutions of the city of a general and permanent nature shall be revised, codified, and promulgated according to a system of continuous numbering and revisions as specified by ordinance, and thereafter shall be updated annually.

ARTICLE IV. - MAYOR



Sec. 4.1. - Election; term; qualiications.

A mayor shall be elected at large by the qualified voters of the city at the regular election for a term of four years, commencing with the municipal elections of April, 1981. The incumbent mayor at the time of the adoption of the Charter shall complete the term to which he was elected. He shall have the same qualifications as are required for other council members. No person shall serve more than two full consecutive terms; the incumbent mayor shall be eligible to serve two additional terms.

Sec. 4.2. - Compensation.

As a member of the council, the mayor shall receive $25.00 for each regular or special session of the council at which he is in attendance up to $625.00 in any one year of service; in addition to this compensation per meeting the mayor shall also receive $600.00 annually.
 

Editor's note— Since enactment of this Charter, the compensation stated in this section has been and continues to be amended from time to time by ordinance.


Sec. 4.3. - Vacancy; forfeiture of ofce; illing of vacancies.

The office of mayor shall be deemed vacant or forfeited for the same reason that the councilman's office shall be deemed vacant or forfeited under section[s] 3 . 5 (a) and 3 . 5 (b) hereof. Whether a vacancy or forfeiture of the office of mayor exists shall be determined by a majority vote of the entire council. A vacancy in the office of mayor shall be filled under the provisions of s e c t i o n 3 . 5 (c).

Sec. 4.4. - Mayor's powers and duties.

The mayor shall have the following powers and duties:

 
(a)


(b)

(c)


(d)
 
Preside at meetings of the council, shall have the right to vote, and shall be recognized as head of the city government for all legal and ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law.
Call special meetings of the council as provided in s e c t i o n 3 . 1 0 (a).

See that all laws, provisions of the Charter and acts of the council, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
Have the responsibility of discussing with the city manager any and all policy matters; however, he shall not interfere in the day-to-day administration of city affairs.
 

The mayor shall have no veto powers and shall have only those administrative powers as are set forth in this Charter or by state law.


Sec. 4.5. - Deputy mayor.

The council shall elect from among its members a deputy mayor who shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor the deputy mayor shall continue to serve as mayor until a new mayor shall have been appointed or elected and shall have the same powers and perform the same duties until the office has been filled pursuant to the provisions hereinabove set forth. The deputy mayor while service [serving] as mayor shall receive $50.00 a month.

Editor's note— Since enactment of this Charter, the compensation stated in this section has been and continues to be amended from time to time by ordinance.


ARTICLE V. - CITY MANAGER



Sec. 5.1. - Appointment; qualiications; compensation.

The council by the affirmative vote of a majority of its members shall appoint a city manager, who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. He need not be a resident of the city or state at the time of his appointment. He may reside outside the city while in office for a period of time not to exceed six months, only with the approval of the council. The compensation and terms of employment shall be set by the council.

Sec. 5.2. - Powers and duties of the city manager.

The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. he shall be responsible to the council for the administration of all city affairs in his charge by or under this Charter. He shall have the following powers and duties:
 

(a)


(b)





(c)


(d)

(e)
 

The city manager shall see that all laws, provisions of the charter and acts of the council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
The city manager shall appoint and, when the city manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and appointive administrative officers provided by law, by this charge or by the terms of the personnel code adopted pursuant to this Charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to that officer's subordinates.
The city manager shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law.
The city manager shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the council.

The city manager shall keep the council fully advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city. The city manager shall submit to the council a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year. The city manager shall make such other reports as the council may require concerning operations of the city subject to the direction and supervision of the city
 

manager. All reports made by the city manager shall be made available to the public unless said report covers subject matter protected from public disclosure under the terms of Chapter 610 of the Missouri Revised Statutes (RSMo ch. 610).
 
(f)


(g)
 
The city manager shall attend all open council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion, but may not vote. The city manager shall receive notice of all special meetings.
The city manager shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter, by ordinance or by law.
 

Sec. 5.3. - Acting city manager.

By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate, subject to approval of the council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during his temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager shall return or his disability shall cease. To be a qualified city administrative officer and serve as the acting city manager, the party appointed must be among other qualifications, considered a full time employee of the city and shall not be an elected official.

Sec. 5.4. - Removal.

The council may remove the city manager from office in accordance with the following procedures:

 
(1)



(2)



(3)
 
The council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all of its members a preliminary resolution that must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager.
Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, he may file with the council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a council meeting not earlier than 15 days nor later than 30 days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing.
The council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after five days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered to the city manager, if he has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he has requested one.
 

The city manager shall continue to receive his salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. The action of the council in suspending or removing the city manager shall not be subject to review by any court or agency.

ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION AND PERSONNEL SYSTEM



Sec. 6.1. - Administrative organization.

By January 1, 1980, the council shall adopt by ordinance an administrative code providing a complete plan of organization and structure for the city government. The administrative code may authorize the city manager to promulgate regulations dealing with questions of organization and structure. The administrative code and any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be consistent with this Charter. Unless otherwise required by law, all boards and commissions provided for in the administrative code shall be appointed by the council.

The administrative code shall provide for at least the following officers, departments, boards, and commissions: City treasurer, tax collector, finance department, public works department, fire department, police department, board of adjustment, planning and zoning commission, library board, parks and recreation commissions, and board of trustees of the police and firemen's retirement fund. Additional departments, boards, and commissions may be created by ordinance. Two or more departments may be headed by the same person, directors of departments may serve as chiefs of divisions, and the city manager may head one or more departments.

Sec. 6.2. - Personnel system.

 
(a)
 
[ Council to adopt code. ] Within 18 months after the adoption of this Charter, the council shall adopt by ordinance a personnel code providing a comprehensive personnel system for city officers and employees. The personnel code shall provide that all appointments and promotions of city officers and employees shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by examination or other evidence of competence. The personnel code shall contain effective grievance provisions. The personnel code may authorize the city manager or a personnel board, if one be established, to promulgate regulations dealing with personnel matters. The personnel code and any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be consistent with this Charter, and the civil service system as now set forth in Ordinance No. 3073, as amended, being Section 203.10, Title 2, of the municipal code.
 

The civil service system as now set forth in Ordinance [No.] 3073[0], as amended, being Section 203.10, Title 2, of the municipal code, shall not be changed without a public hearing. All covered members shall receive at least 30 days prior to the public hearing written notice specifying all changes. The civil service system as set forth in Ordinance No. 3073, as amended, being Section 203.10, Title 2, shall not be abolished without a vote thereon by the electorate after proper notice of said election.
 

(b)


(c)








(d)











(e)
 

Pensions. Pension systems existing at the time of the effective date of this Charter shall be continued in force until lawfully changed. Additional pension plans may be established as provided by law.
Present employees continued in office. All employees, unless otherwise provided in this Charter, who are holding positions hereby placed in the service of the city at the time this Charter takes effect, shall be deemed to hold such positions as though appointed in accordance with the provisions thereof.
All personnel covered by the civil service system at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall continue to be covered. No new personnel shall be employed after the adoption of this Charter who cannot within 12 months meet all qualifications and requirements of the civil service system as set forth in Ordinance No. 3073, as amended, being Section 203.10, Title 2, of the municipal code.

Prohibitions. No employee in the service of the city, or seeking admission thereto, shall be appointed, promoted, reduced, removed, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of his race or his political or religious opinions or affiliations. No person shall willfully or corruptly make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certification, or appointment held or made under the personnel provisions, or in any manner commit, or attempt to commit, any fraud preventing the impartial execution of such personnel provisions, or of the rules and regulations made thereunder. No appointive salaried officer or employee of the city shall continue in such position after becoming a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. No person seeking appointment to or promotion in, the service of the city shall either directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person, for, or on account of, or in connection with his test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion, or proposed promotion. No appointive salaried officer or employee of the city shall make any contribution to campaign funds of any political organization or any candidate for office of councilman or mayor in the City of Maplewood.
Violations. Any person who shall willfully, or through culpable negligence, violate, or conspire to violate, any provision of s e c t i o n 6 . 2 (d) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof in any court of competent jurisdiction, he shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00. The conviction of any employee of any such offense shall operate automatically to terminate his service and to vacate his position. Any employee so removed from the service shall not be reinstated, reemployed, or reappointed, or in any manner reenter the service of the city.
 

ARTICLE VII. - BUDGET AND FINANCE



Sec. 7.1. - Fiscal year.

The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July and end on the last day of June.


Sec. 7.2. - Budget and procedure for adoption.

 
(a)



(b)





(c)

(d)



(e)



(f)

(g)

(h)


(i)

(j)
 
At least 90 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the council a budget and accompanying message. The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be in such form as the city manager deems desirable or as may be required by ordinance, and shall be in accordance with accepted principles of municipal budgeting.
At least 90 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the council a capital program for the three fiscal years ensuing, including a list of all proposed capital improvements, with appropriate supporting information, cost estimates, method of financing, time schedules and the estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the proposed facilities. The program shall be reviewed and extended each year.
The council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget, after appropriate public notice, prior to adoption of the budget.

The council may adopt the budget with or without amendments, and may add, increase, delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except for expenditures required by law, provided that the total proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total anticipated revenues, plus any surplus anticipated to be on hand at the end of the fiscal year then in progress.
The budget shall be adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the council not later than three days prior to the end of the fiscal year. If the council fails to adopt the budget by this date, amounts appropriated for current operations for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a pro-rated month-to-month basis until the council shall adopt a budget.
Adoption of the budget shall constitute an appropriation of the amounts specified therein as expenditures.

The council may by ordinance make supplemental appropriations if the city manager certifies that funds will be available for such expenditures. The city manager may transfer all or any part of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department. The council
may by ordinance transfer part or all of an unencumbered appropriation balance from one department to another.

All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year to the extent that they shall not have been spent or lawfully encumbered. Monies held in the reserve fund or in the unallocated surplus account shall be transferred or encumbered only by the council.
 

Sec. 7.3. - Taxation powers.

Taxes as authorized by law shall be levied by ordinance.


ARTICLE VIII. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS



Sec. 8.1. - City elections.

 
(a)







(b)

(c)
 
Regular elections.

Primary—The regular city primary elections shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of February of each odd-numbered year. A primary election shall be held only for any office for which three or more candidates have filed. (If less than three people file for an office then the contest for that office shall not require a primary election.)

General—The regular general city elections shall be held on the first Tuesday in April in each odd-numbered year.

Special elections. The council may by resolution order special elections, fix the time for such elections, and provide for holding such elections.

Conduct of elections. All city elections shall be governed by the provisions of this Charter and of applicable state law. The council by ordinance may further regulate elections, subject to the provisions of the Charter and applicable state law.
 
(Ord. No. 4466, § 2, 9-11-1990)


Sec. 8.2. - Nominations by petition.

 
(a)








(b)






(c)
 
Nominations. Nominations of candidates for all elective officers shall be by petition. Petitions for ward councilmen shall be signed by not less  than 5 0 qualified voters who are entitled to vote for the candidate so nominated. Petitions for officials elected by the entire city shall be signed by not less than 150 qualified voters of the city. No voter shall sign more than one nominating petition for the same office, and should a voter do so, his signature shall be void except as to the first filed of the petitions signed by him for the office concerned. The signatures shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil. Each signer shall indicate next to his signature the date of his signing and the place of his residence, giving the street and number or other description sufficient to identify his place of residence. The council by ordinance shall designate the appropriate form for nominating petitions and for acceptance of nominations.
Filing and acceptance. All separate papers comprising a nominating petition shall be assembled and filed with the election authorities as one instrument, not earlier than the opening date provided by state law for filing a declaration of candidacy (to be measured from the date of the primary election for such elective office), and not later than the closing date provided by state law for filing a declaration of candidacy is filed (to be measured from the date of the primary election for such elective office). The election authorities shall make a record of the exact time when each petition is filed. No nominating petition shall be accepted unless accompanied by a signed acceptance of the nomination.
Procedure after filing. Within five working days after the filing of a nominating petition, the election authorities shall notify the candidate and the person who filed the petition whether or not it is sufficient. If a petition is found insufficient, the election authorities shall return it immediately to the person who filed it with a statement certifying wherein it is found insufficient. Within the regular time for filing petitions, such a petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition or a different petition may be filed for the same candidate. The election authorities shall keep on file all petitions found sufficient at least until the expiration of the term for which the candidates are nominated in those petitions.
 
(Ord. No. 4853, § I, 10-27-1998)


Sec. 8.3. - Preparation of ballots.

The names of candidates shall be printed on the ballots without party designation. Except where the use of mechanical, electronic, or other device for voting or counting the votes makes it impossible, candidates' names shall be printed on the ballots in order of the filing of approved petitions, except as otherwise provided by the St. Louis County Board of Election Commissioners.

Sec. 8.4. - Voting machines.

 


law.
 
The council shall have power to provide for the use of mechanical, electronic, or other devices for voting or counting the votes not inconsistent with state
 

Sec. 8.5. - Determination of election results.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Number of votes. In an election for mayor, every voter shall be entitled to vote for only one (1) candidate. In an election for councilman, every voter shall be entitled to vote for one (1) candidate for each seat on the council to be filled in his ward.
Returns; canvass. The city council shall canvas the election returns, and declare the results of any municipal election, primary, regular or special, at the first regular meeting to be held following such election. The two candidates receiving the highest number of votes in the primary election,
 

in their respective contest, shall be the candidates in the general election. The candidates receiving the highest number of votes for each office in the general election shall be declared elected and inducted into office at that time.
 
(c)
 
[ Tie vote. ] If at any election there shall be no person elected to one or more council seats by reason of a tie vote, a runoff election between the candidates so tied shall be held within 42 days after certification of the election results. The incumbent shall remain in office until his successor has been duly elected and qualified.
 

Sec. 8.6. - City council wards.

Within 120 days after the adoption of this Charter the city council shall by ordinance divide the city into three wards. Ward boundaries shall be established by ordinance following each decennial (ten-year) census prepared by or for the United States Government or at other more frequent intervals as may be determined by the council. Wards shall comprise compact and contiguous territory and shall contain, as nearly as possible, an equal number of inhabitants.

ARTICLE IX. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW



Sec. 9.1. - City attorney; appointment; qualiications.

There shall be a department of law, the director of which shall be known as the city attorney. He shall be appointed by the city manager with the consent of the council. He shall have been licensed to practice law in the State of Missouri for at least five years prior to his appointment.

Sec. 9.2. - Duties.

The city attorney shall represent the city, except as hereinafter provided, in all legal matters in which it is a party or is interested. He shall advise the council, any committee or members thereof, the city manager, directors of all departments, and the boards and commissions concerning any legal questions affecting the city's interest. He shall serve as city prosecutor in the municipal court. The council may further provide for the appointment of an assistant city attorney or special counsel to assist the city attorney in matters requiring specialized knowledge such as, but not limited to, issuance of bonds of the City of Maplewood.

ARTICLE X. - MUNICIPAL COURT



Sec. 10.1. - Municipal court[; jurisdiction, enforcement in court cases].

There shall be a municipal court that shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases arising under this Charter or the ordinances of the city, and to assess punishment as therein provided. There shall be the right of appeal as provided by law for appeals from municipal courts in St. Louis County.

The municipal court may punish contempt of court by fine not exceeding $100.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding ten days, or both. It may enforce its orders and judgments as a court of record may, and render final judgment on any forfeited bond or recognizance returnable to such court, subject to appeal as in other cases.

Sec. 10.2. - Judge of the municipal court.

The municipal court shall be presided over by a judge nominated and appointed by the mayor with the consent of the majority of the council. The judge shall be appointed to a four-year term which term shall run concurrently with the term of mayor. The judge and municipal court shall be independent of the mayor and the council, except for appointment and removal. He shall be a licensed member of the bar of this state, and shall have been actively engaged in the general practice of law during the five-year period prior to appointment. When necessary, a provisional judge, having the same qualifications as the municipal judge, may be appointed in the same manner as the municipal judge, for a term to be designated by the council. A provisional judge shall serve at any time when the municipal judge is temporarily absent or unable to serve. The compensation of both the municipal judge and a provisional judge shall be determined by the members of the council. He may be removed from office upon the recommendation of the mayor and an affirmative vote of four councilmen, or without the recommendation of the mayor, by an affirmative vote of four councilmen, or without the recommendation of the mayor, by an affirmative vote of five councilmen. Upon the adoption of the Charter, the mayor, with the consent of the council, shall appoint a municipal judge to serve until April 1981, when the new full term will commence.

ARTICLE XI. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL



Sec. 11.1. - General authority.

 
(a)
 
Initiative. The qualified voters of the city shall have power to propose ordinances to the council and, if the council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget, or capital program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes, zoning, or salaries of city officers or employees. No proposed
 

initiative ordinance shall contain more than one subject that shall be clearly expressed in its title.
 

(b)



(c)
 

Referendum. The qualified voters of the city shall have power to require reconsideration by the council of any adopted ordinance and, if the council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program, any ordinance levying a special assessment or relating to appropriation of money, or levy of taxes.
Recall. Any official elected by popular vote may be removed by the electors qualified to vote for his successor, except as hereinafter provided, such power to be known as the recall. Provided, however, neither the mayor nor any member of the council shall be subject to recall within six months from his induction into office or during the last six months of his term; and if he is retained in office upon any recall election, he shall not be subject to recall within a period of six months thereafter.
 

Sec. 11.2. - Commencement of proceedings; petitioners' committee; aidavit.

Any five qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the city clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered, or specifying the name of the elected official to be recalled.

Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed the city clerk shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee.


Sec. 11.3. - Petitions.

 
(a)





(b)



(c)





(d)
 
Number of signatures. An initiative petition or a referendum petition not involving zoning, must be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least ten percent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular city election. A recall petition or a referendum petition involving zoning shall require 20 percent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular city election.
Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that, in the case of an initiative or referendum petition, each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
Time for filing referendum petitions. Referendum petitions must be filed with the city clerk within 30 days after adoption by the council of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
 

Sec. 11.4. - Procedure after iling.

 
(a)










(b)
 
Certificate of clerk, amendment. Within 20 days after the petition is filed, the city clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars where in it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the city clerk within five days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of s e c t i o n 1 1 . 3 , and within five days after it is filed the city clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend, no other action shall be had thereon.
Court review; new petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
 

Sec. 11.5. - Referendum petitions; suspension of efect of ordinance.

When a referendum petition is filed with the city clerk, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when:
 

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)
 

There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition; or The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition; or
The council repeals the ordinance; or

Election results sustaining the ordinance are certified.
 


Sec. 11.6. - Action on petitions.
 

promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided in article III or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within 60 days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within 30 days after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the city.
 
(b)






(c)
 
Submission to voters. The vote of the city on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held not less than 30 days nor more than 120 days from the date of the final council vote thereon.
If no regular city election is to be held within the period prescribed in this subsection, the council shall provide for a special election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such regular election, except that the council may in its discretion provide for a special election at an earlier date within the prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls.

Withdrawal of petitions. An initiative, referendum or recall petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the 15th day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the city by filing with the city clerk a request for withdrawal signed by at least four members of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request, the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated.
 

Sec. 11.7. - Results of election.

 
(a)





(b)


(c)
 
Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor. It shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respect in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.
Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results.
[ Repassage restricted. ] No ordinance on the same subject or with the same purpose shall be passed by the council in less than 120 days after an ordinance has been repealed by referendum.
 

Sec. 11.8. - Recall election.

When a recall petition has been certified to the council as sufficient by the city clerk, the council shall fix a date for holding the election, not less than 30 days nor more than 45 days thereafter. If such office becomes vacant prior to the election, such election shall be cancelled, and the vacancy shall be filled as provided in s e c t i o n 3 . 5 or 4 . 3 of this Charter.

Sec. 11.9. - Recall ballot.

The ballot shall be substantially in the following form: SHALL    ( N a m e / T i t l e )    BE REMOVED FROM OFFICE?
 	Yes

 	No

Voters in favor of the removal place a cross (X) in the square opposite the word "Yes." Voters opposed to the removal place a cross (X) in the square opposite the word "No."
If voting machines or devices other than printed ballots are used, the ballot shall be prepared in a form so as to give the elector an opportunity to vote substantially as set forth above.

Sec. 11.10. - Efect of election.

If a majority of the electors voting in such recall election shall vote in favor of the recall, then a vacancy shall exist, regardless of any defect in the recall petition. Such vacancy shall be filled as provided in sections 3 . 5 and 4 . 3 of this Charter. If a majority of the electors voting in such election shall vote against the recall, the mayor or councilman shall continue in office. Any such person who has been recalled shall be ineligible to serve in the city in any capacity at any time during the remainder of the term for which he was originally elected.

Sec. 11.11. - Conduct of initiative, referendum and recall elections.

Notice of initiative, referendum and recall elections shall be given, the elections conducted, the returns canvassed, and the results declared in all respects as are other city elections.

ARTICLE XII. - FRANCHISES
 

Sec. 12.1. - Granting of franchises.

All public utility franchises and all renewals, extensions and amendments thereof shall be granted only by ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted within less than 30 days after application therefor has been filed with the council, nor until a full public hearing has been held thereon. No exclusive franchises shall ever be granted, and no franchise shall be granted for a longer term than 20 years. No such franchise shall be transferable directly or indirectly, except with the approval of the council expressed by ordinance after a full public hearing.

Sec. 12.2. - Right of regulation.

All public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the council to:

 
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)


(f)

(g)

(h)
 
Repeal the same for misuse or nonuse, or for failure to comply therewith.

Require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standards of efficiency. Established [Establish] reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates.
Make an independent audit and examination of accounts at any time, and require reports annually.

Require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof.
Control and regulate the use of the city streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, and the space above and beneath them. Regulate rates, fares and charges and make adjustments thereof from time to time if the same are not regulated by the state.
Impose such other regulations from time to time as it may determine to be conductive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public, including the requirement that utility taxes shall be paid on a monthly basis.
 

Sec. 12.3. - Revocable permits.

Temporary permits for the operation of public utilities, or like permits for a period not to exceed two years but subject to amendment, alteration, or revocation at any time at the will of the council may be granted only by ordinance on such terms and conditions as the council shall determine. Such permits shall in no event be construed to be franchises, or extensions or amendments of franchises.

Sec. 12.4. - Operation beyond franchise period.

Any operation of a public utility by a franchise holder, with the tacit permission of the city, beyond the period for which the franchise was granted, shall under no circumstances be construed as a renewal or extension of such franchise. Any such operation shall at most be regarded as a mere temporary permit, subject like other permits, to amendment, alteration, or revocation at any time at the will of the council.

ARTICLE XIII. - LICENSING, TAXATION AND REGULATION OF BUSINESS OCCUPATIONS, PROFESSIONS, VOCATIONS AND OTHER ACTIVITIES OR THINGS



Sec. 13.1. - Objects of licensing, taxation, [and] regulation.

The council shall have power by ordinance to license, tax, and regulate all business, occupations, professions, vocations, activities, or things whatsoever set forth and enumerated by the statutes of this state now or hereafter applicable to constitutional charter cities, or cities of the first, second, third, or fourth class, or of any population group, and which any such cities are now or may hereafter be permitted by law to license, tax and regulate.

ARTICLE XIV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 14.1. - Personal inancial interest.

Any elected or appointed officer, employee or member of any board or commission of the city who has a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the city or in the sale or purchase of any land, material, supplies or services to or from the city or to a contractor supplying the city shall make known that interest in writing to the council and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his capacity as a city officer or employee in the making of such sale or purchase or in the making or performance of such contract. Any city officer or  employee who willfully conceals such a substantial financial interest or willfully violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office
or position and shall forfeit his office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge express or implied of the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the city shall render the contract or sale voidable by the city manager or the council. Within 120 days after adoption of this Charter, the council shall enact a conflict of interest ordinance embodying the above principles.

Sec. 14.2. - Prohibitions.
 

(a)
 

Activities prohibited.
 

(1)


(2)



(3)
 

No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way favored or discriminated against with respect to any city position or appointive city administrative office because of race, sex, age, political or religious opinions or affiliations.
No person shall willfully make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certification or appointment under the personnel provisions of this Charter or the rules and regulations made thereunder, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of such provisions, rules and regulations.
No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any city position or appointive city administrative office shall directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person for or in connection with his test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion.
 
(b)
 
Penalties. Any person who by himself or with others willfully violates any of the provisions of s e c t i o n 1 4 . 2 (a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00.
 

Sec. 14.3. - Notice of suits.

No action shall be maintained against the city for or on account of any injury growing out of alleged negligence of the city unless notice shall first have been given in writing to the city manager within 90 days of the occurrence for which said damage is claimed, stating the place, time, character and circumstances of the injury and that the person so injured will claim damages therefor from the city.

Sec. 14.4. - Oicial bonds.

All officers and employees of the city who receive, disburse, or are responsible for city funds, and such other appointed or elected officers and employees as the council by ordinance may designate, shall, within such time after election or appointment as may be fixed by ordinance, and before entering upon the discharge of their duties, give bond to the city in such sums and with such sureties as shall be prescribed by ordinance, and subject to approval by the council, conditioned upon the faithful and proper performance of their duties and for the prompt accounting for and paying over to the city of all monies belonging to the city that may come into their hands. The city shall pay the premiums on all such bonds.

Sec. 14.5. - Charter amendment.

Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the electors by a commission in the manner provided by law and the Constitution for framing and submitting a complete Charter. Amendments may also be proposed by the council or by petition of not less than ten percent (10%) of the registered qualified electors of the city, filed with the city clerk, setting forth the proposed amendment. The council shall at once provide by ordinance that any amendment so proposed shall be submitted to the electors at the next election held in the city not less than 60 days after its passage, or at a special election held as
provided by law and the Constitution for a charter. Any amendment approved by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon shall become a part of the Charter at the time and under the conditions fixed in the amendment; sections or articles may be submitted separately or in the alternative and determined as provided by law and the Constitution for a complete charter.

Sec. 14.6. - Public improvements and special assessments.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Improvements. The procedure for making, altering, vacating or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance, consistent with applicable state law.
Special assessments. The procedure for levying, collecting and enforcing the payment of special assessments for public improvements or special tax bills evidencing such assessments shall be governed by general ordinance, consistent with applicable state law.
 

Sec. 14.7. - Proof of ordinance.

Any ordinance may be proved by a copy thereof certified by the city clerk under the seal of the city; or, when printed and published by authority of the city, it shall be received in evidence in all courts, or other places, without further proof of authenticity.

Sec. 14.8. - Separability.

If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the Charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the Charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

Sec. 14.9. - Gender interchangeable.

Except where the context indicates otherwise, words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
 



Sec. 15.1. - Personnel system.

An employee holding a city position at the time this charter takes full effect, who was serving in that same or comparable position at the time of its adoption and who would be covered by the personnel code provided for in article 6, shall not be subject to competitive tests as a condition of continuance in the same positions but in all other respects shall be subject to the personnel system established pursuant to  s e c t i o n  6 . 2 ; however, such employees shall be required to come within the provisions of the civil service system, where the job classifications is covered by the system, and the requirements thereof in order to qualify for  advancement.

Sec. 15.2. - Ordinances to remain in force.

All ordinances, regulations and resolutions in force at the time this Charter takes effect, which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, shall remain and be in force until altered, modified or repealed by or under authority of this Charter or ordinance.

Sec. 15.3. - Pending actions and proceedings.

No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time this Charter shall take effect, brought by or against the city or any office, department, agency or officer thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this Charter or by anything herein contained.

Sec. 15.4. - Continuance of contracts, public improvements and taxes.

All contracts entered into by the city, or for its benefit, prior to the taking effect of this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect. Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws existing at the time this Charter takes effect may be carried to completion as nearly as practicable in accordance with the provisions of such existing laws. All taxes and assessments levied or assessed, all fines and penalties imposed, and all other obligations owing to the city that are uncollected at the time this Charter becomes effective, shall continue in full force and effect and shall be collected as if no change had been made.

ARTICLE XVI. - SCHEDULE



Sec. 16.1. - Election to adopt Charter.

This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the electors of the City of Maplewood at special election to be held on the 4th day of April, 1978. The election shall be administered by the officials now charged with the responsibility for the conduct of city elections.

Sec. 16.2. - Time of taking full efect.

This Charter shall be in full effect for all purposes on and after the date and time of the first meeting of the council after the 4th day of April, 1978.


Sec. 16.3. - Incumbent councilmen and mayor.

All councilmen and the mayor in office on the date this Charter is adopted shall continue in office for the duration of the term to which they were elected.


Sec. 16.4. - Temporary ordinances.

At its first meeting or at any meeting held within 60 days thereafter, the council may adopt temporary ordinances to deal with cases in which there is an urgent need for prompt action in connection with the transition of government and in which the delay incident to the appropriate ordinance procedure would probably cause serious hardship or impairment of effective city government. Every temporary ordinance shall be plainly labeled as such but shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally. A temporary ordinance may be considered and may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. A temporary ordinance shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time preceding automatic repeal under this subsection as it may specify, and the referendum power shall not extend to any such ordinance. Every temporary ordinance, including any amendments made thereto after adoption, shall automatically stand repealed as of the 91st day following the date on which it was adopted, and it shall not be readopted, renewed or otherwise continued except by adoption in the manner prescribed in s e c t i o n 3 . 1 0 for ordinances of the kind concerned.

Sec. 16.5. - Purpose of schedule.

The purpose of the foregoing provisions is to provide a transition from the present government of the City of Maplewood, Missouri, to the new government provided for in this Charter and to inaugurate the new government under the provisions of this Charter. They shall constitute a part of this Charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish that aim.
 

CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES

This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto.


Ordinance Number	
Date	
Section	
Section

this Charter

4466	
9-11-1990	
2	
 8.1 

4853	
10-27-1998	
I	
 8.2 




PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES


Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 1-1. - Title; citations.

This Code shall be known and may be cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Maplewood, Missouri," or simply as "the Code of Ordinances" or "the Code." This Code may also be referred to by the shortened title "Maplewood Code."

(Code 1982, § 1-1)


Sec. 1-2. - Ordinances saved from repeal.

 
(a)
 
Nothing contained in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the following:
 

(1)


(2)


(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)


(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)
 

Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Code;
Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city;
The administrative ordinances of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city not inconsistent with such Code;
Any appropriation ordinance;

Any right or franchise granted by the city council to any person, firm or corporation;

Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, or in any way affecting any street or public way in the city;
Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor;
Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city, or providing regulations for the same; Any ordinance establishing traffic regulations for specific streets or portions thereof;
Any ordinance annexing property to the city; Any zoning ordinance of the city;
Any ordinance levying taxes, not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; Any ordinance enacted after September 22, 1981.
 
(b)
 
Such repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that is repealed by this Code.
 

(Code 1982, § 1-2)


Sec. 1-3. - Defnitions and rules of construction.

 
(a)
 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise:
 
City. The term "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Maplewood, Missouri."

City council. The term "city council" means the body vested with the legislative and policy making powers of the city.
 

City manager or manager. The term "city manager" or "manager" means the officer vested with the administrative powers of the city as set forth in articles V and VI of the city Charter.

Code. The term "the Code" or "this Code" means the "Code of Ordinances, City of Maplewood, Missouri."

Computation of time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded.

Council. Whenever the term "council" is used in this Code, it shall be construed to mean the city council of the City of Maplewood.

County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of St. Louis.

Day. The term "day" means any period of 24 hours.

Daytime, nighttime. The term "daytime" means the period of time between sunrise and sunset. The term "nighttime" means the period of time between sunset and sunrise.

Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring an officer or the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.

Gender. Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter.

In the city. The term "in the city" means and includes all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.

Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.

Mayor. The term "mayor" means the official representative of the city elected at large and shall preside over meetings of the council, with those executive powers defined in article IV of the city Charter.

Month. The term "month" means a calendar month.

Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the term "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed."

Officers, departments, etc. Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to in this Code shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the City of Maplewood, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.

Official. The term "official" means any person legally invested with the authority of an office.

 


city.
 
Official time. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean Central Standard Time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the
 

Or, and. The term "or" may be read as "and," and the term "and" may be read as "or," if the sense requires it.

Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.

Person. The term "person" includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company and any other group acting as a unit. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever the term "person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a fine or penalty, as to partnerships or associations, the term shall include the partners or members thereof, and as to corporations, shall include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such section.

Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section.

Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.

Process. The term "process" includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.

Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property.

Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.

RSMo. The abbreviation "RSMo" means the Revised Statutes of Missouri, as amended.
 

Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive.

Signature or subscription by mark. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but, a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.

State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Missouri.

Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley or other public thoroughfare dedicated and open to public use, and each of such words shall include all of them. When appropriate, the term "street" includes a sidewalk.

Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.

Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.

Week. The term "week" consists of seven consecutive days.

Writing. The term "writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless expressly provided otherwise.

Year. The term "year" means a calendar year, beginning January 1 and ending on the following December 31, except where otherwise provided.

 
(b)
 
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out.
 
(Code 1972, §§ 102.01, 102.02(A), (C); Code 1982, §§ 1-3, 2-312; Ord. No. 4127, § 2, 11-9-1982)


Sec. 1-4. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.

The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are in the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.

(Code 1982, § 1-4)


Sec. 1-5. - Efect of repeal, etc., of ordinances.

 
(a)

(b)


(c)
 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.

The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed.
Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be revised, repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of ordinance thus revised, repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying the same, where publication is required by law.
 
(Code 1982, § 1-5)


Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code.

It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.

(Code 1982, § 1-6)


Sec. 1-7. - Catchlines, history notes, and state law references.

 
(a)



(b)


(c)
 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catch lines, are amended or reenacted.
The history notes and state law references that appear in this Code in footnote form are not part of this Code and are provided only for the convenience of the user of this Code.
Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code.
 

(Code 1972, § 102.02(B); Code 1982, § 1-7)
 

Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code.

 
(a)







(b)


(c)
 
By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.
When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
 
(1)

(2)


(3)


(4)



(5)
 
Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;

Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;
Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections	to	" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
 
(Code 1982, § 1-8)


Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code.

It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 .

(Code 1982, § 1-9)


Sec. 1-10. - Corporate boundaries.

The corporate boundaries of the city shall be as designated by the official map of the city on file in the office of the city manager. (Code 1982, § 1-10)

Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations.

 
(a)







(b)


(c)
 
Where, by any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, the doing of or the failure to do any thing or act is prohibited, declared to be a misdemeanor, an offense or unlawful, and no other penalty or punishment is provided therefor, the same shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or a jail sentence not to exceed three months or by both such fine and jail sentence unless a lesser penalty be required by law, in which event the punishment shall not exceed such lesser penalty required by law, any provision of this Code or other ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding. The term "misdemeanor" shall be construed to mean a violation of any ordinance of the city.
Prisoners shall be discharged upon payment of fines and costs, when such are assessed, and upon the service of the period of imprisonment imposed, if any is imposed.
Except as otherwise provided, every day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
 

(Code 1972, § 205.03; Code 1982, § 1-11; Ord. No. 3740, § 1, 9-10-1973; Ord. No. 4920, § I, 1-25-2000)


Sec. 1-12. - When same ofense punishable under diferent ordinances, etc.

In all cases wherein the same offense may be made punishable, or shall be created, by different provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city, or by different clauses or sections of the same ordinance, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery or penalty shall be had or enforced against the same person for the same offense, provided that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or
 

penalty so as to bar any other penalty or recovery being enforced or had. (Code 1982, § 1-12)

Sec. 1-13. - Parties to an ofense.

Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit, or aids or abets in the commission of any act declared herein to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons or as principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such unlawful act or offense or misdemeanor, and every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any provision hereof shall likewise be guilty.

(Code 1982, § 1-13)


Sec. 1-14. - Seal of city.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)

(d)
 
The seal for the city is of circular shape, 1 7/8 inches in diameter with an appropriate design therein as directed by the council, and with the words "Seal of the City of Maplewood, Missouri" cut therein.
The seal shall remain in the custody of the city clerk, subject to its use at all proper times and occasions. The city clerk shall put the impression of the city's seal upon all documents as provided by law or ordinance.
No impression of the seal upon a document shall be valid unless it is attested to by the city clerk, and only when duly authorized by law. No person shall use the seal wrongfully, fraudulently and without legal authority.
 
(Code 1972, § 201.02; Code 1982, § 1-14)


Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 2-19. - Qualiications.

No person shall be a councilman unless he is at least 21 years of age before taking office. (Code 1972, § 202.01; Code 1982, § 2-16)

Sec. 2-20. - Meetings.

Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month at 7:30 p.m. (Code 1972, § 202.03; Code 1982, § 2-17; Ord. No. 3981, § 1, 3-12-1979)

Secs. 2-21—2-43. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - CODE OF ETHICS



Sec. 2-44. - Prohibited acts or conduct constituting violations.

The following actions shall constitute a violation of the code of ethics of the city council:

 
(1)


(2)

(3)
 
Foul or abusive language or action when such can be identified with the city council or the individual elected office held, whether this is in formal meetings or informal sessions.
Conveying the impression of representing the full council or the city without prior assent and delegation by a majority of the council. Unofficial and unauthorized contact of board members appointed by the council or of city employees in such a manner as to be harassing
and/or in violation of their privacy or personal time.
 

(4)


(5)


(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)
 

Causing citizens or employees to be threatened, badgered, harassed, and the like in such a manner as to convey the impression that such conduct is the action of the city council or an elected official.
Cooperating with city employees in the violation of the civil service code and personnel policies, disruption of city operations, and/or violation of the chain of command without prior approval of the city manager.
Interference in the functions of city departments and operations of the city government.

Contact with city departments by way of giving instructions or orders without prior approval of the city manager. Interruption and/or disruption of the functions and procedures of boards and commissions appointed by the council. Using an elected office to obtain financial gain, either directly or indirectly.
Accepting gifts of value in return for decisions, actions or influence due to the office entrusted by the people of the city. Any direct or indirect, actual or attempted violations of the Charter.
Any action or manner of speaking that demeans, dishonors or brings insult to the office of mayor, the city council, the people, employees, and/or the city.
 

(Code 1982, § 2-23; Ord. No. 4113, § 1, 3-23-1982)


Sec. 2-45. - Persons authorized to present grievances.

Grievances for violations of the code of ethics of the city council can be filed by the following:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)
 
The mayor.

Members of the council.

Chairperson and members of council-appointed boards and commissions. City employees.
Residents of the city.

Persons operating a business in the city.
 

(Code 1982, § 2-24; Ord. No. 4113, § 2, 3-23-1982)


Sec. 2-46. - Procedures for fling charges.

Procedures for filing charges of violations of the code of ethics of the city council shall be as follows:

 
(1)



(2)
 
Charges must be in writing with substantiating proof and submitted to the mayor. In the event the mayor is an involved party, the deputy mayor shall accept the written complaint. If the mayor and deputy mayor are parties in the complaint, the senior councilmember of the uninvolved wards shall receive the written complaint.
The mayor or whoever is the recipient of the complaint on behalf of the council shall assemble an ethics review committee from the council according to the following guidelines:
 
a.	If the complaint is from someone not on the council, the mayor and the senior councilmember from each of the two neutral wards shall constitute the ethics review committee. If the mayor is the object of the complaint, the deputy mayor with the senior councilmembers from the other two wards shall constitute the ethics review committee.
b.	If a member of the council charges another member of the council with violations of the code of ethics, the accused and accusing councilmembers shall choose one member each for the ethics review committee, and their two choices shall mutually agree upon the third member of the ethics review committee, who shall chair the committee.
c.	If the accused member so wishes, he may elect to have the hearing of the ethics review committee in public session.

d.	If an accused member refuses to select his committee member or refuses to participate then the senior committee member shall select the balance of committee members and conduct the hearing based on the accusations, with or without the accused member's participation.
e.	Once a charge has been made, it shall be deemed unprofessional to withdraw it, unless mutually agreed on by both involved parties.
Should the charge be dropped and not agreed on by the accused, he may submit charges of his own to satisfy any damages caused to his reputation.
 
(3)


(4)
 
The mayor or whoever accepted the complaint on behalf of the council shall present the written complaint and any substantive data to the ethics review committee and the member of the council being accused of ethics violations.
The ethics review committee shall meet in closed sessions, review the facts, interview all persons related to the charges, and issue either a recommendation for dismissal of the charges or a recommendation of censure and the type of censure to be given. The recommendation of the ethics review committee is binding unless appealed.
 

(Code 1982, § 2-25; Ord. No. 4113, § 3, 3-23-1982; Ord. No. 4126, 9-28-1982)


Sec. 2-47. - Appeals.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Any member of the council judged violating the code of ethics of the city council by an ethics review committee shall have the right to appeal to the full council for a public hearing to appeal the action of the ethics review committee.
In cases involving a member of the council accusing another member of the council of violation of the code of ethics of the city council, the accusing member can appeal to the full council for a public hearing to appeal a recommendation for dismissal of charges by the ethics review committee only in cases in which the decision was not unanimous. Unanimous recommendations of dismissal of an ethics review committee are final.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-26; Ord. No. 4113, § 4, 3-23-1982)


Sec. 2-48. - Penalties for violation.

The following are penalties for the violation of the code of ethics:

 
(1)

(2)
 
A letter of censure.

A formal resolution of censure requiring an apology.
 

(Code 1982, § 2-27; Ord. No. 4113, § 5, 3-23-1982)


Sec. 2-49. - Time table.

All charges of violations of the code of ethics of the city council shall be acted on by an ethics review committee within 15 days of being received by the council. All appeals shall be heard and acted upon within 30 days of the written charges being received by the council.

(Code 1982, § 2-28; Ord. No. 4113, § 6, 3-23-1982)


Secs. 2-50—2-71. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 2-72. - Elective and appointive oicers.

The mayor and council shall be elected by the people, as provided in articles III and IV of the Charter. All other officers shall be appointive. Those appointive officers whom the council has power to appoint or approve the appointment of shall be chosen or approved by the vote of a majority of the members of the council. The council may remove any officer whom the council has power to appoint, as provided in the Charter, by majority vote, and may by ordinance set, change, limit, increase, or diminish, the salary of any such officer.

(Code 1972, § 203.01; Code 1982, § 2-51; Ord. No. 3876, § 2, 4-25-1977)


Sec. 2-73. - Classiication and compensation system.

There is hereby established and adopted a classification and compensation system for all employees of the city. This classification and compensation plan for employees is to be modified, as required, each year and included in the budget submitted by the city manger to the council for implementation.

(Code 1982, § 2-52; Ord. No. 4064, §§ 1, 2, 10-14-1980)


Secs. 2-74—2-104. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - CIVIL SERVICE



Sec. 2-105. - System created.

 
(a)
 
There shall be a merit-based civil service system for the city. All city employees shall be appointed by the city manager and shall hold their status under this division. The merit-based personnel rules and regulations apply to all employees of the city, with the exception of all persons filling elective office, members of appointed boards, commissions and committees, persons engaged under contract to supply expert professional or
 

technical services for specified periods of time, and volunteer personnel.
 

(b)


(c)
 

The city manager shall hold employment status under the merit-based personnel rules and regulations that apply to all city employees, with the only exception being the initial appointment or removal by the city council.
All department heads shall hold employment status under the merit-based personnel rules and regulations that apply to all city employees, with the only exception being the initial appointment or removal by the city manager.
 
(Code 1972, § 203.10(A); Code 1982, § 2-66; Ord. No. 4023, § 1, 12-20-1979; Ord. No. 4044, § 1, 5-27-1980)


Sec. 2-106. - Existence of certain departments, etc.

The city council shall provide for the existence of the office of city treasurer, tax collector, finance department, public works department, fire department, police department, board of adjustments, planning and zoning commission, library board, parks and recreation department, law department, city administrative department, and board of trustees of the policemen's and firemen's retirement fund.

(Code 1972, § 203.10(B); Code 1982, § 2-67; Ord. No. 4023, § 1, 12-20-1979; Ord. No. 4044, § 1, 5-27-1980)


Sec. 2-107. - Administrative rules and regulations.

The city manager shall implement merit-based rules and regulations for the administration of the civil service system. Any subsequent amendments to the rules and regulations may be adopted by the city council, and implemented by the city manager only after a public hearing held in the manner prescribed in the city Charter. All rules and regulations adopted shall be consistent with the provisions of this division. Such merit-based rules and regulations shall provide for the following matters in addition to such other matters as may be necessary and advisable in carrying out the intent and purpose of this division:
 

(1)

(2)


(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)



(12)
 

General terms and provisions of the merit based rules and regulations.

Open and competitive recruitment and selection of all employees, excluding all department heads and the city manager for initial appointment. Included are other personnel actions taken with the city covering all employees.
List of eligibles, appointments and probationary periods.

Equitable and adequate compensation for all city employees under the civil service system. Hours of work, leaves of absence, and other benefits.
Separation and disciplinary actions. Appeals, grievances and investigations.
Employee relations, employee service ratings and employee conduct. Records and reports.
Prohibitions and penalties.

Fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of personnel administration shall be without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or religious creed and with proper regard for their privacy and constitutional rights as citizens.
Employees shall be protected against coercion for partisan and nonpartisan political purposes and shall be prohibited from using their official authority for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of an election or a nomination for office.
 

(Code 1972, § 203.10(C); Code 1982, § 2-68; Ord. No. 4023, § 1, 12-20-1979; Ord. No. 4044, § 1, 5-27-1980; Ord. No. 5679, § I, 9-25-2012)


Sec. 2-108. - Applicability.

For the benefit of the public service and by reason of the enactment of the city's personnel code in c h a p t e r 3 8 , an employee holding a city position at the time this Code takes full effect who was serving in that same or comparable position at the time of its adoption and who would be covered by the personnel system shall not be subject to competitive tests as a condition of continuance in the same positions but in all other respects shall be subject to the personnel system established by this Code; however, such employees shall be required to come within the provisions of the civil service system where the job classification is covered by the system, and the requirements thereof in order to qualify for advancement.

(Code 1972, § 203.10(D); Code 1982, § 2-69; Ord. No. 4023, § 1, 12-20-1979; Ord. No. 4044, § 1, 5-27-1980)


Sec. 2-109. - Commission.

 
(a)
 
There shall be a civil service commission that shall consist of five members to be appointed by the city council. No person shall be appointed to the commission who holds a salaried public office or employment. No person while in the commission shall hold or be a candidate for an office or public trust; nor shall any member be appointed to or remain on the commission at the same time as a relative is in the employ of the city. A relative shall be understood as any member of one's immediate family by reason of relationship of son or daughter, wife, mother-in-law, father-
 

in-law, brother-in-law or sister-in-law, aunt, uncle or grandparents or grandchildren. In such instance, the related incumbent member of the civil service commission is ipso facto removed, and the council shall appoint a new member to complete the unexpired term of the removed commissioner.
 
(b)


(c)


(d)



(e)


(f)



(g)


(h)



(i)



(j)
 
When civil service commissioners have been appointed under the provisions of this section, each succeeding city council shall, as soon as practicable after organization, appoint commissioners for four years who shall take the place of those whose terms of office expire.
The chairperson of the commission for each biennial period shall be one of those members whose term first expires. Three members shall be present to transact business.
Before entering upon the duties of their office, each commissioner shall take and subscribe an oath, which shall be filed and kept in the office of the city clerk, to support the Constitutions of the United States and the state and to obey the laws and aim to secure and maintain an honest and efficient merit based civil service system free from partisan distinction or control, and to perform the duties of his office to the best of his ability.
A member of the commission may be removed by the affirmative vote of four members of the council after being given a written statement of the charges against the commission member and a hearing, which shall be a public hearing, if the commission member so requests.
The commission shall, whenever necessary and under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the city manager, hold examinations for the purpose of determining the qualifications of the applicants for positions, which examinations shall be practicable and shall fairly test the fitness of persons to discharge the duties of the position to which they seek appointment.
The commission shall, upon the request of the city council or upon its own initiative, inquire into the administration of the personnel system and, on the basis of the inquiry, make recommendations regarding the system.
The commission shall hear whatever written appeals the personnel rules provide for the commission to hear and, after hearing such an appeal, certify findings and recommendations regarding the appeal to the city council, city manager, and the employee or supervisor who filed the appeal.
A written appeal from a department head can be heard by the civil service commission in accordance with the merit based rules and regulations governing all employees. The findings and recommendations of the civil service commission regarding the appeal shall be discussed with the city manager.
A written appeal from the city manager can be heard by the civil service commission in accordance with the merit based rules and regulations governing all employees. The findings and recommendations of the civil service commission regarding the appeal shall be discussed with the city council.
 
(Code 1972, § 203.10(E); Code 1982, § 2-70; Ord. No. 4023, § 1, 12-20-1979; Ord. No. 4044, § 1, 5-27-1980)


Sec. 2-110. - City manager's authority to contract for technical assistance.

The city manager may contract or otherwise arrange for such technical services in connection with personnel selection and administration as may be desired, including the giving of examinations.

(Code 1972, § 203.10(F); Code 1982, § 2-71; Ord. No. 4023, § 1, 12-20-1979; Ord. No. 4044, § 1, 5-27-1980)


Sec. 2-111. - Notice of appointments and removals.

Notice of each appointment or removal in the city service shall be submitted by the city manager to the city council within five days. (Code 1972, § 203.10(H); Code 1982, § 2-72; Ord. No. 4023, § 1, 12-20-1979; Ord. No. 4044, § 1, 5-27-1980)

Sec. 2-112. - Appropriations.

The city council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of the city's personnel code in c h a p t e r 3 8 . The city council shall provide suitable rooms in which the civil service commission may hold its meetings.

(Code 1972, § 203.10(G); Code 1982, § 2-73; Ord. No. 4023, § 1, 12-20-1979; Ord. No. 4044, § 1, 5-27-1980)


Secs. 2-113—2-137. - Reserved.


DIVISION 3. - CONFLICTS OF INTEREST



Sec. 2-138. - Scope.

This division shall apply to all officers and employees of the city and to any person or business entity, doing business with, or having any dealings or transactions of any kind with any officer, employee or agency of the city.

(Code 1972, § 203.02A(A); Code 1982, § 2-96; Ord. No. 3642, § 1, 8-14-1978)
 

Sec. 2-139. - Defnitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Business entity means a corporation, association, firm, partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture or business entity of any kind or character.

Directly or indirectly benefit means to derive special private advantage as opposed to a general advantage derived as a member of a large class or of the public at large.

Employee means a person performing service for, or holding a position or employment with the city on a full, regular, parttime or intermittent basis.

Immediate family means the officer or employee, his spouse, parents, children, brothers, sisters and spouses thereof.

Officer means a person holding any office or position as department head, membership on any board or commission, whether by election or appointment, whether serving with or without compensation, under any provision of the city Charter, any ordinance or any law.

Substantial interest means ownership by the individual or any member of his immediate family, directly or indirectly, of ten percent or more of any business entity.

(Code 1972, § 203.02A(B); Code 1982, § 2-97; Ord. No. 3642, § 1, 8-14-1978)


Sec. 2-140. - Penalty.

Any city officer or employee who willfully violates any provision in this division shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit such office or position.

(Code 1972, § 203.02A(G); Code 1982, § 2-102; Ord. No. 3642, § 1, 8-14-1978)


Sec. 2-141. - Disclosure required.

Every city officer or employee shall fully and truthfully disclose his interest in any matter in which he shall have discretion to act, and the exercise of such discretion without disclosure of a prohibited conflict of interest shall be deemed a representation that no conflict of interest exists.

(Code 1972, § 203.02A(C); Code 1982, § 2-98; Ord. No. 3642, § 1, 8-14-1978)


Sec. 2-142. - Nepotism.

 
(a)
 
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, daughter, son, aunt, uncle, first cousin, brother, half-brother, sister, half-sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, stepbrother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepsister, stepfather, stepmother, niece, nephew, grandmother, grandfather, grandson or granddaughter; such term shall include any of the foregoing arising from adoption; and such term shall also include two or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit regardless of whether such persons are related by blood, marriage or adoption.
 

(b)







(c)





(d)
 

No person shall be employed by the city in a regular or parttime position, as those terms are defined by the personnel rules and regulations, or shall remain employed by the city if a member of such person's immediate family is the mayor or a member of the city council of the city. If an immediate family member of an existing regular or parttime employee of the city becomes the mayor or a member of the city council of the city, such employee shall resign such position with the city no later than the date on which such mayor or city councilmember assumes such office or such employee shall immediately forfeit such employment and shall be automatically terminated from employment by the city as of that date without further process.
The city shall not employ in a regular or parttime position, as those terms are defined by the personnel rules and regulations, any person who is an immediate family member of the mayor, a city councilmember, the city manager or a department head, provided that an immediate family member of the mayor or a member of the city council may be employed in a temporary position, as such term is defined in the personnel rules and regulations.
No city officer or employee shall have discretion to act in any matter wherein he or a member of his immediate family, or any business entity in which he or a member of his immediate family may own a substantial interest, may directly or indirectly benefit from such action.
 
(Code 1972, § 203.02A(D); Code 1982, § 2-99; Ord. No. 3642, § 1, 8-14-1978; Ord. No. 5549, § I, 10-27-2009)


Sec. 2-143. - Disqualifcation of interested oicer or employee, efect.
 

In the event that any officer or employee shall have a prohibited conflict of interest in any matter in which he shall have discretion to act, he shall be disqualified to act in such matter and he shall immediately inform the council of that interest in writing. In the case of a member of the council or any board or commission which shall have discretion to act in the matter, only such member shall be disqualified and if sufficient members remain who are not disqualified, the council, board or commission may continue to act in the matter. If there are not sufficient members to act who are not disqualified, then any such matter pending before any board or commission of the city shall be transferred to the council for action.

(Code 1972, § 203.02A(E); Code 1982, § 2-100; Ord. No. 3642, § 1, 8-14-1978)


Sec. 2-144. - Contract voidable.

Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any city officer or employee with the knowledge of the business entity contracting with or making a sale to the city shall render that contract or sale voidable by the council or the city manager.

(Code 1972, § 203.02A(F); Code 1982, § 2-101; Ord. No. 3642, § 1, 8-14-1978)


Secs. 2-145—2-171. - Reserved.


DIVISION 4. - SOCIAL SECURITY



Sec. 2-172. - Extension of beneits.

It is the policy of the city to extend to all eligible employees and officials of the city, who are not excluded by law or this division, the benefits of the system of Federal Old-Age and Survivors' Insurance under the Social Security Act Amendments of 1950, and by the laws of the state.

(Code 1972, § 203.11(A); Code 1982, § 2-116)


Sec. 2-173. - Submission of plan, agreement; execution of agreements, etc.

The mayor and city clerk are authorized and directed to prepare, execute and submit, on behalf of the city, a plan and agreement for extending the benefits of the laws referred to in s e c t i o n 2 - 1 7 2 to the employees and officials of the city, to the division of budget and comptroller of the state, in proper form. The plan and agreement shall be effective upon approval by the state agency to which it is to be submitted hereunder. The mayor and city clerk are further authorized and directed to execute agreements and modifications and amendments to the plan and agreement.

(Code 1972, § 203.11(B); Code 1982, § 2-117)


Sec. 2-174. - Withholdings authorized.

Commencing on the first day of the month following the date of the approval of the plan and agreement referred to in s e c t i o n 2 - 1 7 3 by the state agency, there shall be deducted from the wages of all employees and officials of the city, to whom the benefits of federal old-age and survivors' insurance are to be extended, the amount of each employee's and official's contributions, as determined by the applicable state and federal laws and by the plan and agreement. The aggregate amount of deductions are to be paid into the contributions fund created by the laws of the state.

(Code 1972, § 203.11(C); Code 1982, § 2-118)


Sec. 2-175. - Contributions by city.

Commencing on the first day of the month following the date the plan and agreement referred to in s e c t i o n 2 - 1 7 3 have been approved, there shall be appropriated from the general revenue fund of the city the sum or sums of money necessary to pay the contributions of the city under the old-age and survivors' insurance system. This money is to be paid into the contributions fund created by the laws of the state. The fund will, at all times, be sufficient to pay the contributions of the city by this section directed to be paid to the contributions fund.

(Code 1972, § 203.11(D); Code 1982, § 2-119)


Sec. 2-176. - Records; reports.

From and after the approval of the plan and agreement referred to in s e c t i o n 2 - 1 7 3 , the city shall fully comply with, and shall keep such records, make such reports and provide such methods of administration of the plan and agreement as may be required by all applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations, now and hereafter in effect with respect to the extension of the benefits of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors' Insurance system to the employees and officials of the city. For the purpose of administering the plan and agreement the manager shall make all required reports, keep all records, and be responsible for the administration of the plan and agreement on behalf of the city.
 

(Code 1972, § 203.11(E); Code 1982, § 2-120)


Secs. 2-177—2-205. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IV. - POLICEMEN'S AND FIREMEN'S RETIREMENT FUND



Sec. 2-206. - Creation.

 
(a)



(b)
 
There shall be a policemen's and firemen's retirement fund, hereinafter referred to as "the fund," which shall provide money for the retirement of employees of the police and fire departments, and a pension for their widows and minor children. The provisions of this article, as may be amended, which provisions govern the fund, are sometimes referred to as "the plan" or "this plan."
All assets of the fund, including investment income, shall be held in trust for the exclusive benefit of the employees entitled to benefits under this plan and their beneficiaries and shall be used to pay benefits to such persons or to pay administrative expenses of the fund and shall not be diverted to or used for any other purpose or revert to or inure to the benefit of the city, except as otherwise provided in this article.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-236; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995)


Sec. 2-207. - Board of trustees.

 
(a)






(b)


(c)



(d)


(e)







(f)

(g)


(h)



(i)


(j)





(k)
 
Composition. The retirement fund shall be under the exclusive control of a board of trustees, hereinafter referred to as "the board" which shall consist of the city manager, one member of the police department, one member of the fire department, and one citizen appointed by the mayor and approved by the other members of the board and one member employed by a commercial enterprise located in the city appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. The members of the board from the police and fire departments shall be elected by the members of their respective departments once every two years, on the first Monday in December.
Presentation of vouchers. The board shall present properly authenticated vouchers to the proper city officials who shall call upon the city council to appropriate the necessary funds.
Meetings. The board shall endeavor to meet monthly to transact business that may come before it. It may also have special meetings. A quorum shall be four members, and any motion, resolution or other matter that may be decided upon may be passed by a vote of the majority of those present.
Election of president, secretary. The board shall elect from its membership a president, and it shall also elect a secretary, who need not be a member of the board.
Designation of board treasurer. The city clerk shall be treasurer of the board, and as such shall give such additional bond as the board may require, the premium of which shall be paid by the city. The clerk shall be custodian of all moneys, securities and other property of the fund, subject to the control and direction of the board. As required by the board, he shall keep separate books and accounts, which shall be open to inspection of any member of the board. The city clerk shall be liable on his bond for all of his acts concerning the fund. On expiration of his term, he shall deliver all unexpended moneys, securities, books, records and other property that may have come into his possession as treasurer of the fund.
Legal advisor appointed. The city attorney shall be legal advisor to the board.

Rules and regulations. The board may make rules and regulations for the government of its affairs and the administration of the fund, and for the limitation of time within which claims may be filed.
Jurisdiction. The board shall have exclusive jurisdiction of all retirement claims, benefits and refunds. It shall hold hearings and take and preserve evidence, records and make final findings and decisions, which shall be subject only to review by certiorari with right of appeal as in civil cases from the decision of a reviewing board.
Data. The board shall keep such data as shall be necessary for actuarial valuation of the funds of the fund, and for checking the experience of the fund.
Record of proceedings. The board shall keep a record of its proceedings and keep those reports open to the public for inspection. It shall make a report annually to the city council showing the fiscal transactions of the fund for the preceding fiscal year, the amount of accumulated cash and securities in the fund, and the last balance sheet showing the financial condition of the fund by means of an actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities of the fund.
Investments of assets. The board shall hold assets of the fund in trust and shall invest and reinvest all assets of the fund in excess of a safe operating balance provided that the board shall make only such investments as are permitted under RSMo 86.590 as hereinafter amended. No member or employee of the board shall have any interest in the acquisition or disposition of any investment of fund assets.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-237; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995)


Sec. 2-208. - Monetary composition.

 
(a)
 
The fund shall include all moneys that may be given to the board and any other funds given by any person for the uses and purposes for which
 

the fund was created. The board may take, by gift, grant, devise or bequest, any money, personalty, realty, or any interest of any kind whatever in any property of any kind whatever, and subject to any limitation and condition whatever.
 
(b)
 
The fund shall also include all money, fees, rewards or emoluments of any kind that may be paid or given to the fund.
 

(Code 1982, § 2-238; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995)


Sec. 2-209. - Mandatory employer contributions.

 
(a)



(b)



(c)
 
Effective on and after January 1, 1995, the city shall contribute to the fund an amount equal to seven percent of the stated base salary of every employee who is eligible to receive benefits under this article. Such amount, referred to as the "mandatory employer contribution," shall be treated as an employer contribution for federal income tax purposes on and after such date.
For purposes of this article, a year of "service" or "service in the department" shall mean a 365-day period in which a person was employed by the police department or fire department and for which a mandatory employer contribution was made with respect to such employee's stated base salary and credited to the fund in accordance with subsection (a) of this section.
The actual base salary payable in cash to such an employee shall be the employee's stated base salary less the mandatory employer contribution paid to the fund on behalf of such employee.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-239; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995)


Sec. 2-210. - Exemption of school traic oicers and special police oicers.

The provisions of this article do not apply to school traffic officers or special police officers. (Code 1982, § 2-240; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995)

Sec. 2-211. - Tax.

A tax of $0.3920 for residential properties and $0.4470 for commercial properties shall be levied on every $100.00 of assessed valuation of all taxable property in the city. This amount shall be contributed to the fund in addition to the amount contributed to the fund pursuant to section 2-239 and shall be used for no other purposes.

(Code 1982, § 2-241; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995)


Sec. 2-212. - Plan participation required.

All persons who become employees of the police and fire departments after the effective date of this plan shall be subject to the provisions of this article as a condition of their employment, excluding those employees, if any, that had passed their 35th birthday at the time of initial employment, and consequently were not eligible for participation prior to October 16, 1992, and that have exercised their one-time election not to participate in the plan. No such employee who has so elected not to participate in the plan shall be eligible for any benefits (retirement, disability, widow's and children's, or otherwise) under this article.

(Code 1982, § 2-242; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995)


Sec. 2-213. - Pension amount—Application for retirement.

Any employee of the police department or fire department in service and having 20 years of service in the department may file with the board an application for pension on retirement, also setting forth the time, not less than 30 nor more than 90 days after filing the application at which he desires to be retired; and although his service has been discontinued during such period of notification, he may be retired by the board as of the time desired and shall be paid monthly, for life, out of the fund, a retirement pension of 40 percent of his base pay, which shall include longevity and educational bonuses at the time of retirement, per month. His pension will increase each year two percent of the 20-year base after 20 years' service until he has reached the 30-year level. For 30 years' service, he will receive 60 percent of his base pay at the time of retirement without age limit. 60 percent of the base pay shall be the maximum pension.

(Code 1982, § 2-243; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995)


Sec. 2-214. - Same—Application for early retirement.

Any employee of the police department or fire department in service, having at least ten but less than 20 years of service in the department and not being entitled to any other retirement benefit from the fund, may file with the board an application for pension, also setting forth the time, not less than 30 nor more than 90 days after filing the application, at which he desires to be retired; and although his service has been discontinued during such period of notification, he may be retired by the board as of the time desired and shall be paid monthly, for life, out of the fund, a retirement pension beginning at age 55 years equal to two percent per year of service in the department of his base monthly pay.

(Code 1982, § 2-244; Ord. No. 5032, § I, 12-11-2001)
 

Sec. 2-215. - Disability retirement.

 
(a)
 
Any employee of the police department or fire department permanently and totally disabled by injury or disease shall be paid out of the fund monthly for life as long as such employee is disabled:
 
(1)

(2)
 
60 percent of his pay if such disability was caused by accident while performing his duty; or

40 percent of his pay if such disability was caused by a nonduty accident; provided two or more of the doctors on the medical board shall certify to the board that the disability is permanent and total and that the employee shall be retired from service.
 
A person retired from service pursuant to s e c t i o n 2 - 2 1 4 shall not be eligible to retire under or receive payments pursuant to s e c t i o n 2 - 2 1 3 .

 
(b)
 
The board shall only retire, pursuant to this section, as many employees in both the police department and fire department as there is a safe and adequate reserve in the fund.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-245; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 5032, § I, 12-11-2001)


Sec. 2-216. - Medical board.

There shall be a medical board of three physicians appointed by the board of trustees. The medical board shall make all physical examinations. Examination funds shall be supplied by the board of trustees out of the fund.

(Code 1982, § 2-246; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 5032, § I, 12-11-2001)


Sec. 2-217. - Periodic examination of persons on disability retirement.

The permanence of disability of a former employee of the police department or fire department on disability retirement allowance, as provided in s e c t i o n 2 - 
 2 1 4 , may be verified by medical examination prior to age 60 years, or after age 60 years if the former employee has had less than 20 years of service, at any reasonable time. The board of trustees in its discretion shall require former employees to undergo a medical examination at a place designated by the medical board. Such examination shall be made by the medical board, or in special cases by an additional physician or physicians designated by the board.

(Code 1982, § 2-247; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 5032, § I, 12-11-2001)


Sec. 2-218. - Surviving spouse and children's beneits.

 
(a)








(b)








(c)








(d)







(e)
 
If an active and working employee of the police department or fire department shall die from injury or disease as a result of performance of his duties, the surviving spouse shall receive a benefit equal to 40 percent of the employee's base pay at the time of death, plus five percent of the base pay for each child under age 18 years. If there is no such surviving spouse, or the surviving spouse dies, the monthly payment provided for such surviving spouse shall be divided equally among the children of such member who are living and under the age of 18 years at the time of the division; and each child shall receive its share of such division monthly. As each such child dies or obtains the age of 18 years, the child's share shall be divided among the remaining children, if any, who are living and under the age of 18 years. If a surviving spouse remarries, then the payment to the children under the age of 18 years, as well as to the surviving spouse, shall stop.
The surviving spouse of an active and working employee/member of the police department or fire department dying from causes not as a result of the performance of his duties shall receive a benefit equal to 30 percent of the employee's base pay at the time of death plus five percent for each child under the age of 18 years. If there is no such surviving spouse, or the surviving spouse dies, the monthly payment provided for such surviving spouse shall be divided equally among the children of such member who are living and under the age of 18 years at the time of the division; and each child shall receive its share of such division monthly. As each such child dies or attains the age of 18 years, that child's share shall be divided equally among the remaining children, if any, who are living and under the age of 18 years. If the surviving spouse remarries, the payment to the children under the age of 18 years, as well as to the surviving spouse, shall stop.
The surviving spouse of an employee who dies after retirement benefits have commenced under s e c t i o n 2 - 2 1 3 shall receive 50 percent of the retiree's benefit, plus five percent of the retiree's benefit for each child under the age of 18 years, but not less than $250.00 per month. If there is no such surviving spouse, or the surviving spouse dies, the monthly payment for such surviving spouse shall be divided equally among the children of such retiree who are living and under the age of 18 years at the time of the division; and each child shall receive its share of such division monthly. As each such child dies or obtains the age of 18 years, that child's share shall be divided equally among the remaining children, if any, who are living and under the age of 18 years. If the surviving spouse remarries, then the payment to the children under the age of 18 years, as well as to the surviving spouse, shall stop.
The surviving spouse of an employee who dies after retirement benefits have commenced under s e c t i o n 2 - 2 1 4 shall receive 50 percent of the retiree's benefit. If there is no such surviving spouse, or the surviving spouse dies, the monthly payment for such surviving spouse shall be divided equally among the children of such retiree who are living and under the age of 18 years at the time of the division; and each child shall receive its share of such division monthly. As each such child dies or attains the age of 18 years, that child's share shall be divided equally among the remaining children, if any, who are living and under the age of 18. If the surviving spouse remarries, then the payment to the children under the age of 18 years, as well as to the surviving spouse, shall stop.
If an active and working employee of the police department or fire department shall die with no surviving spouse or child below age 18 years at
 

the time of death, an amount equal to the contributions made to the fund by the employee shall be divided equally among the children of such member who are then living.
(Code 1982, § 2-248; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 5032, §§ I—IV, 12-11-2001)


Sec. 2-219. - Procedure upon employee leaving service.

 
(a)





(b)





(c)
 
Any employee of the police department or fire department voluntarily leaving the service for any cause other than death or retirement with pension, shall be paid on demand the amount of his contribution to the fund made before January 1, 1995, plus the amount of the mandatory employer contributions made on behalf of such employee, pursuant to s e c t i o n 2 - 2 0 9 , after 1994, without interest. On reentering the service, that employee enters the service without credit for any prior service.
Any employee of the police department or fire department leaving the service involuntarily shall be paid, on demand, the amount of his contribution to the fund made before January 1, 1995, plus the amount of the mandatory employer contributions made on behalf of such employee, pursuant to s e c t i o n 2 - 2 0 9 , after 1994, without interest. On reentering service, the employee must reimburse the fund for the money he withdrew and be given credit for prior service.
Effective May 9, 1995, if the distributee of any eligible rollover distribution elects to have such distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan and specifies the eligible retirement plan to which the distribution is to be paid (in the form and at the time as the plan administrator may prescribe), the distribution shall be made in the form of a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer to the eligible retirement plan so specified.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-249; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 4934, § I, 4-25-2000; Ord. No. 5032, § I, 12-11-2001)


Sec. 2-220. - Beneits not assignable, etc.

The benefit payable by the policemen's and firemen's retirement fund, whether before or after ordered paid by the board, shall not be assignable or subject to counterclaim, recoupment or set off except as provided in this section, nor shall it be subject to assessment, garnishment, execution, injunction, or any other decree, order, process, or proceeding in any court for the payment of any debt of any beneficiary, and the sum shall be held and distributed for the purpose of this article and for no other purpose whatever. The preceding sentence shall not apply to a qualified domestic relations order as defined in section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code, 2 6 USC 414(p), except that no amount shall be payable to an alternate payee pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order prior to the date on which an amount is payable to the employee under such order.

(Code 1982, § 2-250; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 4947, § I, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 5032, § I, 12-11-2001)


Sec. 2-221. - Penalty for false statements, etc.

Any person who shall knowingly, or willfully, make any false statement in regard to applying for or securing a pension under this article, or shall falsify or permit to be falsified, any record or records kept under or in pursuit of the purposes of this article, in any attempt to defraud, shall as a result of such act, and in addition to any other penalties imposed by this Code, forfeit all his rights, interests and privileges under this article.

(Code 1982, § 2-251; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 5032, § I, 12-11-2001)


Sec. 2-222. - Special adjustments and beneits payable to present retirees.

 
(a)


(b)
 
All individuals who retired prior to July 1, 1987, shall have their benefits increased by two percent times the years between retirement and July 1, 1988. In addition, the minimum benefit is increased from $100.00 per month to $250.00 per month.
All individuals retiring before July 1, 1987, and who did not have longevity and educational bonuses credited as part of their base pay shall receive such credit retroactive to July 1, 1985.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-252; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 5032, § I, 12-11-2001)


Sec. 2-223. - Latest date of payment.

 
(a)



(b)
 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, and notwithstanding any election of the employee, payment of benefits pursuant to
 s e c t i o n  2 - 2 1 3  shall commence no later than the employee's required beginning date. The "required beginning date" is April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the employee attains 70½ years of age.
Section 401(a)(9) (26 USC 401(a)(9)) of the Internal Revenue Code, 2 6 USC 1 et seq. (the "IRS Code"), is hereby incorporated by reference, and distributions under this plan pursuant to s e c t i o n 2 - 2 1 3 shall be made in accordance with such section and the regulations issued by the secretary of the treasury interpreting such section. Provisions reflecting IRS Code section 401(a)(9) (26 USC 401(a)(9)) shall override any other distribution options that may be inconsistent with such IRS Code section and this section. Any distributions required under the incidental death benefit requirements of IRS Code section 401(a) (26 USC 401(a)) shall be treated as distributions required under IRS Code section 401(a)(9) (26 USC 401(a) (9)) and this section.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-253; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 5032, § I, 12-11-2001)
 

Sec. 2-224. - Limitation on compensation.

 
(a)








(b)


(c)
 
In addition to any other applicable limitations set forth in this article, and notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, for fiscal years of the fund ("plan years") beginning after 1994, the annual earnings of each employee taken into account shall not exceed
$150,000.00, as adjusted by the commissioner of internal revenue for increases in the cost of living in accordance with section 401(a)(17)(B) of the IRS Code (26 USC 401(a)(17)(B)). The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to any period, not exceeding 12 months, over which earnings is determined ("determination period") beginning in such calendar year. If a determination period consists of fewer than 12 months, such compensation limit will be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in the determination period, and the denominator of which is 12.
For plan years beginning after 1994, any reference in this plan to the limitation under section 401(a)(17) of the IRS Code (26 USC 401(a)(17)) shall mean the annual compensation limit set forth in this section.
If compensation for any prior determination period is taken into account in determining an employee's benefits accruing in the current plan year, the earnings for that prior determination period are subject to such annual compensation limit in effect for that prior determination period. For this purpose, for determination periods beginning before the first day of the first plan year beginning after 1994, such annual compensation limit is $150,000.00.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-254; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 5032, § I, 12-11-2001)


Sec. 2-225. - Limitation on beneits.

Effective May 9, 1995, in no event shall the annual benefit under this article and all other defined benefits plans maintained by the city exceed the amount specified in section 415(b)(1)(A) of the IRS Code (26 USC 415(b)(1)(A)), as adjusted for any applicable increases in the cost of living in accordance with section 415(d) of the IRS Code (26 USC 415(d)), as in effect on the last day of the plan year.

(Code 1982, § 2-255; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 4934, § II, 4-25-2000; Ord. No. 5032, § I, 12-11-2001)


Sec. 2-226. - Amendment and termination.

 
(a)





(b)
 
The city reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or amend the plan in whole or in part; provided that no such modifications or amendments shall decrease the benefit of any employees entitled to benefits hereunder or their beneficiaries accrued to the date of such an amendment, except to the extent necessary to maintain the qualified status of the plan; and provided further that the duties or liabilities of the board shall not be increased without its consent.
The city reserves the right at any time to terminate the plan in its entirety or only with respect to a portion of the fund. All accrued benefits to the extent then funded shall vest as of the effective date of the termination of the plan, and there shall be no forfeitures thereafter. In the event of a partial termination, all rights to benefits with respect to which the plan terminated to the extent then funded shall be fully vested and nonforfeitable as of the date of such partial termination. In the event of complete termination of this plan, an actuarial valuation shall be made. The funds in the fund shall be allocated on an actuarial basis to pay the benefits in the order and in the manner provided by section 4044 of ERISA (Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 ("ERISA"), 2 9 USC 1001—1461) with no subclass and categories within the classes
described therein. All assets in the fund that are not needed to satisfy in full the accrued benefits of the employees entitled to benefits hereunder or their beneficiaries at the time of such a termination shall revert to the city.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-256; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 5032, § I, 12-11-2001)


Sec. 2-227. - Military service.

Effective May 9, 1995, notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with IRS Code section 414(u) (26 USC 414(u)).

(Code 1982, § 2-257; Ord. No. 4934, § III, 4-25-2000; Ord. No. 5032, § I, 12-11-2001)


Secs. 2-228—2-247. - Reserved.


ARTICLE V. - REVENUE AND FINANCE


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 2-248. - Authority to draw funds.

 
(a)
 
No funds of the city shall be paid out except on checks drawn only by the dual signatures of the city manager, city clerk and/or the city treasurer. Signatures by other elected or appointed city officials upon checks will not be authorized.
 

(b)





(c)
 

Upon presentation of a valid warrant, the director of purchasing or his designee shall determine whether there is sufficient money in the depository the fund upon which the warrant is drawn, and if there is sufficient funds to cover the warrant, the director of purchasing or his designee shall char amount of the warrant to the proper fund, take up the warrant, and issue the city's check or other payment of that amount to the lawful holder of t No check shall be drawn upon the depository unless there is sufficient money in the fund upon which the warrant is drawn.
The city council may cause the city manager to place a sufficient sum at the place where, by their terms, bonds, coupons, or other indebtedness may be payable, if such places other than at the place of business in the city of the depository.
 
(Code 1972, § 207.01; Code 1982, § 2-271; Ord. No. 3977, § 1, 2-26-1979; Ord. No. 3982, § 1, 3-26-1979; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 1-10-1984)


Sec. 2-249. - Warrants.

 
(a)





(b)
 
No warrant shall be drawn in favor of any person who is known to the director of finance to be indebted to the city, or in favor of any assignee of such person, except for the balance which may appear to be due over and above such debt due the city, nor shall any warrant be drawn in favor of any officer of the city known to the city manager to be in arrears or default to the city. The director of finance shall be deemed to have knowledge, for the purposes of this subsection, if he receives any written report of such indebtedness or default.
No warrant shall be drawn unless there is an unexpended balance to the credit of the city in the fund upon which it is to be drawn sufficient to meet the amount to be drawn under the warrant.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-272; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 1-10-1984)


Sec. 2-250. - Contracts with other governmental subdivisions.

No funds shall be drawn for any expenditures under any contract or agreement entered into by the city with other municipalities, governmental subdivisions or agencies of this state or any other state or with the United States unless such contracts or agreements have been approved by the majority of the members of the city council by ordinance or resolution.

(Code 1972, § 207.04; Code 1982, § 2-274; Ord. No. 3773, § 1, 5-30-1974; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 1-10-1984)


Secs. 2-251—2-280. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS



Sec. 2-281. - Purpose.

The purpose of this division is to establish rules and procedures governing the procurement and disposition of materials, supplies, equipment and services for the city, and to maintain a high ethical standard for all officers and employees of the city in connection therewith.

(Code 1972, § 207.08(A); Code 1982, § 2-286; Ord. No. 3821, § 1, 6-23-1975)


Sec. 2-282. - Purchasing agent—Designation.

The city manager, or his designated representative, shall be the purchasing agent for the city. (Code 1972, § 207.08(B); Code 1982, § 2-287; Ord. No 3821, § 1, 6-23-1975)

Sec. 2-283. - Same—Power and duties.

The purchasing agent shall, in accordance with and subject to the rules and regulations and procedures in this division and applicable laws:

 
(1)





(2)
 
Direct, supervise and be responsible for the procurement and acquisition of all materials, supplies and equipment, and all contractual services by any department, agency, or office of the city, and by any other governmental department, agency or office with respect to any procurement by such department, agency or office funded wholly or partially, directly or indirectly, by city funds; provided, however, the purchasing agent shall not be responsible for contracts for the acquisition of real estate, public improvements and professional services.
Sell, dispose of all obsolete, unusable or unneeded personal property of the city.
 

(Code 1972, § 207.08(C); Code 1982, § 2-288; Ord. No. 3821, § 1, 6-23-1975)


Sec. 2-284. - Gifts and rebates prohibited.

The purchasing agent and every other officer, agent and employee of the city are hereby prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person, firm or corporation, to which any purchase order or contract is or might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money or anything of value whatsoever.
 

(Code 1972, § 207.08(E); Code 1982, § 2-289; Ord. No. 3821, § 1, 6-23-1975)


Sec. 2-285. - Purchasing regulations.

 
(a)



(b)






(c)
 
The purchasing agent is authorized and directed to adopt such written regulations, purchasing records, forms and procedures as may be necessary for the implementation of this division. Copies of regulations, records, forms and procedures shall be on file in the office of the purchasing agent and shall be available for public inspection.
Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this section in which the purchasing agent or any officer or employee of the city is financially interested, directly or indirectly, shall be void except that before the execution of a purchase order or contract the council shall have the authority to waive compliance with this division when the best interest of the city requires such action and the laws of the state do not prohibit the transaction. The purchasing agent shall immediately report to the council any information that he has or which shall come to his attention that would indicate any such financial interest either before or after a purchase has been made.
Records pertaining to purchases shall be kept on file in the purchasing agent's office for such period of time as required by state law.
 

(Code 1972, § 207.08(F); Code 1982, § 2-290; Ord. No. 3821, § 1, 6-23-1975)


Sec. 2-286. - Availability of funds.

The purchasing agent shall refuse to purchase or permit the withdrawal of stores and inventories on hand, of any contractual services or supplies when the same would be in excess, taking into account all prior purchases during the fiscal period of the budget appropriation for much contractual services or supplies for the using agency requesting the purchase.

(Code 1972, § 207.08(G); Code 1982, § 2-291; Ord. No. 3821, § 1, 6-23-1975)


Sec. 2-287. - Formal competitive bidding.

 
(a)






(b)
 
Formal bids are required to procure supplies, materials or equipment when the value of the proposed procurement is in excess of $10,000.00 or when directed by the council, or when required by the laws of this state. The procurement of several items of the same type at substantially the same time is a single purchase for the purpose of this section, and the total cost of all such items will determine whether formal competitive bidding procedures must be followed. No contract or purchase shall be subdivided so as to avoid competitive bidding requirements of this division.
Formal bids shall be invited through a notice to be published in at least one local newspaper of general circulation, at least one time, the first publication to be at least two weeks prior to the date specified for submission of bids. Such notice shall include:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
 
A general description of the items to be purchased; The condition of such purchase;
The place specifications and bid forms may be secured; The time and place for submitting such bids;
The time and place for acceptance of bids.
 

The purchasing agent may also solicit bids by mailing copies of the specifications and bidding documents to prospective vendors. There shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the city hall a copy of the invitation to bid containing the information indicated above. A brief tabulation of the bids during the prior month shall be posted.
 

(c)

(d)


(e)

(f)



(g)






(h)



(i)
 

Formal bids shall be sought for any item for which an appropriation has been made in the annual budget of the city.

Formal bids shall be sealed and identified upon the outside of the envelope as a bid for supplying some material or service to the city. The time that the bid is received by the city is to be marked on the outside of the envelope by the receiving employee.
The bids shall be opened by the city clerk. All bids received shall be made available for inspection as a public record.

On all construction bids, the council, after being presented with all available data pertaining to the bid, shall, at a regular or special meeting, award the contract to the lowest, and best bidder; provided, however, the council shall have the authority to reject all bids and to waive minor irregularities.
Bid deposits, when deemed necessary by the council, may be required. Such deposits may be required to be in the form of a certified check or
bid bond and may be for an amount not exceeding $1,000.00, or ten percent of the amount of the bid, whichever is greater. When so required, all bids not accompanied by such deposit shall be rejected. Such bid deposit shall be returned to all bidders upon execution of a contract with, or issuance of a purchase order to, the successful bidder. A successful bidder shall forfeit his deposit if he fails to enter into a contract within 20
days after the award.

Performance bonds may be required of the successful bidder, whenever it is deemed appropriate by the council. Such requirement shall be set forth in the conditions of bidding. Such performance bond may be in the form of a specified amount or a percentage of the value of the proposed purchase.
The purchasing agent shall establish in the conditions of bidding such terms as may be deemed appropriate to protect the interests of the city.
 

(Code 1972, § 207.08(H); Code 1982, § 2-292; Ord. No. 3821, § 1, 6-23-1975; Ord. No. 4622, § 1, 9-14-1993; Ord. No. 4776, § 1, 4-22-1997; Ord. No. 5729, § I, 3-11-
2014)


Sec. 2-288. - Open market purchasing.

The purchasing agent may, without prior authority, acquire on the open market all goods and services with a value of less than $10,000.00. Such acquisition shall be based upon sound procurement principles. Formal bids shall not be required to purchases between $5,000.00 and $10,000.00, but written quotations from three or more vendors shall be secured.

(Code 1972, § 207.08(I); Code 1982, § 2-293; Ord. No. 3821, § 1, 6-23-1975; Ord. No. 4622, § 2, 9-14-1993; Ord. No. 4776, § 2, 4-22-1997; Ord. No. 5729, § I, 3-11-
2014)


Sec. 2-289. - Negotiated purchasing; nonreceipt or rejection of bids; emergency purchasing.

 
(a)



(b)





(c)
 
Absence or rejection of bids. The council may, by resolution, approve negotiated procurement of goods or services of a value in excess of
$10,000.00 if there have been no responsive bids to an advertisement for bids or if the council has rejected all bids for good and sufficient reason.
Emergencies generally. In addition, the council may, by resolution, approve negotiated procurement of goods and services of a value in excess of
$5,000.00 without requiring formal competitive bids if the council determines from all information submitted to it by the purchasing agent and the using agency that the immediate procurement of such goods or services is essential to prevent delays which might adversely affect the health, welfare or convenience of the citizens or cause substantial financial disadvantage to the city.
Other emergency purchasing. Each department head or acting head with the concurrence of the city manager is authorized to purchase up to
$10,000.00 of goods and services as an emergency purchase without any bid procedure if such goods and services are essential and a delay might adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the city.
 
(Code 1972, § 207.08(J); Code 1982, § 2-294; Ord. No. 3821, § 1, 6-23-1975; Ord. No. 4622, § 3, 9-14-1993; Ord. No. 4776, § 3, 4-22-1997; Ord. No. 5729, § I, 3-11-
2014)


Sec. 2-290. - Sole source, specialized and nonstandard items.

The council may, by resolution, approve negotiated procurement of goods of a value in excess of $10,000.00 without formal bids if the council determines from all information submitted to it by the purchasing agent and the using agency, that such goods are available from or they can be acquired only from a sole source of supply and that no standard goods or services would or could reasonably satisfy the city's requirements.

(Code 1972, § 207.08(K); Code 1982, § 2-295; Ord. No. 3821, § 1, 6-23-1975; Ord. No. 4622, § 4, 9-14-1993; Ord. No. 4776, § 4, 4-22-1997; Ord. No. 5729, § I, 3-11-
2014)


Sec. 2-291. - Inspection and testing.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)
 
The purchasing agent or his deputy shall inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services to determine their conformance with the specification set forth in the order or contract.
The purchasing agent may authorize using agencies that have the staff and facilities for adequate inspection to evaluate all deliveries made to the city under rules and regulations that the purchasing agent shall prescribe.
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require chemical and physical testing of bid and delivery samples to determine their quality and conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such testing, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the city or any outside laboratory.
 
(Code 1972, § 207.08(L); Code 1982, § 2-296; Ord. No. 3821, § 1, 6-23-1975)


Sec. 2-292. - Cooperative purchasing.

The purchasing agent shall have authority to join with any other governmental unit in cooperative purchasing or the use of specifications, when the best interests of the city would be served by such cooperation.

(Code 1972, § 207.08(M); Code 1982, § 2-297; Ord. No. 3821, § 1, 6-23-1975)


Sec. 2-293. - Unauthorized purchases.

Except as provided by this section or by the regulations prescribed by the purchasing agent, it shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city other than the purchasing agent to purchase materials, supplies, equipment, or services, or to enter into contracts for any goods or services, and the city shall not be bound by any purchase order or contract made in violation of this section.
 

(Code 1972, § 207.08(N); Code 1982, § 2-298; Ord. No. 3821, § 1, 6-23-1975)


Sec. 2-294. - Disposition of surplus supplies, materials or equipment.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)



(d)
 
All using agencies shall submit to the purchasing agent at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe reports showing stocks of all supplies, materials and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped.
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus supplies, materials and equipment to other using agencies, or shall have the authority to exchange such property for new supplies, materials and equipment.
Surplus, unusable or obsolete supplies, materials and equipment whose estimated value is in excess of $5,000.00 shall be sold by formal written inviting bids as provided for procurement by competitive bids as provided in this division. Proceeds of such sale shall go to the general fund of the city.
Sales of surplus, obsolete or unusable property whose value is estimated to be less than $10,000.00 shall be sold at public auction. Such auction shall be advertised at least one time, one week prior to such auction. Proceeds of such auction shall go to the general fund of the city.
 
(Code 1972, § 207.08(O); Code 1982, § 2-299; Ord. No. 3821, § 1, 6-23-1975; Ord. No. 4776, § 5, 4-22-1997; Ord. No. 5729, § I, 3-11-2014)


Sec. 2-295. - Local purchase of goods and services.

 
(a)
 
Goods and services purchased by the city shall be purchased from merchants and businessmen located in the city, unless:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

Such goods and services are not available in the city;

Such goods and services may be purchased outside the city at a savings of five percent or more; or An emergency exists and such goods or services are not immediately available in the city.
 
(b)
 
The city manager shall be responsible for all purchases.
 

(Code 1982, § 2-300; Res. No. 20-1979, § 1, 2-26-1979)


Sec. 2-296. - Purchase of American goods.

 
(a)
 
Goods purchased by the city shall be American-made, unless:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

Such goods are not available as American-made;

Foreign goods may be purchased at a savings of five percent or more; or An emergency exists and American goods are not immediately available.
 
(b)
 
The city manager shall be responsible for all purchases.
 

(Code 1982, § 2-301; Ord. No. 4268, § 1, 10-28-1986)


Secs. 2-297—2-325. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE



Sec. 2-326. - City manager.

 
(a)



(b)
 
Designated chief administrative officer. The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city government, shall enforce the laws of the city and shall require the faithful performance of all administrative duties. He may serve as the head of any department other than the law department.
Power and duty to appoint, dismiss, etc. He shall appoint all department heads except the city clerk and municipal judge. He shall appoint competent, qualified officers and employees to the administrative service and shall have the power to dismiss, suspend and discipline, in accordance with the personnel code (chapter 3 8 ), all officers and employees in the administrative service under his control. He shall also have the power to authorize a department head or officer responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates serving under that department head or officer. The city manager shall:
 
(1)



(2)


(3)


(4)
 
Administration. Be responsible for the day-to-day administrative activities of the city. He shall also serve as the professional staff resource to the mayor and council in matters concerning the proposal and development of major public policy and shall, as a matter of procedure, bring all such public policy proposals and suggestions to the mayor and council for discussion.
Appoint to acting capacity. Designate himself or some other officer or employee to perform the duties of any office or position in the administrative service under his control which is vacant or which lacks administration due to the absence or disability of the incumbent.
Annual report. Prepare and present to the mayor and council for review an annual report of the city's affairs, including a summary of reports of department heads, and such other reports as the mayor and council shall require.
Budget report. Assemble estimates of the financial needs and resources of the city for each ensuing year, prepare a program of activities
 

within the financial power of the city, and shall prepare and submit to the mayor and council a recommended annual budget and five-year capital program as provided in the Charter.
 
(5)


(6)



(7)


(8)


(9)


(10)


(11)
 
Assign according to classification. Have the power to assign any employee of the city to any department or branch thereof requiring services appropriate to the personnel code classification of the employee so assigned.
Prescribe rules. Have the power to prescribe such rules and regulations as he shall deem necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies subject to his authority; and he shall have the power to revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of the administrative service so prescribed by him or subordinates.
Investigate. Have the power, either by himself or by an officer or person designated for the purpose by him, to investigate and to examine or inquire into the affairs or operation of any department, division, bureau or office, and when so authorized by the mayor and council.
Overrule officials. Have the power to set aside any action taken by a department head and may supersede the department head in the functions of his office.
Delegate duties. Have the power to direct any department, division or bureau to perform the work for any other department, division or bureau.
Appear before the council. Attend council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote. He shall receive notice of all special meetings.
Other duties. Perform such other duties as are specified in the city Charter.
 

(Code 1982, § 2-313; Ord. No. 4127, § 3, 11-9-1982)


Sec. 2-327. - City clerk.

The city clerk shall:

 
(1)


(2)

(3)

(4)


(5)

(6)


(7)

(8)


(9)
 
Clerk of the council. Serve as clerk of the council and perform such other duties of a like nature as shall be required by that body, and as specified by law.
Keeping of records of council. Be responsible for the recording, filing, indexing and safekeeping of all proceedings of the council.

Record of ordinances. Record in full, uniformly and permanently, all ordinances, and shall authenticate the same.

Publish council action. Publish all adopted ordinances and resolutions of the council, as required, and all legal notices required by law or ordinance.
Keeping election records. Keep and maintain all election records and have custody of all property used in connection with elections.

Notice of expiration of term. Notify the appointing authority of the impending expiration of the term of office of a member of any board or commission, said notice to be given at least 30 days before such expiration.
Keeping official seal. Be the custodian of the official seal of the city.

Treasurer of the pension board. Serve as treasurer of the board of trustees of the policemen's and firemen's retirement fund, and perform such other duties of a like nature as shall be required by that body, and as specified by law.
Clerk of the civil service commission. Serve as clerk of the civil service commission, accept personnel grievances, and perform such other duties of a like nature as shall be required by that body, and as specified by law.
 

(Code 1982, § 2-314; Ord. No. 4127, § 4, 11-9-1982)


Sec. 2-328. - Departmental organization.

The administrative service of the city shall be divided under the city manager into the following departments and heads thereof:


Department	
Head of Department

Department of administration and fnance	
Director of fnance

Department of fre	
Fire chief

Department of law	
City attorney

Department of police	
Chief of police

Department of public works	
Director of public works
 


(Code 1982, § 2-315; Ord. No. 4127, § 5, 11-9-1982; Ord. No. 4164, § 1, 1-24-1984)


Sec. 2-329. - Oaths of ofce.

 
(a)
 
Prerequisite to persons taking office. Each of the following officers and employees in the administrative service shall be required to take an oath of office before entering upon the discharge of his duties, which oath shall be subscribed by the person taking it and shall be filed and preserved in the office of the city clerk:
 
(1)

(2)
 
Officials. The city manager, city clerk and each department head.

Police officers. Every member of the department of police, including any private, special, temporary or substitute police officers which the city might find it necessary to appoint.
 
(b)
 
Forms of oath for the city administrator and officers.

STATE OF MISSOURI,
)

COUNTY OF ST. LOUIS
)   ss

CITY OF MAPLEWOOD
)

I,	, do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Missouri and the Charter and ordinances of the City of Maplewood; that I will faithfully, honestly and impartially discharge my duties as	during my continuance therein; that I have no direct or indirect interest in or with any person or corporation having contracts with said city, so help me God.
 


Subscribed and sworn to before me this	day of	/	/	20	.



City Clerk

 
(c)
 
Form of oath for members of the department of police.

STATE OF MISSOURI,
)

COUNTY OF ST. LOUIS
)   ss

CITY OF MAPLEWOOD
)

I,	, do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Missouri, and the Charter and ordinances of the City of Maplewood; and that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully perform the duties of the office of
 	during my continuance therein, so help me God.
 



Subscribed and sworn to before me this	day of	/	/	20	.


City Clerk

(Code 1982, § 2-316; Ord. No. 4127, § 6, 11-9-1982)


Sec. 2-330. - Bonds required of certain ofcials.

The following named city officials shall each, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, give a good and sufficient surety company bond to the city, duly approved by the city attorney and conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of their respective duties, and for proper application and payment of all money or property coming into their hands by virtue of their offices in the following amounts:
 


City manager	
$25,000.00

City clerk	
25,000.00

City treasurer	
25,000.00

City licensing oicer	
10,000.00

City court clerk	
10,000.00



(Code 1982, § 2-317; Ord. No. 4127, § 7, 11-9-1982)


Sec. 2-331. - Administrative policy and procedures.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Officials perform duties. Each official shall perform all duties required of his office by state law, the Charter, this Code and ordinances of the city, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the city manager.
Department heads. Department heads shall:
 

(1)


(2)


(3)


(4)


(5)


(6)
 

Responsibility to city manager. Be immediately responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto.
Inaugurate sound practices. Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the city manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public.
Report to manager. Submit an annual report of the activities of his department to the city manager and such other reports as may be required by the city manager.
Maintain records. Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the city manager.
Authority over employees. Have power, when authorized by the city manager, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel system regulations for personnel, all subordinates under him.
Maintain equipment. Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in this department.
 

(c)



(d)
 

Departments. Each department shall furnish, upon direction of the city manager, any other department such service, labor and material as may be requisitioned by the head of such department and its own facilities permit, through the same procedure and subject to the same audit and control as other expenditures are incurred.
Operation of administrative service. All units in the administrative service shall:
 

(1)


(2)

(3)
 

Office hours. Be open between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays and shall be closed on Saturdays and legal holidays, or as required by the city manager.
Deposits. Make such deposits of any moneys received as directed by the city manager.

Payment of moneys. Pay out moneys belonging to the city only in the manner prescribed by the city manager.
 

(Code 1982, § 2-318; Ord. No. 4127, § 8, 11-9-1982)


Sec. 2-332. - Department of administration and fnance.

 
(a)
 
Duties of director. In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to any other department or office, it shall be the duty of the director of finance to act to promote, secure and preserve the financial and property interest of the city. The director of finance shall:
 
(1)
 
Fiscal supervision over officers. Exercise general supervision over all officers of the city regarding the proper management of the fiscal concerns of their respective offices.
 
a.	Examine books. Examine the books of each department from time to time, and see that they are kept in proper form.

b.	Report delinquent payments and financial reports. See that officers receiving money pay the same into the city treasury, when required, and that all necessary financial reports are made by officials, and shall report all delinquents in such payments or reports to the city manager and council.
 
(2)


(3)
 
Duty upon default of official. Report the default of any official of the city to the manager, who shall direct the city attorney to take immediate legal measures for the recovery of the amount for which such official may be in default.
Responsibility for proceeds of bonds. Deposit the proceeds of all sales of bonds in the city treasury immediately after he shall have received the same; and, until such deposit, he shall be responsible for the amount thereof.
 

(4)



(5)



(6)


(7)

(8)

(9)



(10)


(11)

(12)

(13)


(14)


(15)



(16)


(17)



(18)


(19)
 

Payments of money from special trust funds. Pay out to the persons duly entitled thereto, on warrant of the city, any money paid into the trea condemnation proceedings, or for the redemption of property sold for taxes, or arising from special assessments for public improvements, pa certificates, condemnation fund certificates and all special trust funds.
Accounts of receipts and expenditures. Keep in proper books a full and accurate account of all the moneys received and disbursed by him in behalf of the city, specifying the time of receipt and disbursement, from whom received and to whom disbursed, and on what account received and disbursed, and how paid.
Cancellation of evidences of debt. Cancel all warrants and other evidences of debt against the city, whenever paid by him, by writing or stamping across the face thereof the words "Paid by the City of Maplewood" with the date of payment written or stamped thereon.
Receive and disburse moneys. Receive and have custody of all moneys paid to the city and shall disburse city moneys upon proper approval.

Pay city employees. Pay city employees upon presentation of the properly certified payroll.

Collect moneys and fees due city. Demand and receive all moneys and fees owing to the city whenever any person is indebted to the city in any manner, and the means of collection of such debt is not otherwise provided for by law. When any claim shall not be collectible by other methods, he shall report the same to the city attorney for prosecution.
Permits and licenses. Issue all permits and licenses except those that are required by ordinance to be issued by a particular department or office.
Audit accounts. Examine and audit the accounts of all officials and departments subject to the approval of the manager and council.

Prescribe form. Prescribe the form of accounts and reports to be rendered by him.

Certify contracts. Certify according to law all contracts, agreements or other obligations for the expenditure of public funds entered into by any official of the city government; and no such contract, agreement or other obligation shall be valid until so certified by him.
Budget duties. Prepare estimate of revenue, and shall give such other assistance in the preparation of the budget as may be required of him by the manager.
Financial statements. Transmit to the manager, when so directed, audited statements of cash on hand and of unencumbered appropriation balances for the city as a whole and such other financial statements as the manager may from time to time require. He shall keep all departments, boards, commissions or institutions currently informed of its unencumbered appropriation balances.
Keep accounts. Keep all general accounts of the city government and of the respective departments, offices, boards, commissions and institutions thereof.
Custodian of bonds, contracts, etc. Be charged with the custody of the official bonds of the city employees, except his own, which shall be in the custody of the director of finance, with the custody of all deeds, mortgages, contracts, judgments, notes, debts and choses in action. He shall keep and administer all securities, bonds or other forms of negotiable instruments owned by or belonging to the city.
Assessments. Prepare all work in connection with the assessment of property and the preparation of all assessment and tax rolls and tax notices, as required. The city may contract with the county for the performance of any required services for purposes of assessment.
Daily settlement. Make a daily settlement of the amounts received and paid out during the day for which settlement is being made, and at such settlements shall deliver, properly canceled, all warrants and other obligations of the city paid by him since his last settlement and shall take a receipt therefor in duplicate, one to be turned over to the director of finance and one to be retained; and once each month he shall balance accounts with the city treasurer, which monthly settlement shall show the balance to the credit of the several funds for which the finance director is responsible.
 
(b)


(c)
 
City treasurer. The director of finance shall supervise the actions of the city treasurer regarding receipt or disbursement of city funds as provided in this Code.
Tax collection. The city tax collector shall collect all taxes in the manner authorized and required by law and perform such other duties as may be required by the Charter or statute.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-319; Ord. No. 4127, § 9, 11-9-1982)


Sec. 2-333. - Department of fre.

 
(a)
 
Duties of fire chief. The chief of the fire department shall act in accordance with policies set forth by the city manager and shall:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)



(4)
 

Be responsible for the preservation and protection of life and property against hazardous situations. Be responsible for the proper administration, efficiency and general conduct of the department of fire.
Be responsible for the assignment and reassignment of all personnel and for the efficiency, discipline, general conduct and appearance of such personnel. In this capacity, he shall have the authority to prescribe and enforce rules and regulations for the operation of the department.
Take such action as he deems necessary for the protection of the safety and welfare of persons and property.
 

(b)
 

Functions of the department. The department of fire, under the administrative direction of the fire chief, shall perform the following functions:
 

(1)
 

Fire prevention supervised by the proper commissioned officer through the implementation of the building and premises inspections conducted on a regular and as needed basis, code enforcement, construction/renovation plan and specification review, water supply flow
 

test, fire hydrant inspections, prefire planning, fire and arson investigation, and public information and education.
 

(2)



(3)

(4)

(5)
 

Fire suppression supervised by the proper commissioned officer/personnel through the utilization of all available resources to confine the fire, protect fire exposures, and ultimately to extinguish the fire with the least amount of damage to the property involved while exposing firefighting personnel to the least possible dangers.
Rescue and emergency/nonemergency medical service (ambulance).

Training supervised by the proper personnel in order to ensure proficiency in all phases of every employee's required professional duties. Care and maintenance of department apparatus, equipment, and facilities.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-320; Ord. No. 4127, § 10, 11-9-1982; Ord. No. 4973, § I, 2-13-2001)


Sec. 2-334. - Department of law.

The department of law shall consist of the city attorney and may include an assistant city attorney and such temporary or special counsel as may be appointed pursuant to the Charter.
 

(1)
 

City attorney's duties. The city attorney shall act to protect the interests of the city, and shall:
 

a.	Give advice. Advise the mayor and council and its committees or any city official, when requested, upon all legal questions arising on the conduct of city business.
b.	Prepare ordinances and resolutions. Prepare or revise ordinances and resolutions when so requested by the manager, mayor and council or any committee thereof.
c.	Give opinions. Give his opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted to him by the mayor and council, or any of its committees, or by the city manager.
d.	Attend meetings of the council. Attend all meetings of the council in their entirety for the purpose of giving the council any legal advice requested by its members.
e.	Prepare legal instruments. Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party and shall approve, as to form, all bonds required to be submitted to the city.
f.	Defend officials. Defend any and all actions or proceedings, civil or criminal, brought against the city, or against any official or employee of the city arising out of, or in connection with, the performance of his duties (as such official or employee if authorized by the council).
g.	Settle claims. Have the power with the approval of the council to adjust, settle, compromise or submit to arbitration any action, causes of action, accounts, debts, claims, demands, disputes and matters in favor of or against the city in which the city is concerned as debtor or creditor, now existing or which may hereafter arise. He may settle all small claims up to $1,000.00 without prior approval and report same to the council.
h.	Make reports.

1.	Immediate report of decision. Immediately report the outcome of any litigation in which the city has an interest to the manager and council.
2.	Annual report. Make an annual report to the council of all legal matters in which the city has an interest and the condition thereof.
i.	Prepare records.

1.	Suits. Prepare and forward to the council and city manager a complete record of all suits in which the city had or has an interest, giving the names of the parties, the court where brought, the nature of the action, the disposition of the case, or its condition if pending, and the briefs of counsel.
2.	Opinions. Prepare and forward to the city manager a complete record of all written opinions furnished by him to the city or any department or official thereof.
j.	Prosecute offenders. Prepare all charges and complaints against, and shall appear in the appropriate court in the prosecution of, every person charged with the violation of a city ordinance or of any regulations adopted under authority of the Charter, or with the commission of a misdemeanor as declared by the Charter or by virtue of its authority. In any prosecution for violation of any ordinance or regulation adopted by the council or any board or commission created under authority of the Charter, the city attorney shall act under the direction of such board or commission.
k.	Supervise clerk. Supervise the duties of the municipal court clerk.
 

(2)
 

Assistant attorney. An assistant city attorney or special counsel shall serve as provided in the Charter.
 

(Code 1982, § 2-322; Ord. No. 4127, § 12, 11-9-1982)


Sec. 2-335. - Department of police.
 

(a)
 

Duties of chief of police. The chief of police shall act in accordance with policies set forth by the city manager and be responsible for the enforcemen and ordinances of the city.
 
(1)

(2)



(3)
 
Be responsible for the proper administration, efficiency and general conduct of the department of police.

Be responsible for the assignment and reassignment of all personnel and for the efficiency, discipline, general conduct and appearance of such personnel. In this capacity, he shall have the authority to prescribe and enforce the rules and regulations for the operation of the department.
Take such action as he deems necessary for the protection of the safety and welfare of persons and property.
 

(b)
 

Functions of the department. The department of police shall perform the following functions:
 

(1)


(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)
 

Identify criminal offenders and criminal activity and, where appropriate, apprehend offenders and participate in subsequent court proceedings.
Reduce the opportunities for the commission of some crimes through preventive patrol and other measures. Aid individuals who are in danger of physical harm.
Protect constitutional guarantees.

Facilitate the movement of people and vehicles. Assist those who cannot care for themselves. Resolve conflicts.
Identify problems that are potentially serious law enforcement or government problems. Create and maintain a feeling of security in the community.
Promote and preserve civil order.

Provide other services, both emergency and nonemergency.
 

(Code 1982, § 2-323; Ord. No. 4127, § 13, 11-9-1982)


Sec. 2-336. - Department of public works.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Duties of director of public works. The director of public works shall be responsible for all matters relating to construction, management, maintenance and operation of the city's physical properties.
Duties relative to public works. The department of public works shall include:
 

(1)


(2)
 

Engineering, which shall perform all engineering services for the division of public works and for such other departments of the city as may from time to time require such services.
Permits and inspections, which shall be responsible for the issuance of all permits and inspections involved in the construction of sewer and water services, sidewalks, curb cuts, street cuts and buildings. This division shall review all building plans and construction thereof under the provisions of the electrical, plumbing and building codes of the city and inspect all premises, including structures and appurtenances thereon, for safety features.
 
(c)



(d)
 
Duties relative to street division. The street division shall direct the repair, maintenance and uses of all city streets. The street division shall collect garbage and rubbish, be responsible for the clearing of snow; clean improved streets; maintain and provide for adequate drainage of all streets, sidewalks and bridges; operate and maintain all off-street parking lots, area, and facilities; and maintain loss control/prevention.
Duties relative to parks and recreation department. The parks and recreation department shall plan, promote, organize and supervise a comprehensive municipal park and recreation program and administer the same in the interest of the entire community and shall:
 
(1)

(2)


(3)
 
Develop, operate and maintain all city parks, recreational areas and facilities.

Supervise the recreational use of playgrounds, playfields, recreation centers, swimming pools, ball diamonds, skating rinks, golf courses and such other recreational areas and facilities as may be made available to carry out the city's recreation program.
Conduct and supervise any form of recreational, cultural or social activity that will employ the leisure time of the citizens in a wholesome and constructive manner.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-324; Ord. No. 4127, § 14, 11-9-1982)


Secs. 2-337—2-360. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VII. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 2-361. - Boards and commissions.
 

(a)


(b)


(c)
























(d)
 

Creation. The administrative service of the city shall include such ad hoc committees and standing committees, provided for in subsection (c) this se shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the council.
Membership. The boards and commissions created herein shall be composed of the number of members, and for the terms of office designated in subsection (c) of this section to be appointed by the mayor and council.
Names of boards; number of members.
























Term of office. All members shall serve for a term of office as set in the Charter and ordinances except those appointed to fill a vacancy occurring during the term of a member, and except that the terms of office of the original members of each board or commission shall, at the time of their appointment, be fixed by the mayor and council at such number of years as will provide for staggered terms for those thereafter appointed.
 
(Code 1982, § 2-325; Ord. No. 4127, § 14A, 11-9-1982; Ord. No. 4162, § 1, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 4486, § 1, 2-26-1990; Ord. No. 4604, § 1, 6-8-1993)


Secs. 2-362—2-380. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - HOUSING AUTHORITY



Sec. 2-381. - Creation.

The mayor, with the consent of the council, is hereby authorized to appoint a housing authority consisting of five members in behalf of the city, designating their duties, length of service and compensation.

(Code 1982, § 16-36; Ord. No. 4047, § 1, 6-10-1980)


Sec. 2-382. - Terms; persons eligible for appointment.

The commissioners of the housing authority shall be appointed as aforesaid for a term of office of four years, except that all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term. No commissioner of the authority may be an officer or employee of the city.

(Code 1982, § 16-37; Ord. No. 4047, § 2, 6-10-1980)


Sec. 2-383. - Removal.

A commissioner of the housing authority shall hold office until his successor has been appointed and has qualified, unless sooner removed according to RSMo 99.010 to 99.230.

(Code 1982, § 16-38; Ord. No. 4047, § 3, 6-10-1980)


Sec. 2-384. - Certiicate of appointment to be iled with city clerk.

A certificate of appointment and subsequent reappointment shall be filed with the city clerk as evidence of due and proper appointment of a commissioner of the housing authority.
 

(Code 1982, § 16-39; Ord. No. 4047, § 4, 6-10-1980)


Sec. 2-385. - Compensation.

The commissioners of the housing authority shall receive no compensation for their services for the authority, in any capacity. (Code 1982, § 16-40; Ord. No. 4047, § 5, 6-10-1980)

Sec. 2-386. - Powers and duties.

The general powers and duties of the housing authority will be in accordance with the state housing law contained in RSMo 99.010 through 99.230. (Code 1982, § 16-41; Ord. No. 4047, § 6, 6-10-1980)

Chapter 4 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Secs. 4-1—4-18. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 4-19. - Purpose and indings.

 
(a)








(b)
 
Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor the effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.
Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses of the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of St. Louis County v. BAP, Inc., 18 SW3d. 397 (Mo. App. E.D. 2000), City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. 475 U.S. 4 1 , 106 S.Ct. 925, 89 L.Ed.2d 2 9 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres , 427 U.S. 50, 96 S.Ct. 2440,  4 9 
L.E	d.2d 310 (1976), FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas , 493 U.S. 215, 110 S.Ct. 596, 107 L.Ed.2d 603 (1990); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc. , 501 U.S. 560,
111 S.Ct. 2456, 115 L.Ed.2d 504 (1991), City of Erie v. Pap's A.M. , 529 U.S. 277 120 S.Ct. 1382, 146 L.Ed.2d 265 (2000), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to: Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; St. Paul, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; Beaumont, Texas; Dallas, Texas; Newport News, Virginia; Bellevue, Washington; New York, New York; and St. Croix County, Wisconsin; and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation of Sexually Oriented Business (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the council finds:
 
(1)



(2)


(3)


(4)

(5)


(6)
 
Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises.
Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses, defined in this article as adult theaters and adult cabarets, engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments.
Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows.
Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions.

Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses.
At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections.
 

(7)


(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)



(12)

(13)



(14)


(15)

(16)


(17)






(18)


(19)



(20)



(21)


(22)


(23)


(24)
 

Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndro human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States.
Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody test. The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States reported annually has risen.
The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high level.

In his report of October 22, 1986, the Surgeon General of the United States has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drub abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn.
According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and,
in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate
those activities and maintain those facilities.

Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films.
The findings noted in subsections (b)(1) through (14) of this section raise substantial governmental concerns.

Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns.
A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented businesses is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
Removal of doors to adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.
Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments.
The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
In the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases, it is desirable to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this article is designed to prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to such conduct.
The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this article.
The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to, and prevents conduct which leads to, the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
The general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this article.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-274; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Sec. 4-20. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited, wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by matters exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store means a commercial establishment which has ten percent or more of its stock-in-trade, or derives ten percent or more of its revenues or devotes ten percent or more of its interior business or advertising, or maintains ten percent or more of its sales or display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:
 

(1)
 

Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual representations, which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
 

(2)
 

Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadom abuse of the user or others.
 

Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Persons who appear seminude;

Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or

Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
 

Adult motel means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment, which:

 
(1)





(2)

(3)
 
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; and either
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or

Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
 

Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear nude or seminude, or live performances which are distinguished or characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.

Distinguished or characterized by means the dominant or principal theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers to films which are distinguished or characterized by the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

Employee, employ and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented businesses on a fulltime, parttime, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent, or by another status. The term "employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.

Enforcement officer means the city zoning administrator or such person as may be designated by the city manager.

Escort means a person who, for consideration, and for another person, agrees or offers:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
To act as a companion, guide, or date; To privately model lingerie; or
To privately perform a striptease.
 

Escort agency means a person or business association that for a fee, tip, or other consideration, furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish, escorts as one of its primary business purposes.

Establish or establishment means and includes any of the following:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
 
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;

The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
 

Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business.

Nude, nudity or state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less than a fully opaque fabric covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque fabric covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. Body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex, whether wet or dried, and other similar substances shall not be considered an opaque fabric covering.
 

Operate or cause to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. The term "operator" means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational control of the business, or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operations, the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether the person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.

Regularly featured or regularly shown means a consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business.

Seminude or in a seminude condition means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not shown with less than a fully opaque fabric covering. Body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex, whether wet or dried, and other similar substances shall not be considered an opaque fabric covering.

Seminude model studio means a commercial establishment which regularly features a person who appears seminude and is provided to be observed, sketched, painted, sculptured, or photographed by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration, but shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; or a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.

Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities. The definition of sexual encounter center or any sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.

Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, seminude model studio, or sexual encounter center.

Specified anatomical areas means:

 
(1)

(2)
 
The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or

Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
 

Specified criminal activity means any of the following offenses:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)
 
Prostitution or promotion of prostitution;

Dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; Sexual performance by a child;
Possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; Indecent exposure;
Indecency with a child;

Engaging in organized criminal activity relating to a sexually oriented business; Sexual assault;
Molestation of a child;

Distribution of a controlled substance; or

Any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries for which:
 

a.	Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
b.	Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
c.	Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.

The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.

Specified sexual activities means any of the following:

 
(1)

(2)
 
The fondling of another person's genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts;

Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
 

(3)
 

Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition.
 

Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area exists on the date this article takes effect.

Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;

The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or

The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-275; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 5816, §§ 1, 2, 5-24-2016)


Sec. 4-21. - Classiication.

Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)
 
Adult arcades;

Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores; Adult cabarets;
Adult motels;

Adult motion picture theaters; Adult theaters;
Escort agencies;

Seminude model studios; and Sexual encounter centers.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-276; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Sec. 4-22. - Inspection.

 
(a)





(b)
 
For the purpose of ensuring compliance with this article, an applicant, operator or licensee shall permit law enforcement officers and any other federal, state, county or city agency in the performance of any function connected with the enforcement of this article, normally and regularly conducted by such agencies, to inspect, at any time the business is occupied or open for business, those portions of the premises of a sexually oriented business which patrons or customers are permitted to occupy.
The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-280; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Secs. 4-23—4-47. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - LICENSING



Sec. 4-48. - License required.

 
(a)
 
It is unlawful:
 

(1)


(2)


(3)
 

For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this article.
For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this article.
For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this article.
 
(b)


(c)
 
An application for a sexually oriented business license and a sexually oriented business employee license shall be made on a form provided by the city. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this article to obtain such a license.
An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file with the enforcement officer a completed application made on a form prescribed and provided by the city clerk. No application shall be considered complete if it does not
 

include all of the information required in this section. The application shall be sworn to under oath and acknowledged before a notary public. The application shall include the information called for in subsections (c)(1) through (6) of this section and, where applicable, subsection (c)(7) of this section, as follows:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)


(4)


(5)
 
The full true name of the applicant and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. The current business address of the applicant.
A set of fingerprints of the applicant suitable for conducting necessary background checks pursuant to this article, and the applicant's social security number, to be used for the same purpose, and the applicant's consent to same.
If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name, business location, legal description, business mailing address and phone number of the proposed sexually oriented business.
For each application for a sexually oriented business employee license, written proof of age of the applicant, in the form of:
 

a.	A copy of a birth certificate and current photo;

b.	A current driver's license with picture; or

c.	Other picture identification document issued by a governmental agency.
 

(6)


(7)
 

The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license or permit currently or formerly held by the applicant relating to a sexually oriented business, and whether any such license or permit has been denied, revoked, or suspended, and if so, the reasons therefor.
If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and address of the registered agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process.
 
The information provided pursuant to subsections (c)(1) through (7) of this section shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the enforcement officer no later than ten working days prior to (or within five calendar days after if it is legally impossible to provide such prior supplementation) a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false, inaccurate or incomplete.
 

(d)



(e)





(f)
 

The application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
If the person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If the person that wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual (such as a corporation), each officer, director, general partner, or other person who will participate directly in decisions relating to management of the business shall sign the application for a license as the applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under s e c t i o n 4 - 4 9 , and each applicant shall be considered as a licensee if a license is granted.
A person who possesses a valid business license is not exempt from the requirement of obtaining all required sexually oriented business licenses. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a business license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this article, where applicable.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-277; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Sec. 4-49. - Issuance of license.

 
(a)
 
Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, the enforcement officer shall issue a temporary license to the applicant, which temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the enforcement officer to deny or grant the license. Within 20 days after the receipt of a completed application, the enforcement officer shall either issue a license, or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license, to the applicant. The enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or more of the following is found to be true:
 
(1)

(2)


(3)

(4)
 
An applicant is less than 18 years of age.

An applicant is delinquent in the payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business.
An applicant has failed to provide information as required by s e c t i o n 4 - 4 8 for issuance of the license.

An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect under this subsection. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "conviction":
 
a.	Means a conviction or a guilty plea; and

b.	Includes a conviction of any business entity for which the applicant has, at the time of the offense leading to the conviction for a specified criminal activity, a management responsibility or a controlling interest.
 
(5)

(6)

(7)
 
The license application fee required by this article has not been paid.

An applicant has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form.

The proposed sexually oriented business is located in a zoning district other than a district in which sexually oriented businesses are allowed to operate under the city zoning ordinance, or is not in compliance with the location restrictions established for sexually oriented businesses in the appropriate zoning districts.
 

(b)


(c)
 

An applicant that is ineligible for a license due to subsection (a)(4) of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the t required by the definition of the term "specified criminal activity" in  s e c t i o n  4 - 2 0  has elapsed.
The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to that applicant, the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. A sexually oriented business employee license shall contain a photograph of the licensee. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing, and shall produce such license for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized city official.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-278; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Sec. 4-50. - Fees.

The nonrefundable initial license fee and annual renewal fee for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license is hereby set at the amount of $250.00 for the initial license and $125.00 for the renewal fee for a sexually oriented business license; $100.00 for the initial license, and $50.00 for the renewal fee, for a sexually oriented business employee license. The city council hereby determines, based on the expected personnel time and personnel cost to the city of reviewing and investigating the information and material required to be submitted in connection with each such license applications, the fees provided for herein are less than the costs to the city of administering this sexually oriented business licensing program.

(Code 1982, § 18-279; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Sec. 4-51. - Expiration of license.

 
(a)



(b)
 
Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in s e c t i o n 4 - 4 8 . An application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
If the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to the denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or bated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date that the denial became final.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-281; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Sec. 4-52. - Suspension.

The city shall issue a written intent to suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:

 
(1)

(2)
 
Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; or

Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-282; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Sec. 4-53. - Revocation.

 
(a)


(b)
 
The enforcement officer shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if a cause of suspension in s e c t i o n 
 4 - 5 2  occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.

The enforcement officer shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if the officer determines that:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
 

A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;

A licensee has knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;

A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises. This subsection will not apply to an adult motel, unless the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities to occur either in exchange for money or in a public place or within public view.
 
(c)

(d)
 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.

When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in s e c t i o n 4 - 5 4 , the enforcement officer revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective, provided that, if the conditions of s e c t i o n 4 - 5 4 are met, a provisional license will be granted pursuant to that section. If, subsequent to revocation, the enforcement officer finds that the basis for the revocation found in subsections (b)(1) and (4) of this section has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least 90 days have lapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-283; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)
 

Sec. 4-54. - Hearing; license denial, suspension, revocation; appeal.

 
(a)








(b)







(c)



(d)
 
If the enforcement officer determines that facts exist for denial, suspension, nonrenewal or revocation of a license under this article, the enforcement officer shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, including  the grounds therefor, by personal delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file with the enforcement officer. Within five working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the city manager, in writing, a
response that shall include a statement of reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended, or revoked. Within three days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the city manager shall notify respondent in writing of the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding.
Within ten working days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the city manager shall conduct a hearing at which respondent shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and present evidence and witnesses on his behalf. If a response is not received by the city manager in the time stated or, if after the hearing, the city manager finds that grounds as specified in this article exist for denial, suspension, or revocation, then such denial, suspension, or revocation shall become final five days after the city manager sends, by certified mail, written notice that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked. Such notice shall include a statement advising the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
If the city manager finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, then within five days after the hearing, the city manager shall withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, and shall so notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action and shall contemporaneously issue the license.
When a decision to deny, suspend, not renew or revoke a license becomes final, the applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a license has been denied, or whose license has been suspended or revoked, shall have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial, suspension, nonrenewal or revocation, the city shall immediately issue the aggrieved party a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee, as the case may be, and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the aggrieved party's action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-284; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Sec. 4-55. - Transfer of license.

A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a license operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application.

(Code 1982, § 18-285; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Secs. 4-56—4-83. - Reserved.


DIVISION 3. - LOCATION RESTRICTIONS



Sec. 4-84. - Distance regulations of business operations.

 
(a)





(b)
 
A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business on any property other than property located in the HM heavy manufacturing, as defined and described in c h a p t e r 5 6 , with respect to which a conditional use permit has been obtained for such sexually oriented business in accordance with all requirements of c h a p t e r 5 6 , or if that person shall fail to comply with all the terms and conditions of the conditional use permit issued for such sexually oriented business.
A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of:
 

(1)

(2)





(3)

(4)



(5)
 

A church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities;

A public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities. The term "school" includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school;
A boundary of any residential district as defined in c h a p t e r 5 6 ;

A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities;
The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in c h a p t e r 5 6 ;
 

(6)

(7)
 

An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment; or Any premises licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the state.
 
(c)


(d)



(e)





(f)



(g)







(h)
 
A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business.
A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
For the purpose of subsection (b) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the property on which building or structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in subsection (b) of this section. The presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
For purposes of subsection (c) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest property line of the property on which each business is located.
Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date hereof, that is in violation of subsections (a) through (f) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet
of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is/are nonconforming.
A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the  grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in subsection (b) of this section within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application is made for a license after the applicant's previous license has expired or been revoked.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-286; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Secs. 4-85—4-111. - Reserved.


DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS



Sec. 4-112. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit flms, videos, or live entertainment in viewing rooms.

 
(a)
 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business (other than an adult motel) which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
 
(1)











(2)

(3)

(4)


(5)
 
Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 3 2 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit, if granted, will be conspicuously posted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.

No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city.

It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
 

(6)



(7)

(8)


(9)


(10)

(11)

(12)


(13)

(14)
 

It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of th has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section.
No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.

The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles as measured at the floor level.
It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths.

No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms.

The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.

The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board, or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.
 
(b)
 
A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (14) of this section commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-287; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Sec. 4-113. - Additional regulations for escort agencies.

 
(a)

(b)
 
An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.

A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort, or agrees to act as an escort, for any person under the age of 18 years.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-288; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Sec. 4-114. - Additional regulations concerning public nudity.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)



(d)
 
It shall be a misdemeanor for a person to knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity or engage in specified sexual activities.
It shall be a misdemeanor for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a seminude condition, unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, is at least six feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor.
It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude in a sexually oriented business, to receive directly any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee, while that employee is seminude in a sexually oriented business.
It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude, to knowingly and intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-289; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Sec. 4-115. - Prohibition against children on premises of business.

A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. (Code 1982, § 18-290; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)

Sec. 4-116. - Hours of operations.

No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.

(Code 1982, § 18-291; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Sec. 4-117. - Exemptions.

It is a defense to prosecution under s e c t i o n 4 - 1 1 4 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:

 
(1)

(2)


(3)
 
By a proprietary school, licensed by the state; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;

By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
In a structure:
 

a.	Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;

b.	Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and

c.	Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.

(Code 1982, § 18-292; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Sec. 4-118. - Injunction.

A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of s e c t i o n 4 - 5 5 is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Such violations shall be punishable by a fine of $1,000.00 or 30 days' imprisonment. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation.

(Code 1982, § 18-293; Ord. No. 5333, § I, 4-11-2005)


Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Sec. 6-1. - Signs, banners across streets.

Signs and banners announcing civic, charitable, historic or patriotic events or activities may be installed over or across any public street or sidewalk for periods not to exceed 30 days upon approval and receipt of a permit from the director of public works.

(Code 1982, § 3-1; Ord. No. 5047, § I, 3-26-2002)


Sec. 6-2. - Destroying lawful posters.

It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully and maliciously tear down, deface or cover up any posted advertisement or bill of any person when the same is lawfully posted and put up and during the time such sign or advertisement shall be of value.

(Code 1982, § 3-2)


Sec. 6-3. - Marking on streets, sidewalks prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, or attempt to advertise, by marking or painting on any of the streets or sidewalks within the city. (Code 1982, § 3-3)

Sec. 6-4. - Signs in public rights-of-way.

Signs, banners, and similar structures and objects directly relating to charitable, historical, religious or other civic services and nonprofit activities may be installed in the public rights-of-way upon review and approval of the city council and receipt of a permit from the director of public works.

(Code 1982, § 3-4; Ord. No. 5047, § II, 3-26-2002)


Sec. 6-5. - Stickers.

It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any gummed sticker to any vehicle within the city without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, except that it shall not be unlawful to attach a sticker if a vehicle is parked in violation of parking regulations.

(Code 1982, § 3-5; Ord. No. 5047, § III, 3-26-2002)


Secs. 6-6—6-28. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - SIGNS


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 6-29. - Deinitions.
 

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Billboard means a sign advertising or directing attention to an activity not conducted, or to a service not provided, or to an article or product not manufactured, assembled, processed, prepared or sold upon the premises upon which the sign is located.

Ground sign means a display sign supported by uprights or braces in or upon the ground surface.

Post sign means a sign that is mounted on a stationary pole or posts and not attached to any part of a building. (Also called a pole sign.)

Projecting sign means a display sign which is attached directly to the building wall and which extends more than 15 inches from the face of the wall.

Roof sign means a display sign that is erected, constructed and maintained above the roof of the building.

Sign means any identification, description, illustration or device, illuminated or nonilluminated, which is visible from any public place or is located on private property and exposed to the public and which directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, including any emblem, painting, placard or temporary sign designed to advertise, identify or convey information, with the exception of window displays and national flags. For the purpose of removal, signs shall also include all sign structures.

Sign area means the total area of the space to be used for advertising purposes, including the spaces between open-type letters and figures, including the background structure or other decoration or addition which is an integral part of the sign. Sign supports shall be excluded in determining the area of a sign. A double-faced sign shall have the same total area as a single-faced sign.

Temporary sign means a display sign, banner or other advertising device constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric or other light temporary material with or without a structural frame, intended for display for a period not to exceed 30 days, including decorative displays for holidays or public demonstrations.

Wall sign means a display sign which is painted on or attached directly to the building wall and which extends not more than 15 inches from the face of the wall.

(Code 1982, § 3-21; Ord. No. 4141, § I, 5-10-1983; Ord. No. 4713, § 1, 1-9-1996; Ord. No. 5047, § IV, 3-26-2002)


Sec. 6-30. - Violations.

Any person who installs, erects or maintains any sign or device in violation of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00, and each day or part thereof such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.

(Code 1982, § 3-29; Ord. No. 4141, § IX, 5-10-1983)


Sec. 6-31. - Permits.

 
(a)





(b)


(c)
 
Required for sign construction or alteration. No sign of any of the types described herein shall be erected, nor the location of any existing sign changed, until a permit therefor shall have been issued by the director of public works. No permit shall be granted until after an application has been filed with the director of public works showing the plans and specifications, including dimensions, material and details of construction of the proposed sign.
Existing signs. An existing sign shall not be enlarged, altered, or relocated except in conformity to the provisions for new signs, nor until a proper permit has been secured.
Exempt signs. The following signs are exempt from permit fees:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)



(4)



(5)
 

"For sale" or "for lease" (including garage or basement sales) signs not to exceed six square feet. Temporary signs announcing civic events approved by the director of public works.
Temporary yard signs in residential districts (other than "for sale" or "for lease" signs as described in subsection (c)(1) of this section); these signs shall not exceed six square feet and cannot be erected more than 30 days prior to the event for which they are erected and must be removed within two days after the event for which they are erected.
Window signs which are placed on the inside of a ground floor display window, both temporary and permanent-type, advertising only specific products available or services provided therein; provided that there be no more than four signs for the total display window area, and the signs not exceed 20 percent of the total display window area.
Front door signs, with wording confined to the name of the business, building or institution, address, telephone number, general business or service conducted therein, and hours of operation, not to exceed 33 percent of the area of the door.
 
(d)
 
Permit fees. Before the issuance of a permit, the following fees shall be paid to the office of director of public works:
 

(1)

(2)
 

For permanent signs, $0.50 per square foot; provided that the minimum permit fee for the erection of each such sign shall be $5.00. The permit fee for double-faced signs shall be based on the total area of both faces.
 

(3)
 

Temporary signs other than exempted, $5.00 each.
 

(Code 1982, § 3-22; Ord. No. 4141, § II, 5-10-1983; Ord. No. 4183, § 1, 6-12-1984; Ord. No. 5047, §§ V—X, 3-26-2002)


Secs. 6-32—6-48. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - PERMITTED PERMANENT-TYPE SIGNS



Sec. 6-49. - Regulations.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Generally. Subject to the regulations contained in this chapter, the signs described in subsection (b) of this section are allowable in commercial districts.
Number permitted; installation, design standards.
 

(1)
 

Wall signs. Only one wall sign shall be allowed on each office or store except for buildings on corner lots where two signs are permitted. All such signs shall be erected on walls of the building parallel to the fronting street or streets. Signs shall not contain phone numbers or web addresses. All such wall signs shall be attached parallel to a building surface, provided that the top of such sign is no higher than whichever of the following is lowest:
 
a.	Twenty-five feet above grade;

b.	The top of the sills of the first level of windows above the first story; or

c.	The lowest point of the roof surface, except in the case of a one-story building with a continuous horizontal parapet, the top of said parapet. A second floor business may install a wall sign that only complies with subsection (4) of this section. The total area in square feet of all permanent exterior wall signs, except for signs on windows above the first floor, shall not exceed:
 
(2)



(3)








(4)







(5)













(6)
 
Pole signs/post signs. Pole signs or post signs shall be allowed only on the issuance of a sign permit approved by the city council. Signs shall not contain phone numbers or web addresses. The pole sign/post sign must conform to the requirements for post or pole signs established in s e c t i o n 6 - 7 6 (a) (10). If a pole sign is used, a ground sign is not also allowed.
Ground signs. Each building may have one ground sign. Signs shall not contain phone numbers or web addresses. Such ground sign shall be subject to the requirements of s e c t i o n 6 - 7 6 (a)(7), provided that the city council may issue a permit, containing such conditions as the city council may impose, allowing a ground sign to exceed the dimension requirements of s e c t i o n 6 - 7 6 (a)(7)a, provided that the total area in square feet of other permitted exterior wall signs or awning signs for the building is reduced by at least the amount of the additional dimension allowed for such ground signs, but only if the city council finds that the total signage permitted for the building with such permit is less visually intrusive and will better contribute to and promote the community welfare than the total signage otherwise allowed for the building under the provisions of this chapter. If a ground sign is used, a pole/post sign is not also allowed.
Display windows signs. Permanent-type signs, naming and identifying the business, but excluding information concerning specific products available or services provided therein, may be painted on the inside of or displayed in a ground floor display window visible from and intended to be read from the exterior of each business or store. Such signs shall not exceed either 15 percent of the ground floor display window area or a maximum area of 25 square feet. Interior signs intended to provide information for persons inside the building or store shall be exempt from this requirement. Painted window signs above the ground floor shall be permitted only when the business is different from the first floor tenant. Such signs shall only be permitted on one window and shall not exceed 25 percent of that window opening.
Awning signs. One sign facing the street may be painted on the valance of any canvas awning located on the first floor level. Signs shall not contain phone numbers or web addresses. The text shall be confined to a single line of letters not larger than eight inches in height on a valance that is 11 or more inches in height, or not larger than seven inches in height on a valance that is ten or less inches in height. The text, including company logo, shall not exceed 75 percent of the length of the valance. Where no other wall, post, ground or display window sign is used, a second awning sign shall be permitted. In the case of corner lots, one awning sign shall be permitted facing each street. Back lighted illuminated sign awnings shall not be permitted. No sign, flag or banner shall be attached to or be suspended from any awning. One
second floor tenant awning sign shall be permitted in addition to those allowed for ground floor tenants. Awning signs for tenants above the ground floor shall be permitted only when the business is different from the first floor tenant. Such awning signs shall only be permitted if the second floor tenant has an entrance directly to the exterior at the ground level. The awning must be located at the first floor street level. Awning signs shall be placed on the valance of the awning. The size of the awning is limited to the width of the door serving the second floor tenant and the size and appearance of the sign must be approved by the design and review board.
Projecting signs.
 

a.	Projecting signs may exceed the current height restriction of five feet, six inches to a height of eight feet on buildings on Sutton Boulevard that meet the following criteria:
1.	Such signs are listed on the National Register of Historic Places;

2.	The signage must serve as branding for the building which must house a minimum of two businesses and be the only identifying projecting sign on the building;
 

3.	The sign can be no larger than 16 square feet in area.

b.	One projecting sign no larger than 16 square feet in area with the width not exceeding four feet, six inches and the height not exceeding five feet, six inches shall be permitted at any first floor business location in the Special Business District. One projecting sign is permitted per business. If a projecting sign is used, then other signage is limited to one display window sign and one awning sign. Projecting signs shall be placed at least eight feet above ground level, and the top of the sign shall not extend above the top of the sills of the first level of windows above the first story.
 
(7)



(8)



(9)
 
Directional and parking signs. Directional and parking signs, provided that the signs are not larger than six square feet, and are deemed necessary for the safety and convenience of the public, may be approved by the director of public works. Such signs are not included in the calculation of area of permitted signs.
Outdoor illuminated menu signs. Illuminated signs listing menu items at drive-through restaurants, provided there are no more than two per premises, the sign area does not exceed 25 square feet per sign, and no sign, flag or banner is attached to or suspended from the menu sign. Such signs are not included in the calculation of area of permitted signs.
Fuel filling station signs. In addition to signs otherwise permitted in this article, fuel filling stations shall be allowed the following signs:
 

a.	Two company name or logo signs not exceeding 24 square feet per sign attached to the canopy over the fuel pumps are permitted.

b.	Displays of merchandise outside the filling station building shall be limited to automotive products only. One product identification and price sign not exceeding six square feet shall be permitted per display.
c.	One sign may be placed on the top of each fuel pump. Such sign shall be limited in size to the width of the pump and 20 inches in height.
d.	Advertising on any machine or equipment that is exclusively intended and customarily found on such machine or equipment is permitted.
 
(c)
 
Billboard sign requirements. In addition to the foregoing permitted signs, and notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code, billboards shall be permitted within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of any roadway designated as an interstate or primary highway by the state highways and transportation commission pursuant to RSMo ch. 226 to the extent such interstate or primary highway is located in a commercial district (in other words, is located within districts zoned NB, CB, PB, AB, LM and HM pursuant to c h a p t e r 5 6 ), subject to the regulations contained in this subsection. All such billboards shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter (classified as pole signs, or ground signs, or other category as may be applicable to each proposed billboard), subject to the following modifications or additional requirements (and in the event of any conflict between the following modifications or additional requirements and the remainder of this chapter, the more restrictive provision shall govern):
 
(1)
 
Lighting.
 

a.	The maximum average intensity level for any billboard shall be 20 foot-candles;

b.	No revolving or rotating beam or beacon of light that simulates any emergency light or device shall be permitted as part of any billboard. No flashing, intermittent, or moving lights will be permitted except scoreboards or other illuminated signs designating public service information, such as time, date, or temperature, or similar information, will be allowed;
c.	External lighting, such as floodlights, thin line and gooseneck reflectors are permitted, provided the light source is directed upon the face of the billboard and is effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed into any portion of the main traveled way of the interstate or primary highway and the lights are not of such intensity so as to cause glare, impair the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle, or otherwise interfere with a driver's operation of a motor vehicle;
d.	No billboard shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the effectiveness of, or obscures, an official traffic sign, device, or signal.
 

(2)
 

Size of billboards.
 

a.	The maximum area for any one billboard permitted pursuant to this subsection (c) shall be the lesser of:

1.	The size otherwise permitted under this chapter for the applicable sign type (pole sign, ground sign or other); or

2.	72 square feet.

The maximum area shall be measured inclusive of border and trim but excluding the base or apron, supports, and other structural members. The maximum area shall be measured as established in rules promulgated by the state highways and transportation commission.

b.	Each billboard may have only one sign face. Billboards may not be placed back to back, double faced, or in V-type construction.
Billboards shall have not more than one display to each facing.
 

(3)
 

Height. The maximum height shall be the lesser of:
 

a.	The height otherwise permitted under this chapter for the applicable sign type (pole sign, ground sign or other); or

b.	35 feet.

The height shall be measured from the ground to the highest point on the billboard.

 
(4)
 
Spacing of signs.
 

a.	No billboard shall be erected within 1,000 feet of an existing billboard. The measurements in this section shall be the minimum distances measured along the nearest edge of the pavement between points directly opposite the billboards along the highway regardless of whet located on the same side or opposite sides of the highway involved.
b.	In addition to any applicable requirements of s e c t i o n 6 - 7 6 , no billboard shall be erected:

1.	Within 90 feet of any right-of-way;

2.	Within 90 feet of the property line of the lot on which the billboard is located;

3.	Within 1,000 feet of land zoned residential, or of any public use, historic site, school, church, park, playground, library or hospital;

4.	Within 250 feet of on-site signs located on buildings;

5.	Within 1,000 feet of free standing on-site signs;

6.	Within 100 feet of any existing building or roofed structure; or

7.	Within 90 feet of an overhead power line.

c.	No billboard shall be located in such manner as to obstruct or otherwise physically interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, signal, or device or obstruct or physically interfere with a motor vehicle operator's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic.
 
(5)
 
Permits.
 

a.	No sign permit to allow a billboard pursuant to s e c t i o n 6 - 3 1 shall be issued by the city unless and until the applicant has obtained a permit issued by the state highways and transportation commission. In addition to the requirements of s e c t i o n 6 - 3 1 , an application for a sign permit for any billboard shall include and be accompanied by plans that show the size and shape of the billboard, the location of the proposed billboard, the setbacks from surrounding properties, the type of illumination and proposed lighting, the colors to be
used in the billboard, the materials used to construct and the method used to support the billboard.

b.	Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall submit the following certifications from the appropriate licensed professionals regarding the following: certification from a licensed engineer that the soil and subsoil surface is capable of accepting the projected loads; certification from an electrical engineer as to the electrical portion of the billboard; certification from a structural engineer as to the structural strength of the billboard; and a certified out boundary survey of the site and its setback/clearance zone.
c.	Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall submit and receive from the city director of public works approval of a lighting and landscape plan depicting the landscaping, billboard lighting and fencing around the proposed billboard to ensure that the structure will be aesthetically compatible with its surroundings and the aesthetic standards of the community and neighboring property. At the city's option, such plans may be reviewed by the city's third party landscape architect. The director of public works (and, if applicable, the landscape architect) shall take into consideration the nature of the location, the impact on surrounding properties, the safety and security of the proposed billboard, and the relative cost of the landscaping, lighting and fencing to the applicant in relationship to the overall impact upon the property values in the immediate area which would be caused by a lack of such landscaping, lighting and fencing for the proposed billboard.
d.	Permits to allow a billboard to be erected shall require construction to begin within six months from the date of issue and shall require construction to be completed within 12 months from the date of issue.
e.	Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in the Code, no billboard permitted pursuant to this subsection shall be erected until a permit therefor shall have been issued by the director of public works, and the director of public works shall charge a one-time permit or inspection fee of $500.00, to ensure compliance with wind and electrical requirements. Subsection (c)(4) of this section shall apply only to billboards erected pursuant to this subsection and shall not otherwise supersede the provisions of s e c t i o n 6 - 
 3 1 .
 

(6)





(7)


(8)

(9)



(10)
 

Lot requirements. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of c h a p t e r 5 6 or of this chapter, each billboard permitted pursuant to this subsection shall be located on a separate lot (as that term is defined in c h a p t e r 5 6 ), and no lot occupied by a billboard shall be occupied by any other building or use (including another billboard). Each lot containing a billboard must comply with all requirements otherwise applicable to that lot according to c h a p t e r 5 6 .
Nonconformities. Any billboard existing on the date of enactment of this section that does not meet the requirements of this chapter shall be deemed a "nonconforming use" and shall be subject to the limitations of article III, division 4 of c h a p t e r 5 6 .
Trimming vegetation prohibited. Trees or other vegetation may not be removed or trimmed for the purpose of improving billboard visibility.

Annual inspection and certification. Owners of all billboards erected after enactment of this section shall be required to submit an inspection report from a state licensed engineer as to the billboard's structural integrity. Such certification shall be done on or before June 1 of each year.
Nuisance. Any billboard which, because of lack of maintenance, upkeep, vandalism, accumulation of litter, refuse or debris, or the deterioration of landscaping, lighting or fencing, becomes unsightly or unsafe is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be subject to abatement by the city in the same manner all other nuisances on private property.
 
(d)
 
Ground sign requirements.
 

(1)



(2)
 

Apartment complexes. One ground sign shall be permitted at any multifamily apartment complex containing 12 or more units. The sign may b size of the sign shall be no larger than 22 square feet per side. The height of the sign shall not exceed five feet, including its foundation or plan ground sign shall comply with all other regulations set forth in s e c t i o n 6 - 7 6 .
Institutional properties. One ground sign of the same size as permitted for apartment complexes as set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section shall be permitted at institutional properties. One wall sign not exceeding 3 2 square feet shall be permitted as an alternative to a ground sign.
 
(Code 1982, § 3-23; Ord. No. 4141, § III, 5-10-1983; Ord. No. 4184, § 1, 6-12-1984; Ord. No. 4699, § 1, 7-25-1995; Ord. No. 4847, § 1, 10-13-1998; Ord. No. 5047, §§
XI—XVI, 3-26-2002; Ord. No. 5154, §§ I—III, 1-27-2004; Ord. No. 5346, §§ I, II, 6-13-2006; Ord. No. 5490, § I, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 5709, § I, 8-13-2013; Ord. No.
5800, § I, 1-12-2016; Ord.No. 5848, § I, 3-28-2017)


Secs. 6-50—6-71. - Reserved.


DIVISION 3. - PERMITTED TEMPORARY SIGNS



Sec. 6-72. - Regulations.

The following temporary signs may be erected in conformance with this article:

 
(1)
 
Announcement of development sign. A temporary ground sign may be erected on vacant property for a period not to exceed 60 days prior to the issuance of a building permit announcing the specific development of the lot, provided the sign is erected behind the building line and does not exceed 3 2 square feet in area. On projects in which the working drawings require more than 60 days to complete, the director of public works may extend the allowable time period an additional 60 days, provided that drawings are being completed expeditiously.
 

(2)
 

Construction signs. A construction sign may be erected after issuance of a building permit announcing the type of building or development under construction. Such sign may include the names of those associated with the project and leasing information. Such sign shall not exceed 3 2  square feet in area. Such sign shall be removed upon completion of the work and prior to occupancy of the building. The location of the sign shall be subject to the review and approval of the public works director.
 
(3)
 
"For sale" signs on nonresidential buildings. One "for sale" or "for lease" sign may be erected on each nonresidential building or premises, provided such sign conforms to the following requirements:
 
a.	It shall not exceed 12 square feet in area.

b.	The legend shall refer only to the sale or the lease of the building or premises and contain the name, address and telephone number of the agent handling the sale. The sign may contain the zoning district designation and the type of space available if desired.
 
(4)
 
Residential "for sale" signs. One "for sale" or "for lease" sign shall be permitted on each residential property, provided said sign conforms to the following requirements:
 
a.	It shall not exceed six square feet in area.

b.	It shall be erected in the front yard at least five feet back from the property line and not attached to any building.

c.	The legend shall refer only to the sale or lease of the premises with the name, address and telephone number of the agent. The zoning district may be placed on the sign.
d.	"For sale" signs remaining longer than ten days after the property is sold or no longer for sale shall be considered illegal signs.
 

(5)
 

Garage and basement sale signs. One such sign shall be permitted on a residential property, provided said sign conforms to the following requirements:
 
a.	It shall not exceed six square feet in area.

b.	It shall not be posted for longer than 48 hours.

c.	No one residence shall be permitted more than two such signs per year.
 

(6)



(7)
 

Miscellaneous signs. The public works director may authorize one temporary sign for each building, such as political headquarters signs, signs announcing civic events or similar type signs, provided they are mounted flat on the wall of the building and do not exceed 25 square feet in area.
Banners. One banner may be erected on any nonresidential building, provided such sign does not exceed 40 square feet in area, and is erected for no more than 30 days. No more than four banners may be erected in a calendar year.
 
(Code 1982, § 3-24; Ord. No. 4141, § IV, 5-10-1983; Ord. No. 4183, § 1, 6-12-1984; Ord. No. 5047, § XVII, 3-26-2002; Ord. No. 5154, § IV, 1-27-2004; Ord. No. 5709, §
II, 8-13-2013)


Sec. 6-73. - On public streets.
 

Small post signs indicating the direction to any institution or place may be erected and maintained on the parkway or side of a public street, alley or place on the following conditions:
 

(1)


(2)

(3)
 

The council shall investigate and make its finding that the sign will serve a public purpose and that a public necessity for such directional sign exists.
The council shall issue its special revocable permit therefor.

Such signs shall not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches in size and shall be installed under the supervision of the director of public works in a manner and at a height so as not to interfere with the ordinary and lawful use of the street.
 

(Code 1982, § 3-25; Ord. No. 4141, § V, 5-10-1983)


Sec. 6-74. - Illegal signs and devices.

It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any of the following signs or devices in the city:

 
(1)


(2)

(3)


(4)


(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)


(10)

(11)


(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)
 
Paper posters and certain signs and devices are prohibited. Paper posters applied directly to the wall of a building or pole or other support, and letters and pictures in the form of advertising, printed or applied directly to the wall or surface of a building.
Signs painted directly on the front walls of buildings.

Any signs which are no longer applicable to the property or building upon which such signs are located shall be considered unlawful signs and shall be removed within 30 days after becoming nonapplicable.
Mechanical contrivances. No sign shall contain flashers, animators or mechanical movement or contrivances of any kind, excepting clocks, and any such sign so erected shall be an unlawful sign within the meaning of this article.
Conflicting signs. Signs or devices that by color, location or design resemble or conflict with traffic control signs or devices are prohibited. Roof signs. Signs erected on the roofs of building.
Billboards, except as permitted by  s e c t i o n  6 - 4 9 (c). Projecting signs, except as permitted in  s e c t i o n  6 - 4 9 (b)(6).
Reader boards, that is, any sign utilizing individually mounted and removable letters and numbers inserted into channels, except for price signs at fuel filling stations and reader boards which are part of approved signs at religious and institutional properties.
Detached and portable signs, whether or not trailer mounted.

Streamers, pennants and balloons hung from any building, structure pole or vehicle, placards attached or set in or upon vehicles for sale at any commercial property, and marking of windows of any vehicle for sale at any commercial property.
Any sign or banner erected in the public right-of-way or public easement except as provided in this article. Any signs or banners not specifically permitted under this article.
No windows maybe covered with paper or cloth except when the property is under construction and not opened to the public. Illegal signs in existence at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be removed upon:
 
a.	Change of ownership of business.

b.	Change of use of building.

c.	Damage from any source, when the cost of repair exceeds 50 percent of the value of the original sign.

d.	Exterior renovation of said building.

(Code 1982, § 3-26; Ord. No. 4141, § VI, 5-10-1983; Ord. No. 4847, § 2, 10-13-1998; Ord. No. 5047, § XVIII, 3-26-2002; Ord. No. 5119, § I, 8-12-2003; Ord. No. 5154,
§ V, 1-27-2004; Ord. No. 5346, §§ III, IV, 6-13-2006)


Sec. 6-75. - Unsafe and unlawful signs.

The director of public works may cause to be removed any sign of immediate danger or hazard to persons or property without notice. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit to remain upon any premises owned, leased, occupied or used by him or it, with notice thereof, any unsafe or insecure  sign liable to injure any person or property or to maintain or permit to remain on any such premises any sign which, because of condition or appearance, would have a damaging effect upon other property in the city.

(Code 1982, § 3-27; Ord. No. 4141, § VII, 5-10-1983)


Sec. 6-76. - General requirements for all signs.

 
(a)
 
Construction. All signs shall be designed and constructed in conformity to the provisions and the requirements of this article, as set out hereafter:
 

(1)
 

Wind. The effect of special local wind pressures shall be thoroughly considered in the design; but the wind load shall not be assumed less
 

than 15 pounds per square foot for ground signs.
 

(2)


(3)


(4)



(5)



(6)
 

Illumination. A sign shall not be illuminated by other than electrical means and electrical devices and wiring shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code.
Obstructions to exit ways. A sign shall not be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit way, window or door opening used as an element or a means of egress or access thereto, the firefighting forces having jurisdiction.
Obstruction to ventilation. A sign shall not be attached in any form, shape or manner which will interfere with any opening required for ventilation, except that such signs may be erected in front of and may cover transom windows when not in violation of the provisions of this Code.
Artistic quality. All signs shall be of a high artistic quality that will enhance its surroundings. Drawings of the proposed sign indicating colors and other specifications as required in this article (section 6 - 3 1 ) shall be submitted with the permit application. The design and review board shall review and approve the drawings of the permanent-type signs submitted with permit applications.
Use of combustibles.
 

a.	Ornamental features. Wood or approved plastic, or other material of combustible characteristics similar to wood, may be used for moldings, cappings, nailing blocks, letters and latticing and for other purely ornamental features of signs.
b.	Sign facings. Sign facings may be made of approved combustible plastics, provided the area of each face is not more than 100 square feet and the wiring for electric lighting is entirely enclosed in metal conduit and installed with a clearance of not less than two inches from the facing material.
 
(7)
 
Ground signs.
 

a.	Obstructions to traffic. A ground sign shall not be erected so as to obstruct free access to or egress from any building.

b.	Setback. A ground sign shall not be set nearer to the street lot line than one foot.

c.	Dimensions. No ground sign may exceed five feet in height and eight feet in length, including its foundation or planter box, with the actual sign area limited to 3 2 square feet per side.
d.	Construction. A ground sign shall not be constructed of combustible materials, except as provided herein.

e.	Landscaping. A ground sign shall have landscaping at the base of the sign.
 

(8)
 

Wall signs.
 

a.	Projection. A wall sign shall not project more than 15 inches from the wall of a building.

b.	Wall signs exceeding 40 square feet in area shall be constructed of noncombustible materials except as provided for herein.

c.	A wall sign shall not project beyond the top of the wall nor extend beyond the end of a wall to which it is attached, except the director of public works may allow a wall sign to be mounted on the roof of a building where the roof slopes upward from the front wall, provided the sign is parallel to and directly above the wall of the building facing the street.
 
(9)






(10)
 
Flags and flag poles. Flag poles and flags may be erected in the front yard of commercial, institutional or governmental buildings for the purpose of displaying the American flag, flags of any city, county, state or federal jurisdiction and flags with a specifically designed pattern or emblem of a firm or business located in the building on the site, provided no lettering or advertising is used. A maximum of two such flag poles and flags may be erected on any one building site and shall be uniform in height, size and arrangement according to acceptable standards for displaying flags.
Pole signs/post signs.
 

a.	In granting or denying approval of a permit for a pole sign pursuant to s e c t i o n 6 - 4 9 (b)(2), the city council shall determine whether the criteria listed below are true with respect to the proposed pole sign, and the applicant for such sign shall have an opportunity to be heard. The council shall approve the permit if it determines that all of the following criteria are true with respect to the proposed pole sign and shall deny the permit if it determines that any of such criteria are not true with respect to the proposed pole sign:
1.	Will not cause a traffic hazard;

2.	Will not diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood;

3.	Will not adversely affect the public health, safety, order, convenience or general welfare of the community;

4.	Is consistent with and not injurious to the character of the neighborhood; and

5.	Meets the requirements of subsection (a)(10)b of this section.

b.	All pole/post signs shall be subject to the following requirements:

1.	No more than one pole sign shall be allowed at each building, except as provided in subsection (a)(10)c of this section.

2.	Maximum height of a pole sign is 25 feet or the roofline, whichever is lower.

3.	No pole sign shall extend downward nearer than ten feet to the ground or pavement.

4.	The pole sign must be so located that no part of the sign may project beyond a one-foot setback line from any property line.

5.	The sign area of pole signs shall not exceed in square feet the number equaling one-half the linear foot frontage of property on which the pole sign is located less the sign area of any existing and proposed signs.
 

(b)
 

Maintenance and inspection.
 

(1)


(2)



(3)


(4)


(5)
 

Removal. The director of public works may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Maintenance. All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be kept in repair in accordance with the provisions of this article; and when not galvanized or constructed of approved corrosion-resistive, noncombustible materials shall be painted when necessary to prevent corrosion.
Housekeeping. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner or lessee of every sign to maintain the immediate premises occupied by the sign in a clean, sanitary and healthful condition.
Inspection. Every sign for which a permit has been issued shall be inspected upon erection to determine compliance with the provisions of this article.
Failure to notify for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the director of public works when the sign is erected and ready for inspection. Failure to notify the director of public works constitutes a violation of this section.
 
(Code 1982, § 3-28; Ord. No. 4141, § VIII, 5-10-1983; Ord. No. 4184, § 2, 6-12-1984; Ord. No. 4713, § 2, 1-9-1996; Ord. No. 4777, § 1, 5-13-1997; Ord. No. 4791, § 1,
7-22-1997; Ord. No. 5047, §§ XIX, XX, 3-26-2002; Ord. No. 5154, §§ VI—VIII, 1-27-2004; Ord. No. 5346, § V, 6-13-2006; Ord. No. 5709, § III, 8-13-2013)


Sec. 6-77. - Planned unit development (PUD) district signage.

 
(a)


(b)
 
In planned unit development (PUD) districts, the provisions of sections 6 - 2 9 , 6 - 3 1 , 6 - 4 9 (except for the provisions of sections 6 - 4 9 (c)), 6 - 7 3 , and 6 - 
 7 6  may be superseded by the provisions of article III of this chapter, if approved by the design and review board. The provisions of sections  6 - 3 0 ,  6 - 7 2 ,  6 - 7 4  and  6 - 7 5  may not be superseded by article III of  this chapter.
 
(Code 1982, § 3-30; Ord. No. 4580, § 1, 2-9-1993; Ord. No. 4847, § 3, 10-13-1998)


Secs. 6-78—6-99. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - EXTERIOR SIGNS IN PUD DISTRICTS



Sec. 6-100. - Intent and purpose.

 
(a)


(b)
 
The intent and purpose of this article is to provide a means for the execution of a coordinated exterior signage system designed to enhance the built environment and provide an overall, consistent design theme in keeping with the intent and purpose of a planned unit development (PUD).
Upon approval by the design and review board of an exterior signage plan as herein defined, the PUD developer may proceed with the erection of various signs within the development on an as-needed basis in accordance with the following guidelines:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
No sign may be erected before obtaining a city permit;

The permit will be issued only to the authorized PUD developer;

The director of public works shall have the authority to grant permits for new signs without the necessity of design and review board approval as long as the proposed signs comply with the exterior signage plan approved by design and review board at the outset.
 
(Code 1982, § 3-51; Ord. No. 4580, § 3, 2-9-1993)


Sec. 6-101. - Defnitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Conditional approval means conditional approval is an action taken by the design and review board that state the board's general approval of the exterior signage plan but with conditions such as requests for additional information, clarifications and/or relatively minor modifications. The applicant may not initiate the proposed exterior signage plan under a conditional approval.

Developer means the owner of the property within a specified planned unit development (PUD) district and who is the applicant requesting review and approval of the specified exterior signage plan.

Development means the project developed by the applicant that has been approved by the city council to be constructed within the specified planned unit development (PUD) district.

Exterior signage plan (hereinafter referred to as the plan) means a plan which describes the objectives and performance standards for exterior signage within a specified planned unit development (PUD) district, the minimum requirements of such plan being further described herein. A plan shall be specifically identified as being a covenant unto an individually named development within a planned unit development (PUD) district.
 

Signs means any identification, description, illustration, directive, warning, instruction, illustration or other device displaying visual information, illuminated or nonilluminated, which is visible from any public place or is located on private property and exposed to the public and which directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business, solicitation or informative, directive, warning or instructive message, including any emblem, painting, symbol or placard intended to convey information for a limited period of time are not included under this article, but are included under the provisions of this article. Window displays and national flags are not included under the provisions of this article. For the purpose of removal, signs shall also include all sign structures.

Unconditional approval means the design and review board's approval of the applicant's exterior signage plan without any conditions. (Code 1982, § 3-52; Ord. No. 4580, § 3, 2-9-1993)

Sec. 6-102. - Permits.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Approval of the plan by the design and review board shall constitute an approval for the director of public works to grant permits to erect exterior signs allowed by the plan and conforming to the design standards established by the plan.
An existing sign shall not be altered in any way nor relocated unless such alteration or relocation is in conformance with the provisions for new signs as promulgated herein. Any such deviation from the approval exterior signage plan shall require re-review and approval by the design and review board.
 
(Code 1982, § 3-53; Ord. No. 4580, § 3, 2-9-1993)


Sec. 6-103. - Exterior signage plan.

 
(a)



(b)


(c)
 
Generally, an exterior signage plan shall describe the intended uses, locations, appearance, variety of sizes, materials and details of construction for all exterior signs. The plan shall be comprehensive in nature, serving as a detailed guide for all signage within a specified planned unit development (PUD) district.
The plan shall be identified as being the exterior signage plan for a specifically-named development and developer approved by the city and located within a planned unit development (PUD) district.
The plan shall include as a minimum, but is not limited to, the following information and submittal requirements:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)



(5)
 

The name and address of the developer submitting the plan.

The name and location of the development to which the plan pertains.

Verification that the developer has received city approval of its final development plan and all related subdivision plats.

Evidence of commitment to said plan by the developer by means of deed restrictions, private covenants, agreements or other formal commitments customarily used to control the use, development, construction and/or maintenance of all publicly and privately owned improvements within the development.
The types of signs, by function, that will be permitted and are anticipated to be erected, constructed or otherwise installed within the development. At a minimum, the type of functions shall include the following categories:
 
a.	Identification functions.

b.	Information functions.

c.	Vehicular control functions.
 

(6)

(7)
 

The types of signs that will not be permitted within the development.

Site plans which describe the anticipated locations of the various signs, by function and grouped as follows:
 

a.	Functions pertinent to major development entries and streets, shown on a drawing having a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet.
b.	Functions pertinent to individual buildings or building complex sites shown on a drawing having a scale of not less than one inch equals 40 feet.
 
(8)
 
Physical characteristics of the signage system, including:
 

a.	Variety of sizes and placements allowed in conjunction with the various functions.

b.	Types of materials to be utilized in the construction of the signs.

c.	Colors.

d.	Typeface style and size, including standard alphabet and numerals.

e.	Graphic composition.

f.	Method and type of illumination.

g.	Typical construction details.

h.	Symbols, logos and trademarks to be utilized.

i.	Architectural sketch, in color, depicting the appearance of each functional type of sign anticipated to be used.

j.	Dimensions for location of signs adjacent to street curbs, rights-of-way, building lines, setbacks and/or property lines.
 

 
(9)


(10)


(11)

(12)

(13)
 
Standards regarding placement, such as distance from a street curb, distance from an intersection and/or legibility (height and style of letters) related to vehicular speed and direction.
Guidelines regarding identification of owners, tenants or other building occupants including use of an owner's, tenant's or other occupant's logo, symbol or trademark.
Design and placement of vehicular traffic control signage, such as stop signs, speed limit signs, prohibited turns, prohibited access, etc. Design and placement of signage pertaining to physically disabled persons.
No sign will be erected that is deemed indecent or not in good taste.
 

(Code 1982, § 3-54; Ord. No. 4580, § 3, 2-9-1993)


Sec. 6-104. - Requirements for all signs.

 
(a)
 
Generally. All signs shall be designed, constructed or erected in conformity with the following requirements:
 

(1)


(2)


(3)


(4)


(5)


(6)



(7)



(8)
 

Wind. The effect of special local wind pressures shall be thoroughly considered in the design; but the wind load shall not be assumed less than 15 pounds per square foot.
Illumination. No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical means and electrical devices and wiring shall be installed in accordance with the National Electrical Code, latest edition.
Obstruction to exit ways. No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit way, window or door opening used as an element or a means of egress or access thereto, or the firefighting department having jurisdiction.
Traffic hazards. No sign may be located such that it substantially interferes with the view necessary for motorists to proceed safely through intersections or to enter onto or exit from public or private streets.
Interference with traffic signals. No sign shall be erected that due to its location, color, size, shape, nature or message would tend to obstruct the view of, or be confused with, traffic signals or other signs erected by governmental agencies.
Obstruction of ventilation. A sign shall not be attached in any form, shape or manner which will interfere with any opening required for ventilation, except that such signs may be erected in front of and may cover transom windows when not in violation of the provisions of this Code.
Use of combustibles. Sign facings may be fabricated of approved combustible plastics, provided the area of each face is not more than 100 square feet and the wiring for electric lighting is entirely enclosed in metal conduit and installed with a clearance of not less than two inches from the facing materials.
Flags and flag poles. Flag poles and flags may be erected in the front yard of commercial, institutional or governmental buildings for the purpose of displaying the American flag, flags of any city, county, state or federal jurisdiction. A maximum of two such flagpoles and flags may be erected on any one building site and shall be uniform in height, size and arrangement according to acceptable standards for displaying flags.
 
(b)
 
Right-of-way signage prohibited. No sign may be constructed on any public right-of-way.
 

(Code 1982, § 3-55; Ord. No. 4580, § 3, 2-9-1993)


Sec. 6-105. - Maintenance, inspection and removal.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)
 
Maintenance. All signs shall be of sound structural quality, be maintained in good repair and have a clean and neat appearance. Land adjacent to such signs shall be kept free from debris, weeds and trash.
Inspection. Every sign shall be inspected by the director of public works to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. Inspections shall be made in compliance with the provisions of the city's sign permit ordinance.
Removal. The director of public works may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article or that is erected in violation of the provisions of this article.
 
(Code 1982, § 3-56; Ord. No. 4580, § 3, 2-9-1993)


Sec. 6-106. - General standards and criteria for approval.

The specified exterior signage plan shall only be approved after the design and review board makes specific findings of fact directly based on evidence presented by the developer supporting the following conclusions:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
 

The specified exterior signage plan supports the intent and purpose of a planned unit development (PUD) district.

The proposed exterior signage plan supports and enhances the specified development in which the signage will be erected.

The proposed exterior signage plan meets the intent and spirit of this article and all other applicable city ordinances and codes. The proposed signage will be compatible with its surroundings, and appropriate to the uses for which it is intended.
 

(Code 1982, § 3-57; Ord. No. 4580, § 3, 2-9-1993)
 

Sec. 6-107. - Approval procedures.

The developer of a specified planned unit development shall submit an application to the director of public works for an exterior signage plan review and request for approval by the design and review board. Applications shall be processed according to the following criteria:
 

(1)


(2)
 

All applications shall be submitted in support of a planned unit development previously approved by the plan and zoning commission and the city council.
All applicants shall be required to submit a revised exterior signage plan if the initial plan is not approved or shall notify the director of public works that the applicant has chosen to rescind its application.
 

(Code 1982, § 3-58; Ord. No. 4580, § 3, 2-9-1993)


Sec. 6-108. - Application submittal for review and approval.

 
(a)
 
The proposed exterior signage plan complying with the requirements of this article and the requirements listed below shall accompany an application for review and approval. Applications to the design and review board for initial submittal review and approval shall be submitted to the director of public works at least 15 working days prior to the board meeting at which it is to be considered, together with:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. Name of the development.
15 copies of the exterior signage plan, the contents of such comply with the provisions of s e c t i o n 6 - 1 0 3 .
 

(b)



(c)
 

The director of public works shall forward a copy of the submittal to the zoning administrator for review and comment. The zoning administrator shall return his review comments to the director of public works not less than ten working days prior to the board meeting at which the plan is to be considered.
At the design and review board meeting at which the plan is to be considered, the plan and zoning commission shall review the application and take one of the following actions:
 
(1)

(2)


(3)
 
Unconditional approval of the exterior signage plan as submitted.

Conditional approval of the exterior signage plan subject to revisions of further information requested by either the board or the director of public works.
Rejection of the exterior signage plan, clearly stating the reasons for rejection.
 

(d)





(e)
 

Unconditional approval. If the design and review board gives an unconditional approval of the plan, the applicant can then initiate the plan without the requirement for permits or other applications, fees, etc.; except that if the applicant must modify the plan in some substantial manner, the applicant shall be required to notify the director of public works, requesting for a review and request for approval of all proposed modifications to the previously approved plan.
Conditional approval. If the design and review board gives a conditional approval of the plan:
 

(1)

(2)


(3)
 

The plan and zoning commission will clearly state its conditions.

The applicant shall reply to such conditions no later than ten working days prior to the next regularly scheduled board meeting. Such reply shall be in writing, accompanied by a modified plan, if required.
At its next regularly scheduled meeting, the board shall either:
 

a.	Give the modified plan its unconditional approval.

b.	Reject the application.
 

(4)
 

If the modified plan is rejected, the board shall clearly state its reasons and notify the applicant accordingly.
 

(f)
 

Rejection. If the board rejects the proposed exterior signage plan, the applicant may:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

Appeal the decision to the city's board of adjustment. Modify the plan and reapply for review and approval.
Rescind the plan and proceed with signage under the provisions of article II of this chapter.
 

(Code 1982, § 3-59; Ord. No. 4580, § 3, 2-9-1993)


Sec. 6-109. - Time limit.

An unconditionally approved exterior signage plan shall be initiated within one year or it becomes null and void. (Code 1982, § 3-60; Ord. No. 4580, § 3, 2-9-1993)

Chapter 8 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Sec. 8-1. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Hotel means every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public as a place where sleeping accommodations are furnished for pay to transient or permanent guests, in which ten or more rooms are furnished for the accommodation of such guests, with or without meals.

Intoxicating liquor means alcohol for beverage purposes, alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt, or other liquors, or combination of liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous, or fermented, and all preparations or mixtures for beverage purposes, containing in excess of one-half of one percent by volume except for nonintoxicating beer as defined in RSMo 312.010.

Merchant means any person who deals in any goods of any kind, or owns or operates any place of business lawfully subject to regulation by the city.

Nonintoxicating beer means any beer manufactured from pure hops or pure abstract of hops, and pure barley malt or other wholesome grains or cereals and wholesome yeast and pure water, and free from all harmful substances, preservatives and adulterants, and having an alcoholic content of more than 0.5 percent by volume, and not exceeding 3.2 percent by weight.

Original package means, as to intoxicating liquor, any container containing less than 187 milliliters; as to nonintoxicating beer, any package containing three, six, 12, or 24 small standard beer bottles, or such package containing such number of large standard beer bottles.

Premises means the entire building in which a licensee under the provisions of this chapter has his place of business, and any additional building used in connection with that building, the entire lot or lots, parcel or parcels of land on which those buildings are situated, or which are used in connection with that building.

Restaurant means every place in which the greater volume in value of business transacted in such place is in the sale of food for consumption in that place.

Transportation company means any person engaged in the business of transporting goods or merchandise for hire, by any means of conveyance.

Wholesale liquor dealing agent means any person who solicits, receives or takes orders for the purchase and delivery of intoxicating liquors to any person in the city.

(Code 1972, § 601.01; Code 1982, § 4-1; Ord. No. 4432, § I, 1-23-1990)


Sec. 8-2. - Nonapplication of chapter.

This chapter shall not apply to the possession by a druggist of intoxicating liquor purchased by him from a licensed vendor under RSMo ch. 311, or intoxicating liquor lawfully acquired and transported into the state by him pursuant to RSMo ch. 311, such liquor to be used in connection with the business of a druggist in compounding medicine or as a solvent or preservative, nor shall this chapter apply to the sale of intoxicating liquor by druggists on prescription from a regularly licensed physician.

(Code 1972, § 601.01A; Code 1982, § 4-2)


Sec. 8-3. - City oicials and employees not to have interest in establishment.

No member of the city council or any city employee shall have any interest of any kind, whether proprietary, as security for a loan or other lien for his benefit or in a fiduciary capacity or in any other capacity, in any premises where intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer is distilled, brewed, manufactured,
rectified, sold or offered for sale, or in any business in whole or in part which is devoted to the distilling, brewing, manufacturing, rectifying or sale of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, nor shall such person himself be involved directly or indirectly in such distilling, brewing, manufacturing, rectifying or sale of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, in any capacity whatever.

(Code 1972, § 601.04; Code 1982, § 4-7)


Sec. 8-4. - Drinking in assemblies.

 
(a)


(b)
 
No person shall enter any schoolhouse, church or courtroom in which there is an assemblage of people, met for a lawful purpose, and drink or offer to drink any intoxicating liquors in the presence of such assembly of people.
This section shall not apply to religious services in which drinking or offering to drink an intoxicating liquor is a part of such service.
 

(Code 1972, § 305.16; Code 1982, § 4-6; Ord. No. 3910, § 1, 10-24-1977)


Sec. 8-5. - Transportation companies to report shipments.
 

Every railroad, express, motor transportation or other transportation company, and every other person, who shall transport any intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer into the city and deliver it to any person in the city shall, upon request, furnish the city council with a duplicate bill of lading or receipt for such intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, showing the name of the consignor and consignee, and the date, place and quantity received.

(Code 1972, § 601.14; Code 1982, § 4-8)


Sec. 8-6. - Enforcement; police.

The police of the city shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall report to the chief of police the name and address of the place at which a violation occurs, and the name and address of the proprietor or manager of any place which is not kept in an orderly manner, or which otherwise violates the provisions of this chapter.

(Code 1972, § 601.18; Code 1982, § 4-10)


Secs. 8-7—8-30. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - LICENSING AND REGULATION


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 8-31. - Qualiications and conditions of licensure.

 
(a)










(b)
 
No person shall be granted a license under the provisions of this chapter unless such person is of good moral character, or, in the case of a corporation, whose managing officer is of good moral character; nor shall a license be granted or retained if such person or managing officer has ever had a permit or license revoked under the liquor laws of any state, or who has been convicted since ratification of the Twenty-First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States of any violation of the provisions of any law applicable to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, or who employs in his business any person whose permit or license has been revoked under the  liquor laws of any state, or who has been convicted of violating any provisions of any law applicable to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, since the ratification of the Twenty-First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. In addition, no person shall be granted a license to sell nonintoxicating beer unless such person is a taxpaying citizen and a qualified legal voter of the city.
No license shall be granted or retained under the provisions of this chapter for the sale of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises if:
 
(1)

(2)


(3)
 
The premises includes a building occupied or used for immoral or unlawful purpose;

The premises or room or portion of a building is connected by an entrance or exit or other means of communication with any room or place used for an immoral or unlawful purpose;
The place where intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer is sold at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises:
 

a.	Has any gambling device on the premises;

b.	Has any tables concealed or enclosed in private rooms or by partition or rooms;
 

(4)
 

In the case of the sale of intoxicating liquor at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises, the place where such intoxicating liquor is sold:
 
a.	Is in any drugstore, cigar and tobacco store, grocery store or confectionery or delicatessen store;

b.	Is within 100 feet of any school, church or other building regularly used as a place of religious worship, unless the applicant for the license shall first obtain the consent in writing of the board of directors of the school, or the consent in writing of the majority of the managing board of the church or place of worship; except that when a school, church or place of worship shall hereafter be established within 100 feet of any place of business licensed to sell intoxicating liquor, the license shall not be denied for lack of consent in writing as herein provided.
 
(c)
 
No license shall be issued for the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package, not to be consumed on the premises where sold, except to a person engaged in, and to be used in connection with the operation of one or more of the following businesses: a drugstore, a cigar and tobacco store, a grocery store, a general merchandise store, a confectionery or a delicatessen store, nor to any such person who does not have and keep in his store a stock of goods having a value according to invoices of at least $1,000.00, exclusive of fixtures and intoxicating liquors.
 
(Code 1972, § 601.06(A), (C), (D); Code 1982, § 4-49; Ord. No. 3911, § 1, 10-24-1977; Ord. No. 4032, § 1, 3-11-1980; Ord. No. 5011, § I, 8-28-2001)


Sec. 8-32. - Prohibition of sale at certain times.

 
(a)
 
No person having a license under the provisions of this chapter shall sell, give or otherwise dispose of, or allow to be sold, given or otherwise disposed of, any intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer:
 

(1)

(2)
 

Between 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any weekday;

In the case of nonintoxicating liquor, between 1:30 a.m. Sunday and 6:00 a.m. Monday; in the case of nonintoxicating beer, between 6:00
a.m.	and 1:00 p.m. on Sunday.
 

(b)


(c)
 

Every person who has obtained a license under the provisions of this chapter to sell at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises shall keep all doors locked and allow no patrons on the premises during the times on the days as stated in subsection (a) of this section.
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section:
 

(1)






(2)


(3)
 

When January 1, March 17, July 4, or December 31 falls on Sunday, and on the Sundays prior to Memorial Day and Labor Day and on the Sunday on which the national championship game of the national football league is played, commonly known as "Super Bowl Sunday," any person having a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink may be open for business and sell intoxicating liquor by the drink under the provisions of his license on that day from the time and until the time which would be lawful on another day of the week, notwithstanding any provisions of this section to the contrary.
Where the licensee is authorized to sell by the drink as a club or hotel, this section shall apply only to those rooms in which such intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer is sold or otherwise dispensed.
Where a license to sell intoxicating liquor is held by a restaurant whose business is conducted in one room only and substantial quantities of food and merchandise other than intoxicating liquors are dispensed, the licensee shall keep securely locked, during the hours and on the days specified in subsection (a) of this section, all refrigerators, cabinets, cases, boxes and taps from which intoxicating liquor is dispensed.
 
(d)
 
Notwithstanding subsection (a)(2) of this section, every person with a Sunday sales license obtained pursuant to s e c t i o n 8 - 1 8 9 (b)(3)g shall be allowed to operate from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Sundays, subject to any state law requirements regarding operating times, and every person with a Sunday sales license obtained pursuant to s e c t i o n 8 - 1 8 9 (b)(3)i shall be allowed to operate from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Sundays.
 
(Code 1972, § 601.11; Code 1982, § 4-30; Ord. No. 3824, § 1, 7-14-1975; Ord. No. 4096, § 1, 6-23-1981; Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-26-1984; Ord. No. 4339, § 1, 1-26-
1988; Ord. No. 4455, § I, 6-12-1990; Ord. No. 4612, §§ 1, 2, 7-13-1993; Ord. No. 4673, § 1, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 5130, § I, 10-14-2003)


Sec. 8-33. - Vacating premises during closed hours.

 
(a)






(b)
 
No person having a license under the provisions of this chapter, his agents or employees shall permit or allow any person to be inside the liquor licensed premises or on any patio or garden under the control of the liquor licensee during the hours when the sale of intoxicating liquor and nonintoxicating beer on said premises is prohibited, except that employees and contractors of the liquor licensee, and entertainers who have been performing at said premises may remain thereon, solely for the purpose of cleaning, restocking, loading and unloading equipment and supplies, performing maintenance work, and other business purposes.
No person shall enter or remain inside a liquor licensed premises or on any patio or garden under the control of the license licensee during the hours when the sale of intoxicating liquor and nonintoxicating beer on said premises is prohibited, except that employees and contractors of the liquor licensee, and entertainers who have been performing at said premises may remain thereon, solely for the purpose of cleaning, restocking, loading and unloading equipment and supplies, performing maintenance work, and other business purposes.
 
(Ord. No. 5449, § I, 1-22-2008)


Sec. 8-34. - Application for license.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)
 
No license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter unless it has been approved by the city council at a regular or special meeting of the council, evidenced by a certificate over the signature of the mayor.
The applicant shall file with the city council a petition for a license that is signed and sworn to by the applicant, setting out his compliance with the conditions to the granting of such a license as set forth in this chapter.
In the case of an application for a license to sell intoxicating liquor at retail, the applicant shall also state:
 

(1)








(2)



(3)
 

If an individual, his full name, age, residence, place of birth, and if naturalized, the place and date of naturalization; whether or not he has been convicted of a felony or the violation of any law regulating or prohibiting the sale of intoxicating liquor since the adoption of the Twenty-First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States; whether, when and where he has been engaged in the manufacture or sale or distribution of intoxicating liquor, and the nature of the business; and whether and to what extent any distiller, wholesaler, winemaker, brewer or an employee, agent, officer, affiliate or subsidiary thereof has an interest of any kind or proposes to have an interest of any kind in the applicant's retail business for which a license is sought, or has made any gift or loan of money, credit or equipment, or will make such loan or gift outside the ordinary commercial credit or sales made to the applicant.
If a corporation, the same information as in the case of individuals concerning the managing officer of each place of business, and, in addition, the names and addresses of its officers, directors and all persons directly or indirectly financially interested in the proposed business, the state of incorporation, the amount of capital stock, and its full corporate name.
In all cases, the exact location of the proposed place or premises where the applicant proposes to engage in the retail liquor business, fully describing such premises and setting forth all entrances and exits, the doors and windows, and the visibility of the interior from any street or sidewalk or other place on the outside of the premises, and the plans and specifications of proposed fixtures and equipment to be used.
 

 
(4)
 
In all cases, the nature of business conducted in other parts of the building or premises in or on which the applicant's business is to be located, the kind of business the applicant intends to conduct in the premises and the hours during which the business is to remain open.
 
(d)
 
The application for a license either to sell intoxicating liquor at retail, or to provide live entertainment in establishments having a license to sell any intoxicating beverages at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises, shall require a public hearing before the city council with notices being sent 15 days before the public hearing to all property owners within 200 feet from the proposed location in all directions.
 
(Code 1972, § 601.08; Code 1982, § 4-51; Ord. No. 3921, § 1, 1-9-1978; Ord. No. 5030, § I, 11-27-2001)


Sec. 8-35. - Licensees to fle periodic statements.

Every licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall file, on or before the fifth day of each calendar month, in the office of the city clerk, a sworn statement showing the amount of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer manufactured or sold, and to whom sold during the preceding calendar month.

(Code 1972, § 601.15; Code 1982, § 4-9)


Sec. 8-36. - Restriction on interest in and obligations of licensees' business.

 
(a)







(b)
 
Brewers or manufacturers of nonintoxicating beer, or the employees, officers or agents thereof, or their subsidiaries or affiliates, shall not, under any circumstances or in any way, obtain any financial interest in the retail business for the sale of nonintoxicating beer licensed under the provisions of this chapter, nor shall they in any way give or furnish equipment, money or credit other than commercial credit for nonintoxicating beer sold, to such licensee. No licensee shall enter into any contract or other agreement with any brewer or manufacturer of nonintoxicating beer, or their officers, employees or agents, or their subsidiaries or affiliates, obligating the licensee to buy or sell only that person's product, or to buy or sell the major part of that licensee's requirements from such person. Any such contract or agreement shall be void.
Manufacturers, rectifiers, distillers, wholesalers, winemakers, brewers or their employees, officers or agents, affiliates or subsidiaries shall not, under any circumstances or in any way, obtain any financial interest in the retail business for the sale of intoxicating liquor licensed under the provisions of this chapter, nor shall they in any way give or furnish equipment, money or credit other than commercial credit for intoxicating liquor sold, to such licensee. No licensee shall enter into any contract or other agreement with any manufacturer, rectifier, distiller, wholesaler, winemaker or brewer, its officers, employees or agents, or its affiliates or subsidiaries, obligating the licensee to buy or sell only that person's product, or to buy or sell the major part of that licensee's requirements from such person. Any such contract or agreement shall be void.
 
(Code 1972, § 601.07; Code 1982, § 4-50)


Sec. 8-37. - Display required.

All licensees under the provisions of this chapter shall keep their licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter in a conspicuous place in the place for which such license was issued.

(Code 1972, § 601.12; Code 1982, § 4-55; Ord. No. 5401, § II, 5-8-2007)


Sec. 8-38. - Revocation; suspension.

 
(a)



(b)





(c)



(d)


(e)
 
Whenever it is shown that a person licensed under the provisions of this chapter has kept a disorderly place or house, or has violated the provisions of this chapter, or of any lawful order issued thereunder, in any way, the city council, in its discretion, may revoke or suspend the license of such person.
Suspension shall be for no longer than ten days. Where a license is revoked, the person whose license is revoked may not obtain another license under the provisions of this chapter, for any premises, for a period of two years from the date of revocation. Refusal to reissue a license shall not be deemed a revocation for this purpose unless such refusal to reissue follows the required procedures as set forth in this section, and the city council is explicit in making the refusal to reissue tantamount to such revocation.
Before a license may be revoked or suspended, the city council shall notify the licensee in writing of the time, date and place of the meeting, and of the charge or complaint upon which the suspension or revocation is to be based. Such notice shall issue no later than ten days after the issuance of the charge or complaint, and the date and time of the hearing shall be within a reasonable time after notice is sent.
For purposes of this section, notice will be deemed sufficient if it is served in a manner that conforms to the standards set forth by the laws of the state for service of process.
The city council shall exercise its discretion to suspend and revoke in a reasonable manner, and only if the charge or complaint referred to in the notice is found to be true and sufficient grounds for such revocation or suspension are found.
 
(Code 1972, § 601.19; Code 1982, § 4-56; Ord. No. 5401, § II, 5-8-2007)


Sec. 8-39. - Report of revocations.
 

The city council shall report promptly to the state supervisor of liquor control all cases in which licenses issued pursuant to this chapter relating to intoxicating liquors have been revoked, and all cases in which persons licensed to sell nonintoxicating beer have been found to be selling intoxicating liquor in the city.

(Code 1972, § 601.3A; Code 1982, § 4-57; Ord. No. 5401, § II, 5-8-2007)


Sec. 8-40. - Renewal.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be renewed upon its expiration upon the payment of the annual fee then prescribed by ordinance, provided the city council is satisfied that the conditions under which the license was granted still remain.
Renewal license applications not received by the specified time will be required to pay an additional $25.00 as and for a late fee and is not to be included in the regular license fee.
 
(Code 1972, § 601.10; Code 1982, § 4-58; Ord. No. 4006, § 1, 10-9-1979; Ord. No. 5401, § II, 5-8-2007)


Sec. 8-41. - Certain acts prohibited in premises licensed to sell at retail intoxicating liquor, wine or beer.

 
(a)
 
It shall be unlawful for any retail licensee, licensed to sell intoxicating liquor, wine or beer, or his/her employee to permit in, upon or about the licensed premises:
 
(1)


(2)


(3)

(4)


(5)


(6)
 
The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
The displaying of any portion of the areola of the female breast or failure to cover the entire breast below the highest point of the areola with opaque fabric covering;
The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals;

The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals or failure to cover pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals with opaque fabric covering;
Any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of his/her genitals or anus or fails at any time to have and keep opaque fabric covering over all parts of his/her genitals and anus; and
The displaying of films, video or DVD programs or pictures depicting acts, the live performances of which are prohibited by this regulation or by any other law.
 
(b)

(c)
 
Body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex, whether wet or dried, and other similar substances shall not be considered an opaque fabric covering. In addition to the licensee and/or his/her employee being subject to all penalties contained in this Code, violation of any act or any provision
contained herein shall be grounds for the license of the licensee to be suspended or revoked.
 

(Ord. No. 5816, § 3, 5-24-2016)


Secs. 8-42—8-68. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - INTOXICATING LIQUOR



Sec. 8-69. - Number of intoxicating liquor licenses limited.

 
(a)
 
No more than one license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold in the city shall be granted for every 200 inhabitants of the city or any fractional part thereof. No more than 40 percent of the above described licenses shall be issued to establishments which do not meet the following criteria:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Is licensed as a restaurant;

Derives over 50 percent of their income from the sale of food;

Has dining room seating exclusive of any separate bar area seating for 40 or more patrons.
 

(b)
 

Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, licenses to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold in the city may be granted to not-for-profit corporate private clubs in a number not to exceed one license for every 5,000 inhabitants of the city or any fractional part thereof.
 
(Code 1972, § 601.05; Code 1982, § 4-48; Ord. No. 4658, § 1, 8-9-1994; Ord. No. 5309, § I, 1-10-2006; Ord. No. 5518, § I, 5-12-2009; Ord. No. 5710, § I, 8-13-2013;
Ord. No. 5881, § I, 3-27-2018)


Sec. 8-70. - License for retail sale of intoxicating liquor; hearing; approval.

 
(a)
 
Upon the filing of a petition for the granting of a license for the sale at retail of intoxicating liquor, the city council shall fix a date for a hearing
 

within ten days after the filing of such petition. The applicant shall have written notice of the date and time of the hearing.
 

(b)





(c)
 

At the hearing, the applicant may be represented by counsel and may call witnesses. The city council may itself subpoena witnesses, take testimony under oath, and the city council shall hear any assessed taxpaying citizen who occupies or conducts business in any building within 200 feet of the place in which the proposed retail liquor business is to be conducted, and such citizens may themselves produce witnesses and testimony.
If the city council finds that the applicable provisions of law, both in this chapter and in the Revised Statutes of Missouri, are met, and that the applicant will conduct his business in accordance with the applicable provisions of law, and if the city council further finds that the application is in fact supported by a majority of the assessed taxpaying citizens occupying or conducting businesses in buildings within 200 feet of the place where the proposed retail liquor business is to be conducted, the council shall approve the application.
 
(Code 1972, § 601.08A; Code 1982, § 4-52)


Sec. 8-71. - Sale of intoxicating liquors restricted.

 
(a)



(b)


(c)
 
No person holding a license to manufacture intoxicating liquors shall sell such liquors at wholesale or retail, or deliver such liquor except in a container having painted or printed in bold and legible letters the name of the manufacturer and the percentage of alcoholic content by weight of such liquor.
No person holding a license to manufacture or sell intoxicating liquors or to sell intoxicating liquors at wholesale in the city, shall ship liquors out of the state or outside the city limits for the purpose of evading or as part of a plan to evade any of the requirements of this chapter.
No person holding a license to sell intoxicating liquors at retail in the original package, not to be consumed on the premises where sold, shall sell such intoxicating liquor in an original package containing less than eight ounces.
 
(Code 1972, § 601.03; Code 1982, § 4-29)


Sec. 8-72. - Certain displays prohibited.

No intoxicating liquor, or package, bottle or container showing the label or brand of any intoxicating liquor, shall be displayed in any street window or show window.

(Code 1972, § 601.17; Code 1982, § 4-32)


Sec. 8-73. - Special regulations concerning sale of beer in chilled glass containers.

No person holding a license to sell intoxicating liquors at retail in the original package, not to be consumed on the premises where sold, or a license to sell nonintoxicating beer in the original package shall sell beer in glass containers of 32 ounces or greater that are chilled or refrigerated to a temperature that is below room temperature of the licensed premises.

(Code 1982, § 4-33; Ord. No. 4659, § 1, 8-9-1994)


Sec. 8-74. - Restrictions on sale of intoxicating liquor.

 
(a)


(b)
 
No person shall manufacture, distill, offer or expose for sale, sell or give away in this city any intoxicating liquor that has not obtained and does not possess a valid license as provided by this chapter.
No person shall sell or deliver intoxicating liquor for resale to any person not licensed under the provisions of this chapter.
 

(Code 1972, § 601.03(B)(1), (2); Code 1982, § 4-47)


Secs. 8-75—8-91. - Reserved.


DIVISION 3. - NONINTOXICATING BEER



Sec. 8-92. - License required.

No person shall manufacture, brew or sell at wholesale or at retail, any nonintoxicating beer in the city, or shall any person own, manage, operate or control any beer depot or storage room handling, storing or selling nonintoxicating beer in the city, unless he has acquired a license under the provisions of this  chapter, and such license is then valid.

(Code 1972, § 601.03(A)(2); Code 1982, § 4-46)


Sec. 8-93. - Containers of nonintoxicating beer to be labeled; sale restricted.

 
(a)
 
Every manufacturer or brewer of nonintoxicating beer who sells or ships for sale in the city any nonintoxicating beer, at wholesale or at retail,
 

shall cause every bottle, barrel, keg or other container of such beer to be marked with a label stating in plain letters and figures "Alcoholic content not in excess of 3.2 percent by weight" or "Alcoholic content not in excess of four percent by volume."
 
(b)


(c)
 
Any container not so labeled or marked as set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed to contain intoxicating liquor and the sale thereof shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter regulating the sale of intoxicating liquor.
No person shall sell or offer for sale in the city any nonintoxicating beer unless it is:
 

(1)


(2)
 

Sold in the original bottle or in the original package containing bottles bearing the original label and full name of the brewer or manufacturer upon both the label and the bottle, and upon the cap or cork of such bottle; or
Sold on draft drawn from the original keg or barrel having stamped on the ends thereof the full name of the manufacturer or brewer of the beer contained therein.
 
(Code 1972, §§ 601.03(A)(1), 601.13; Code 1982, § 4-28)


Sec. 8-94. - Intoxicating liquor prohibited on nonintoxicating beer license premises.

No person holding a license to sell nonintoxicating beer at retail shall allow on or about the premises covered by the license any intoxicating liquor of any kind or character, nor shall any person sell for resale or use on the premises any intoxicating liquor to a person holding a license to sell nonintoxicating beer at retail.

(Code 1972, § 601.03(A)(3); Code 1982, § 4-4)


Sec. 8-95. - Possession of nonintoxicating beer restricted.

No person shall possess any nonintoxicating beer within the city which has not been acquired from a person licensed to sell or otherwise supply such beer to him, and if the package in which the beer is contained and from which it is taken for consumption has not been labeled and sealed as provided by this chapter add by lawful regulations issued under the, authority of this Code.

(Code 1972, § 601.03(A)(4); Code 1982, § 4-5)


Secs. 8-96—8-118. - Reserved.


DIVISION 4. - WINE AND BRANDY



Sec. 8-119. - Wine or brandy manufacturing; what sales may be made, when.

 
(a)





(b)







(c)






(d)
 
For the privilege of manufacturing wine or brandy, which manufacturing shall be in accordance with all provisions of federal law applicable thereto except as otherwise may be specified in this section, in quantities not to exceed 500,000 gallons, not in excess of 18 percent of alcohol by weight for wine, or not in excess of 34 percent of alcohol by weight for brandy, there shall be paid and collected, in lieu of the charges provided in
 s e c t i o n 8 - 1 8 9 , a license fee of $300.00, but in no event shall the license fee imposed hereby exceed the amount paid pursuant to RSMo 311.190. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, a manufacturer licensed under this section may purchase and sell bulk or packaged
wines or brandies received from other licensed manufacturers and may also purchase in bulk, bottle and sell to duly licensed wineries,
wholesalers and retail dealers on any day except Sunday, and a manufacturer licensed under this section may offer samples of wine, may sell wine and brandy in its original package directly to consumers at the winery, and may open wine so purchased by customers so that it may be consumed on the winery premises on Monday through Saturday between 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight and on Sunday between 11:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary and provided that all requirements under applicable state statutes and regulations have been satisfied, the city may issue a license to a wine manufacturer, its employees, officers or agents to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises where sold, if the premises so licensed is in close proximity to the winery. Such premises may remain open between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Sunday.
Except as specifically provided in this section, in all respects the provisions of this chapter shall apply to applicants and licensees for the privilege of manufacturing wine or brandy.
 
(Code 1982, § 4-59; Ord. No. 5011, § II, 8-28-2001; Ord. No. 5401, § II, 5-8-2007)


Secs. 8-120—8-136. - Reserved.


DIVISION 5. - MICROBREWERIES
 

Sec. 8-137. - Microbrewery deined; license fee; retail license allowed, procedure; sale to wholesalers allowed, when.

 
(a)


(b)



(c)



(d)



(e)
 
As used in this section, the term "microbrewery" means a business whose primary activity is the brewing and selling of beer, with an annual production of 10,000 barrels or less.
A microbrewer's license shall authorize the licensee to manufacture beer and malt liquor in quantities not to exceed 10,000 barrels per annum. In lieu of the charges provided in s e c t i o n 8 - 1 8 9 , there shall be paid and collected a license fee of $250.00, but in no event shall the license fee imposed hereby exceed the amount paid pursuant to RSMo 311.195.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the holder of a microbrewer's license may apply for, and the supervisor of liquor control may issue, a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the brewery premises and in the original package for off-premises consumption.
The holder of a microbrewer's license may also sell beer and malt liquor produced on the brewery premises to duly licensed wholesalers. However, holders of a microbrewer's license shall not, under any circumstances, directly or indirectly, have any financial interest in any wholesaler's business, and all such sales to wholesalers shall be subject to the restrictions of RSMo 311.181 and 311.182.
Except as specifically provided in this section, in all respects the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all microbrewery applicants and licensees.
 
(Code 1982, § 4-60; Ord. No. 5011, § II, 8-28-2001; Ord. No. 5401, § II, 5-8-2007)


Secs. 8-138—8-157. - Reserved.


DIVISION 6. - MINORS



Sec. 8-158. - Purchases, possession by minors.

No person below the age of 21 years shall purchase, attempt to purchase or have in his possession or under his control any intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer.

(Code 1972, § 601.02A(D); Code 1982, § 4-3; Ord. No. 3729, § 1, 5-30-1973)


Sec. 8-159. - Selling or supplying restriction to minors; violation.

 
(a)






(b)
 
No person shall sell or supply intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, or permit the same to be sold or supplied, to any person who is under  or apparently under the influence of alcohol, or to an habitual drunkard. Intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer shall not be given, sold or otherwise supplied to any person under the age of 21 years, except that this shall not apply to the supplying of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer to a person under such age for medicinal purposes only, or, in the case of nonintoxicating beer, by the parent or guardian of such person, or to the administering of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer to such person by a physician.
In addition to any other penalties imposed by this Code, violation of this section shall subject the violator to the loss of his license to conduct business in the city.
 
(Code 1972, § 601.02; Code 1982, § 4-26)


Sec. 8-160. - Sale by persons under 21 years of age prohibited.

No person under the age of 21 years shall sell or assist in the sale or dispensing of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer except where such person is permitted to do so under the laws of this state.

(Code 1972, § 601.02A(A), (C); Code 1982, § 4-27)


Secs. 8-161—8-188. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - FEES



Sec. 8-189. - License issuance, fees; collection.

 
(a)
 
Licenses issued under this chapter are nontransferable and are valid for one year, from July 1 to June 30. Licenses may be issued for less than one year, with the proportionate reduction in license fees, as follows:
 
(1)

(2)
 
To applicants whose licenses commence after January 1: one-half year; To applicants whose licenses commence after April 1: one-quarter year.
 
(b)
 
Subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, licenses shall be issued by the city clerk upon the following conditions and the payment
 

of the following fees:
 

(1)

(2)
 

A license shall cover a single premises only, and shall particularly describe such premises. Nonintoxicating beer license fees shall be as follows:
 
a.	To manufacture or brew nonintoxicating beer, which shall be construed to authorize the sale of such beer to distributors and wholesalers for resale to retailers only, or to retailers directly, but not to consumers: $375.00.
b.	To sell as distributor or wholesaler, which shall be construed to authorize the sale of such beer only to persons authorized to sell nonintoxicating beer at retail, but shall not authorize the licensee to sell to consumers: $75.00.
c.	To sell nonintoxicating beer at retail not for consumption on the premises, in the original package, which shall not authorize the licensee to sell such beer for consumption on the premises where sold: $22.50.
d.	To sell nonintoxicating beer at retail for consumption on the premises, which shall be construed to authorize the sale of such nonintoxicating beer by the glass, by the bottle, on draught, or in the original package: $37.50.
e.	For a beer depot or store room handling, selling or storing nonintoxicating beer: $75.00.
 

(3)
 

Intoxicating liquor license fees shall be as follows:
 

a.	For the privilege of manufacturing, distilling, blending and/or brewing in this city:

1.	Malt liquor containing not in excess of five percent of alcohol by weight and the privilege of selling to duly licensed wholesalers and soliciting orders for the sale of malt liquors containing not in excess of five percent of alcohol by weight, to, by or through duly licensed wholesaler: the sum of $250.00.
2.	Intoxicating liquor containing not in excess of 22 percent of alcohol by weight and the privilege of selling to duly licensed wholesalers and soliciting orders for the sale of intoxicating liquor containing not in excess of 22 percent of alcohol by weight, to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler: the sum of $200.00.
3.	Intoxicating liquor of all kinds within this city and the privilege of selling duly licensed wholesalers and soliciting orders for the sale of intoxicating liquor of all kinds, to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler: the sum of $450.00.
b.	To sell intoxicating liquor at wholesale, which shall be subject to the same conditions regarding the sale of such intoxicating liquor as are licenses to manufacture, rectify, distill and blend; for handling:
1.	Intoxicating liquor containing not more than five percent of alcohol by weight: $75.00.

2.	Intoxicating liquor containing not more than 22 percent alcohol by weight: $150.00.

3.	Intoxicating liquors of all kinds: $375.00.

c.	To sell intoxicating liquor in excess of five percent by weight by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises: $450.00.

d.	To sell intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail only, and not by the drink for consumption on the premises, which shall include the right to sell nonintoxicating beer at retail in the original package: $150.00.
e.	To sell malt liquor containing alcohol over 3.2 percent but not more than five percent by weight at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises, which shall include the right to sell nonintoxicating beer at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises:
$52.50.

f.	To sell malt liquor, as described in subsection (b)(3)e of this section, at retail in the original package to consumers, but not by the drink for consumption on the premises, which shall include the right to sell nonintoxicating beer direct to consumers in the original package, but not by the drink for consumption on the premises: $22.50.
g.	To sell intoxicating liquor in excess of five percent by weight by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises (which shall include the right to nonintoxicating beer at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises) on Sundays between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight provided all requirements of state law are complied with: $300.00.
h.	To provide live entertainment in establishments having a license as described in subsections (b)(3)c, (b)(3)e and (b)(3)g of this section:
$125.00.

i.	To sell intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail only, and not by the drink for consumption on the premises (which shall include the right to sell nonintoxicating beer at retail in the original package) on Sundays between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight: $300.00.
j.	Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any person possessing the qualifications in meeting the requirements of this chapter whose is licensed to sell intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail may apply for a special permit to conduct wine, malt beverage and distilled spirit tasting on the licensed premises. A licensee under this section shall pay $25.00 per year payable at the same time and manner as the packaged liquor fee. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit the licensee to sell wine, malt beverages or distilled spirits for on-premises consumption.
 
(4)


(5)
 
The payment of any license fee under the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the licensee from liability for merchants' license or ad valorem taxes assessed and levied under other provisions of this Code and other ordinances.
Intoxicating liquor shall not be consumed on the premises of a person licensed under subsection (b)(3)d or (b)(3)f of this section except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
 

(6)


(7)
 

No licensee shall keep or secret or allow anyone else to keep or secret on the premises described in the license any intoxicating liquor other th character and kind expressly authorized to be sold by such license.
All fees collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be accounted for and paid into the city treasury.
 

(Code 1972, § 601.09; Code 1982, § 4-53; Ord. No. 3823, § 1, 7-14-1975; Ord. No. 3912, § 1, 11-14-1977; Ord. No. 4185, § 2, 6-26-1984; Ord. No. 4432, § II, 1-23-
1990; Ord. No. 4612, §§ 3, 4, 7-13-1993; Ord. No. 4673, § 2, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 5041, § I, 2-26-2002; Ord. No. 5555, § I, 1-12-2010)


Sec. 8-190. - Advertising fees.

All applicants for liquor licenses that require a public hearing must pay the cost to advertise for the public hearing. This is a nonrefundable fee that offsets the cost of advertising.

(Code 1982, § 4-54; Ord. No. 5401, § I, 5-8-2007)


Chapter 10 - ANIMALS AND FOWL


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Sec. 10-1. - Dead animals.

No person shall permit any animal owned by him after it is dead to remain unburied for over 12 hours after it is dead. (Code 1982, § 6-1; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)

Sec. 10-2. - Raising certain animals prohibited.

No person shall raise or keep in the city any livestock such as horses, cattle, pigs, sheep, goats or any other useful animals traditionally kept or raised on a farm or ranch, including miniature versions of the aforementioned animals. No person shall raise in the city any pigeons, poultry (except as allowed in s e c t i o n 
 1 0 - 3 ), rabbits or other rodents unless raised or kept within biological laboratories, hospitals or pet shops.

(Code 1982, § 6-2; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005; Ord. No. 5525, § I(6-2), 6-9-2009; Ord. No. 5844, § I, 10-10-2017)


Sec. 10-3. - Poultry.

 
(a)
 
The keeping of up to six chickens or ducks in total shall be permitted as provided in this section only in the SR single-family residential zoning district and only if a permit has been issued by the director of public works. A permit to keep not more than six chickens or ducks in total on any parcel of property located within a SR single-family residential zoning district shall be issued by the director of public works if the following conditions are satisfied:
 
(1)


(2)

(3)


(4)

(5)

(6)
 
The chickens or ducks must be adequately confined within a yard or other place surrounded by wire netting or other fence as a provision to prevent their escape therefrom.
The pen shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.

Any manure or other discharges from the chickens or ducks shall be collected and properly removed from the premises or tilled into the soil on the premises promptly and regularly to prevent the spreading of offensive smells or diseases.
The keeping of roosters shall be strictly prohibited.

No slaughtering of any chickens or ducks kept pursuant to a permit issued under this section shall be allowed. No person shall keep chickens or ducks in any manner as to create a nuisance under c h a p t e r 3 4 , article VIII.
 
(b)
 
The keeping of chickens or ducks pursuant to a permit issued under this section shall comply with all ordinances of the city. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude the enforcement of any violation of any city ordinances committed in connection with the keeping of chickens or ducks, notwithstanding the issuance of such permit. By applying for a permit under this section the property owner authorizes city officials at all reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to enter upon and inspect the property with respect to which such permit is applied for to determine whether the keeping of chickens or ducks violates this section or any other applicable ordinances.
 
(Ord. No. 5525, § I(6-3), 6-9-2009)


Sec. 10-4. - Revocation of permits to keep chickens and/or ducks.

 
(a)
 
The director of public works shall revoke any permit issued for the keeping of chickens or ducks for violation of any of the conditions stated in
 s e c t i o n 1 0 - 3 or if any of the following conditions are found to exist:
 

(1)

(2)
 

Excessive noise created by the chickens or ducks is audible from adjacent property. The chickens or ducks are not kept in safe and sanitary condition.
 

(3)

(4)
 

The chickens or ducks are not properly confined.

The keeping of the chickens or ducks creates a nuisance.
 

(b)
 

Actions to be taken.
 

(1)



(2)





(3)
 

If a complaint is filed regarding a violation of any of the conditions stated in s e c t i o n 1 0 - 3 or this section, or, in the absence of a complaint, in the discretion of the director of public works, an investigation of any potential violations shall be made by the director of public works or designee.
If the investigation substantiates the existence of a violation of such conditions, a letter shall be sent by certified mail to the property owner notifying the property owner of such violation and that same shall be corrected within not less than five days and that such property owner shall be responsible for notifying the director of public works by certified mail that such violations have been corrected and seeking a reinspection to verify that such violations have been corrected.
In the event the property owner shall fail to notify the director of public works of such correction within five days or in the event that a reinspection does not verify such correction, the permit shall be revoked.
 
(c)
 
Permit revocations under this section may be appealed as follows:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
 

Appeals must be filed within five days after the revocation notice is mailed by certified mail. Appeals shall be determined following a hearing before the city manager or his designee.
At least five days notice of the hearing shall be given to the property owner by certified mail.

The property owner and any other interested party may appear at the hearing and testify and present evidence concerning the conditions giving rise to the revocation.
 
(Ord. No. 5525, § I(6-4), 6-9-2009)


Sec. 10-5. - Reckless riding, driving of animals.

No person shall ride or drive any animal along or upon a street or other public place in a fast, violent or furious manner, nor shall any person allow a vehicle drawn by animals to strike any person or thing, or allow the animal to remain loose or standing unfastened or unguarded.

(Code 1982, § 6-3; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-6. - Cruelty to animals; abandonment.

No person who is responsible for an animal shall:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)
 
Fail to provide adequate food and shelter for the animal for a period of more than 24 hours. Leave an animal without the apparent intent to recover or resume custody.
Fail to provide the animal with proper shelter.

Fail to provide the animal with the opportunity for adequate daily exercise.

Fail to provide the animal with veterinary care when needed to treat injury or illness unless the animal is instead promptly euthanized. Transport an animal in an open vehicle from which it can escape.
Beat, torment, or otherwise abuse an animal.

Cause, instigate, attend, umpire or permit any unlawful exhibition including any dogfight or other combat between animals or between animals and humans within the city limits. Any animal so used shall be seized and impounded. Animals seized shall not be returned to any person participating in or attending the unlawful exhibition.
 

(Code 1982, § 6-4; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-7. - Tethering, prohibited conduct.

It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person controlling or possessing any dog or cat to:

 
(1)

(2)


(3)



(4)
 
Leave a dog or cat tethered outdoors for eight continuous hours or for a total of 12 hours in a 24-hour period.

Tether a dog or cat except by means of a properly fitting harness or collar of nylon or leather construction and a tether in proportion to the size of the animal. The tether must be at least 15 feet in length with a swivel at both ends.
Tether a dog or cat outdoors under conditions where the animal or tether can become entangled on the tether, another animal, or some other object or where the tether can restrict the animal's access to suitable, edible, and sufficient food, clean water (cool in summer and unfrozen in winter), and appropriate shelter.
Tether a dog or cat outdoors in unsafe or unsanitary conditions or when said tether does not allow the animal to defecate or urinate in an area separate from the areas where it must eat, drink, or lie down.
 

(5)
 

Expose a dog or cat to any weather conditions that cause immediate imminent threat to the animal's physical well-being.
 

(Code 1982, § 6-5; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-8. - Gifts of animals.

No person shall sell, give or award, or offer for sale, gift or award six or fewer fowl under one month of age, or a live rabbit under six weeks of age unless the sale, gift or award of such rabbit includes the sale, gift or award of the dam.

(Code 1982, § 6-6; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-9. - Slaughter of stock restricted.

No person other than a person engaged in the business of slaughtering animals in a regular slaughterhouse which is properly equipped for the purpose, shall slaughter any animal in the city.

(Code 1982, § 6-7; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-10. - Horse racing prohibited.

No person shall engage in or participate in any way in horse racing in a public place in the city. (Code 1982, § 6-8; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)

Sec. 10-11. - Defecation on private property, condominium common elements and public property prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for any person owning, controlling, possessing or having the management or care, in whole or in part, of any animal whether licensed or not to allow or permit such animal to defecate upon any private property owned by another, condominium common elements or public property unless such person shall remove all feces so deposited by such animal.

(Code 1982, § 6-14; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-12. - Dogs banned in public places.

The public works director or his or her designee shall be permitted to temporarily ban animals, for up to 60 days from entering public spaces, including but not limited to city parks. After review by the parks and recreation commission the city council may permanently ban animals from entering public spaces, including but not limited to city parks, if the animals using the space are creating a public health hazard, safety concern, or any other nuisance to the public.

(Ord. No. 5703, § I, 5-28-2013)


Secs. 10-13—10-40. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT



Sec. 10-41. - Impoundment—Authorized in certain cases.

The chief of police and the members of the police department or other persons designated by the city council shall have the power to catch, confine and impound dogs, cats and other animals and it shall be the duty of the chief of police, the members of the police department or other persons designated by the city council to take or have taken and impound or have impounded in a suitable place, the location of which shall be published by posting a card of notice in the offices of the chief of police, city collector and city clerk, all dogs, cats and other animals as follows:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)


(4)



(5)
 

All dogs and cats running at large, whether licensed or unlicensed.

All female dogs and cats, licensed or unlicensed, not securely confined in an enclosed place while in heat.

All dogs, cats and other animals affected with rabies, whether such dog, cat or other animal is running at large or on a leash, and whether licensed or unlicensed.
All dogs, cats and other animals suspected by the rabies control officer, member of the police department or other persons designated by the city council, to be exposed to or affected with rabies, including dogs, cats or other animals known to have been bitten by a rabid animal, whether such dog, cat or other animal is running at large or on a leash, and whether licenses of unlicensed.
All dogs, cats or other animals with vicious propensities.
 

(Code 1982, § 6-9; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)
 

Sec. 10-42. - Same—Fierce, vicious or dangerous dogs running at large.

 
(a)
 
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
Vicious dog means:

 
(1)


(2)


(3)

(4)
 
Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to, or otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals;
Any dog which because of its vicious propensity is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to humans and which would constitute a danger to human life or property if it were not kept in a manner required by this Code;
Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or bites, or has attacked or bitten a human being or domestic animal; or Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purposes of dogfighting or any dog trained for dogfighting.
 

(b)






(c)
 

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, no dog may be deemed "vicious" by reason of a threat, injury or damage which was sustained by a person who at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog or by reason of a threat, injury or damage sustained by a person who, at the time of such threat, injury or damage was teasing, tormenting, abusing or insulting the dog, or was threatening or committing assault or any other bodily harm to the owner or the owners immediate family or their invitees.
Any fierce, vicious or dangerous dog running at large, whether licensed or not, may be impounded for any length of time deemed necessary by the chief of police, or in an emergency in the opinion of the chief of police or any police officer may be shot forthwith. The owner and/or any person having the right of possession of such animal shall be issued a summons to appear in municipal court for violation of this section and, upon conviction, shall be published as provided in s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 . Animal control officers under contract with the city shall have the authority to issue summonses to appear in municipal court for violations of this section only.
 
(Code 1982, § 6-10; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-43. - Same—Redemption fees.

Any dog, cat or other animal captured and impounded under the provisions of s e c t i o n 1 0 - 4 1 for the first offense and determined not to be affected with rabies by the director of public health and sanitation may be redeemed to the custody of the owner or other person having the right of possession of such animal by paying the city clerk the sum of $25.00 if not inoculated or licensed and $10.00 if inoculated and licensed. In the event any dog, cat or other animal is impounded for a second or subsequent offense under this section the owner or other person having the right of possession of such animal shall pay to the city clerk the sum of $50.00 if not inoculated and licensed and $25.00 if inoculated and licensed.

(Code 1982, § 6-11; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-44. - Same—Disposition of unredeemed animals.

Any dog, cat or other animal impounded pursuant to s e c t i o n 1 0 - 4 1 and not claimed by its owner or keeper within five days shall be disposed of in such a way or manner as may be directed by the director of public health and sanitation by and with the approval of the city council and the mayor; provided, however, that such dog, cat or other animal may be redeemed by any person before its disposal upon securing a license for such animal and paying the redemption fee provided in s e c t i o n 1 0 - 4 3 .

(Code 1982, § 6-12; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-45. - Interference with person enforcing chapter prohibited.

No person shall conceal any animal or interfere with any authorized person in the performance of his duties under this chapter. (Code 1982, § 6-13; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)

Secs. 10-46—10-63. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL



Sec. 10-64. - Disposition of afected animals.

The director of public health and sanitation or any person designated by him shall dispose of any dog, cat or other animal affected with rabies and he shall carefully examine or have examined any dog, cat or other animal known to have been bitten by a rabid animal, whether such dog, cat or other animal is running at large or is on a leash, and whether that dog, cat or other animal is licensed or unlicensed.
 

(Code 1982, § 6-31; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-65. - Quarantine of suspected animals.

If a dog or cat has been bitten by another dog or cat, or acts in a manner suggesting rabies, or if the dog or cat is viciously inclined, the owner or keeper of that dog or cat upon receiving a written notice from the police department, and at his own expense, shall have the dog or cat examined and treated by a veterinarian and quarantined for rabies observation. The quarantine shall be for such time as the chief of police or the director of public health and sanitation may specify. The dog or cat so quarantined shall be kept in such a manner as to prevent any human or other animal from being bitten during the period of observation.

(Code 1982, § 6-32; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-66. - Areawide quarantine.

Whenever rabies becomes prevalent in any locality within the city or county, the director of public health and sanitation shall recommend a quarantine order, according to the necessity of the case. The city council may issue such quarantine order pursuant to such recommendation. The director of public health and sanitation shall, during the first week after such quarantine order is issued, take proper measures to inform the people of the city of the existence of such quarantine order and of the penalties attached to the violation of such quarantine order. The quarantine may be terminated by the city council upon the recommendation of the director of public health and sanitation after the necessity therefor shall no longer exist, provided that no quarantine shall remain effective for more than six months from the date of the adoption of the quarantine order, unless such quarantine order is specifically extended by order of the city council.

(Code 1982, § 6-33; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-67. - City's right of entry for enforcement of article.

The director of public health and sanitation, or a person directed or designated by him, shall have the right to enter upon any enclosed property for the purpose of collecting any stray or unlicensed dog, cat or other animal. The director of public health and sanitation, or a person directed or designated by him, may enter any property or premises within a quarantined area during the period of quarantine in order to examine or obtain any dog, cat or other animal suspected of having or having been exposed to rabies. In case entry is refused, the director or the person directed or designated by him under the provision of this section, such person may obtain a warrant upon probable cause from a magistrate or other person empowered to issue such warrants.

(Code 1982, § 6-35; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-68. - Contracts authorized.

The city is empowered to cooperate and contract with the county for the common service of rabies control. All such contracts must be approved by the city council.

(Code 1982, § 6-36; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Secs. 10-69—10-96. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IV. - DOGS AND CATS



Sec. 10-97. - Inoculation required.

Every resident person who owns, controls, manages, possesses or has part interest in any dog or cat over six months of age kept anytime during the year or who permits such a dog or cat to come upon, on or in, and to remain in or about his home, place of business or other premises in the city shall have such dog or cat inoculated against rabies at least once each year.

(Code 1982, § 6-51; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-98. - Running at large prohibited.

No person owning, controlling, keeping, possessing or having any management or care of any dog or cat shall permit such dog or cat to run at large or go off the premises of the owner or keeper thereof, or to be upon any street, alley or other public place within the corporate limits of the city at any time, whether licensed or unlicensed, unless such dog or cat is in the custody and charge of some responsible person and is securely tied or led by a line or leash, so as to effectively prevent such dog or cat from biting, molesting, being with or approaching any person or animal.

(Code 1982, § 6-52; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)
 

Sec. 10-99. - Vicious dog; coninement; leash and muzzle; insurance; posting warning.

 
(a)





(b)


(c)



(d)
 
The owner of any vicious dog, as defined in s e c t i o n 1 0 - 4 2 , shall securely confine such dog indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner of the dog. The pen or structure shall have secured sides and a top securely attached to the sides. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides shall be embedded into the ground no less than one foot. All such pens or structures shall be adequately lighted and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
The owner of a vicious dog, as defined in  s e c t i o n  1 0 - 4 2 , shall post a notice on the premises conspicuously visible to the public and noting letters not less than two inches high "vicious dog" or "beware—vicious dog" or "beware of dog."
The owner of a vicious dog, as defined in s e c t i o n 1 0 - 4 2 , shall not suffer or permit the dog to go beyond the premises of the owner unless the dog is securely muzzled and restrained by a chain or leash, and under the physical restraint of a person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent the dog from biting any human or animal
The owner of a vicious dog, as defined in s e c t i o n 1 0 - 4 2 , must within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, provide proof to the city manager of general liability or homeowners liability insurance in the amount of at least $100,000.00 per occurrence, insuring the owner against all claims of any personal injuries inflicted by his vicious dog.
 
(Code 1982, § 6-53; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-100. - License—Fee imposed; inoculation certiicate prerequisite to issuance.

 
(a)



(b)



(c)

(d)
 
An annual license fee of $5.00 for each dog or cat is imposed upon every resident person who owns, controls, manages, possesses or has part interest in any dog or cat kept at any time during the year in the city, or who permits a dog to come upon, on or in, and to remain in or about his home, place of business or other premises in the city.
All applicants for dog or cat licenses, for dogs or cats of more than six months of age, shall present a certificate of inoculation against rabies from a licensed veterinarian, executed sometime during the previous 12-month period, to the licensing official and such official shall not issue such license unless such certificate shall be presented.
The full license fee shall be paid to the city clerk on or before January 1 of each year for the succeeding calendar year or any part of that year. The license fee prescribed herein shall not be charged for a license for any dog trained to assist blind persons when any such dog is actually
being used by a blind person for the purpose of aiding or assisting such blind person in going from place to place.
 

(Code 1982, § 6-54; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-101. - Same—Tags.

 
(a)



(b)



(c)
 
The city clerk shall procure annually a sufficient number of metal tags of convenient size and shape, inscribed with the words "Maplewood, Missouri Animal Tag" and the figures indicating the year for which such license tag is valid. The metal license tags shall be numbered from one upwards.
Any person who is the owner of or has in his possession or custody or control, in whole or in part, any dog or cat shall secure from the city clerk a license tag therefor and keep it securely fastened by means of a collar or of harness of substantial make about the neck of the dog or cat at all times.
Any owner or keeper of a dog or cat who suffers the loss of his dog or cat license tag shall report that loss promptly to the licensing official and exhibit the original license receipt at which time he shall be issued a new license tag upon the payment to the city clerk of a fee of $1.00.
 
(Code 1982, § 6-55; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-102. - Female dogs and cats to be conined while in heat.

All female dogs and cats shall be securely confined while they are in heat. (Code 1982, § 6-56; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)

Secs. 10-103—10-132. - Reserved.


ARTICLE V. - KENNELS



Sec. 10-133. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Conducting a kennel means keeping or harboring at any one time more than two dogs or more than two cats, over the age of three months.
 

(Code 1982, § 6-71; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-134. - License.

 
(a)

(b)


(c)


(d)
 
Required. No person shall operate a kennel without having a valid license.

Application. The applicant shall apply for a license hereunder to the city clerk and shall accompany such application with a petition signed by two- thirds of the resident property owners of the city block on which the kennel is to be located, consenting to the establishment of the kennel.
Issuance restricted. No license shall be issued for the establishment of a kennel in an SR, LR or MR zoning district as defined c h a p t e r 5 6 , zoning, if the operation of the kennel includes the sale, exchange or boarding of dogs or cats.
Fee. The license fee shall be $100.00.
 

(Code 1982, § 6-72; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)


Sec. 10-135. - Number of animals restricted.

No more than eight dogs or cats shall be kept in a kennel. (Code 1982, § 6-73; Ord. No. 5295, § I, 11-8-2005)

Chapter 12 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Sec. 12-1. - Notiication to the city by Union Electric Company.

For any month when there is a change of user of residential (rate 0.001) or nonresidential (rate 0.043) electric service within the city, Union Electric Company shall notify the public works director (or other appropriate official) of the city, in writing, within seven working days after the end of the month of said changes; indicating the address and apartment or unit number and the names of electric users per service and address and apartment or unit number in whose names service is connected or billed.

(Code 1982, § 16-1; Ord. No. 4594, § 1, 5-11-1993)


Sec. 12-2. - Violations.

It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in violation of any provisions of this chapter, including the codes herein adopted, or to cause, permit or suffer any such violation to be committed. Any such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished with a fine not to exceed $500.00 or 90 days in jail, or both. For purposes of this section, for each day a violation exists, each existing violation shall be considered a separate offense.

(Code 1982, § 7-50; Ord. No. 4221, § 1, 8-13-1985)


Secs. 12-3—12-20. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 12-21. - Enforcement oicial.

It shall be the duty and responsibility of the director of public works or his designated representative of the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter. No order for correction of any violation under this chapter shall be issued without the approval of the director of public works or his designated representative.

(Code 1972, § 803.01; Code 1982, § 7-16; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 1-24-1984)


Sec. 12-22. - Permit fees.

 
(a)



(b)
 
The following fees shall be paid to the city clerk as a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit under the provisions of the Code adopted by this article: Remodeling, alteration or construction, $5.00 for the first $1,000.00 of estimated cost, and $3.00 for every additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of cost.
For every investigation or inspection, the fee shall be $5.00.
 

(c)
 

A reinspection fee of $20.00 shall be paid to the city clerk for each inspection after the first time a project has failed its inspection due to noncompli any of the following provisions:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)
 
The inspection record card is not posted or otherwise not readily available at the work site; The approved plans are not readily available to the inspector at the site;
Access to the work site is not provided on the date for which the inspection is requested; The job for which the inspection was requested is not completed and ready for inspection; Corrections ordered by the inspector have not been made;
Deviations from the approved plans requiring the approval of the inspector have been made.
 

(Code 1972, § 801.04; Code 1982, § 7-17; Ord. No. 4941, §§ I—IV, 5-23-2000)


Sec. 12-23. - Inspections.

 
(a)








(b)





(c)
 
Authorization. The director of public works or his designated representative is authorized and directed to make inspections to determine whether structures, including, without limitation, dwellings and dwelling units, accessory structures and premises located within this city, conform to the requirements of the building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, property maintenance and other codes and ordinances enacted to provide for the safety and appearance of structures and premises. For the purpose of making such inspections, the director of public works or his designated representative is authorized to enter, examine and survey at reasonable times all structures. The owner or occupant of every structure shall give the director of public works or his designated representative access thereto at reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey.
Interference. If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a structure subject to the provisions of this chapter refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and free access to every part of the structure where inspection is authorized by this chapter, the director of public works or his designated representative may seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an order that such owner, occupant or other person in charge cease and desist with such interference.
Initiation. Inspections pursuant to this section shall be initiated upon receipt of an application for inspection under the following circumstances:
 

(1)






(2)


(3)






(4)
 

Whenever there is a change of owner or occupant of a structure, other than a multiple dwelling, or a residential rental unit for which a valid certificate of compliance exists as stated in subsection (e) of this section, the director of public works shall cause an inspection to be made of said structure to determine that the provisions of this chapter are complied with. If no violations are noted, the director of public works will issue a certificate of compliance which shall be valid until the next change of ownership or occupancy unless revoked by the director of public works for good cause. These inspections will be made upon receipt of an application for inspection and accompanying fee.
Owners contemplating a change of ownership or occupancy may request the director of public works to make the inspection at a mutually agreed time.
An owner or an occupant may request an inspection at any time to determine if there are any violations of this chapter. The owner or occupant will be notified of violations with the understanding that abatement of internal violations will not be enforced, except those of an emergency nature constituting a health or safety hazard, until such time as there is a change of owner or occupancy, but that external conditions contributing to substantial blight or the appearance of blight or that are detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of residents of the city must be abated within a reasonable time as provided in sections 1 2 - 2 6 through 1 2 - 3 4 .
The director of public works may make external inspections at any time when he has reason to believe that conditions exist which contribute to substantial blight or the appearance of substantial blight or which are detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of residents of the city. The owner or occupant will be given a reasonable time to abate any violations as provided in sections 1 2 - 2 6 through 1 2 - 3 4 . No inspection fee will be charged.
 
(d)
 
Fees.
 

(1)
 

The fees for subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section shall be as follows:
 

a.	For the first unit, $50.00.

b.	For each additional unit, $10.00.
 

(2)
 

Whenever an inspection of a multifamily dwelling or residential rental property indicates evidence of a violation of any provision of this chapter and written notice has been given to the owner to commence a remedy of the condition therein specified, a reinspection fee of
$25.00 for the first unit and $5.00 for each additional unit shall be paid to the city clerk prior to every reinspection that is required that occurs after 30 days from date of the issuance of the notice of violation and correction order until the multifamily dwelling or residential rental property is determined to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The fee may be waived by the director of public works due to the need for additional time caused by the requirement to employ skilled tradesmen to make the repairs or seasonal weather conditions making exterior repairs impossible.
 
(e)
 
Annual inspection of multifamily dwellings and residential rental property.
 

(1)
 

No person shall operate a multiple-family dwelling or residential rental property, unless a current certificate of compliance is issued for the specifically named multiple-family dwelling or residential rental property.
 

(2)


(3)





(4)



(5)



(6)


(7)



(8)



(9)






(10)
 

Every certificate of compliance for a multiple-family dwelling or residential rental property shall be issued for a period of one year unless revok cause.
No certificate of compliance shall be issued unless the owner or agent agrees in the application to such inspections, pursuant to this section, as may be required to determine whether the multiple-family dwelling or residential property in connection with the certificate of compliance is sought is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and also provides the city with a current list of tenants and occupants.
No certificate of compliance shall be issued unless the owner or agent has first made application for inspection, and the completed application form is accompanied by the payment of an inspection fee, and the applicant agrees to require all new tenants to obtain an occupancy permit before taking occupancy.
No certificate of compliance shall be issued unless the applicant designates an agent who shall either reside or have a place of business in the city or in the county as authorized to accept service of notice of violation of the provisions of this article and for service or process pursuant to this article.
The application for annual inspection shall be made no more than 60 days and no less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the current certificate of compliance.
Whenever, upon inspection of the multiple-family dwelling or residential real property, it is found that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any applicable rules and regulations pursuant thereto, the owner or agent shall be served  with a notice of such violation in the manner provided in s e c t i o n 1 2 - 2 6 .
At the end of the time allowed for correction of any violation cited, there shall be a reinspection of the multiple-family dwelling or residential rental property to determine that, if such conditions have not been corrected within a reasonable time, there will be prosecution of such violation as provided in sections 1 2 - 3 1 through 1 2 - 3 4 .
Every owner or agent shall have a current and valid certificate of compliance before they sell, transfer, lease or otherwise dispose of any multiple-family dwelling or residential rental property and shall have advised the new owner or agent that annual inspections are required and that an occupancy permit is required of each new occupant before taking occupancy. The name and address of the new owner or agent succeeding to the ownership or control of such multiple-family dwelling or residential rental property shall be given to the city by written notice.
The owner or agent of a multiple-family dwelling or residential rental property shall notify all occupants of inspections to be made, shall be present for inspections, and have means to gain entry to each dwelling unit and/or make arrangements with occupants to be present for inspections.
 
(f)
 
Annual inspection of vacant buildings, vacant dwellings and dwelling units.
 

(1)


(2)



(3)

(4)
 

No owner or agent shall maintain any vacant building, vacant dwelling or dwelling unit after 180 days of the date of vacancy without a current certificate of compliance.
Prior to obtaining a certificate of compliance, the owner or agent shall obtain an inspection of the vacant building, vacant dwelling or dwelling unit to determine whether a certificate of compliance may be issued. The process for obtaining an inspection shall be the same as set forth in subsection (e) of this section, except that the submission of a list of tenants is not applicable.
The fees for inspection shall be the same as set forth in subsection (d) of this section.

A certificate of compliance shall be issued if the owner has paid the applicable fees and the vacant building, vacant dwelling or dwelling unit complies with the following provisions:
 
a.	The 1993 BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, as adopted, amended and codified in article III, division 2 of this chapter.
Adoption of the property maintenance code, except that the regulations contained in the following paragraphs and chapters shall not apply:
1.	PM-303.4.2 Landscape materials;

2.	PM-303.11.2 Openable windows;

3.	PM-304.12 Insect screens;

4.	PM-305.1 General (Interior Structure);

5.	PM-305.3 Interior surfaces;

6.	 C h a p t e r 4 Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations;

7.	 C h a p t e r  5  Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements;

8.	 C h a p t e r  6  Mechanical and Electrical Requirements; and

9.	 C h a p t e r  7  Fire Safety Requirements.

b.	In addition to the 1993 BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, with the above referenced exceptions, the vacant building, vacant dwelling or dwelling shall comply with the following regulations:
1.	Water service to the structure shall be turned off at the tee head, except in the case of a vacant unit, the plumbing shall be so winterized as to prevent the plumbing pipes from freezing;
 

2.	Natural gas service shall be turned off at the tee head, except in the case of a vacant unit, the natural gas service shall be turned off to prevent leakage;
3.	No flammable materials shall be stored inside the structure;

4.	The interior premises shall be maintained free of rubbish and garbage;

5.	All floors shall be maintained in a safe condition; and

6.	All exterior doors shall be locked.
 

(5)


(6)





(7)



(8)


(9)
 

Every certificate of compliance for a vacant building, vacant dwelling or dwelling unit shall be issued for a period of one year unless revoked for good cause.
The owner or agent of the vacant building, vacant dwelling or dwelling unit shall have 30 days from the issuance of the notice of a violation to make all repairs and remedy any conditions found which prevent the issuance of a certificate of compliance. Additional time to correct violations, not exceeding 60 days after the initial 30 days allotted for corrections or repairs, may be granted by the director of public works if the owner or agent has demonstrated by evidence of work already performed that work is progressing continuously to completion.
If the condition of the vacant building, vacant dwelling or dwelling unit is so deteriorated or unsafe that in the opinion of the director of public works the structure may be declared a public nuisance as set forth in s e c t i o n 1 2 - 3 2 , then the director of public works may set another schedule for compliance, or may undertake emergency measures pursuant to s e c t i o n 1 2 - 3 5 .
If the owner or agent does not make all repairs and remedy any conditions which prevent the issuance of certificate of compliance, the director of public works is authorized to seek compliance with the provisions of this chapter as authorized in  s e c t i o n  1 - 1 1 .
A transfer of ownership of a vacant dwelling shall comply with the regulations set forth in subsection (g) of this section.
 

(g)
 

Transfer of ownership.
 

(1)












(2)


(3)
 

It shall be unlawful for the owner of any structure or his agent to sell, transfer, lease or otherwise dispose thereof to another until he shall have secured a certificate of compliance, and such owner shall be responsible for abating any violations necessary for a certificate of compliance to be issued, unless such owner or agent provides the grantee (including a lessee or mortgagee) with a true copy of the notice of any violation or compliance order which must be abated before a certificate of compliance is issued and provides the city with a signed and notarized statement from such grantee acknowledging the notice of violation or compliance order and fully accepting the responsibility, without condition, for making the corrections or repairs required within a reasonable time established by the city manager or director of public works, not to exceed 90 days. If such corrections or repairs are not completed within such time (as may be extended by the city manager or director of public works for good cause shown) the city may hold both the seller or lessor and the grantee responsible for such corrections or repairs. For dwellings and dwelling units, the owner or agent shall advise the grantee that such grantee must secure an occupancy permit if the premises are to be occupied.
A grantee who has received actual or constructive notice of the existence of a notice of violation or compliance order, whether or not shall be bound by such notice as of the date of the transfer without further service of notice upon him.
This section shall not apply to transfers of real property wherein the grantee commits in writing to the city manager or director of public works that the structures on the land so transferred will be demolished within 90 days after the transfer, provided that the structures are so demolished within such time. The city manager or director of public works may, upon good cause shown, grant an extension for a period of time not to exceed 90 days. If at the expiration of such 90-day period of time and any extension thereof the buildings shall not have been demolished, then the provisions of this section shall apply.
 
(Code 1972, § 803.02; Code 1982, § 7-18; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4067, § 1, 10-28-1980; Ord. No. 4073, § 1, 12-9-1980; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-
1981; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 4645, § 1, 5-10-1994; Ord. No. 4941, §§ V, VI, 5-23-2000; Ord. No. 4974, §§ I, II, 2-13-2001; Ord. No. 5085, §§ I, II, 1-
14-2003; Ord. No. 5160, §§ I, II, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 5464, § I, 3-25-2008)


Sec. 12-24. - Access by owner or operator.

Every occupant of a structure or premises shall give the owner or operator thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such structure or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspection, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

(Code 1972, § 803.03; Code 1982, § 7-19; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981; Ord. No. 4645, § 1, 5-10-1994)


Sec. 12-25. - Occupancy permit.

 
(a)
 
Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to hereinafter occupy, or for any owner or agent thereof to permit the occupancy of, any dwelling or dwelling unit, or addition thereto, or part thereof, for any purpose:
 
(1)

(2)
 
Until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the director of public works; If such certificate of occupancy has been revoked.
 
The certificate of occupancy shall be issued when the occupancy complies with all the provisions of this chapter.
 

(b)







(c)



(d)


(e)

(f)


(g)
 

Conditional. The director of public works may, at his discretion, issue a conditional occupancy permit under circumstances where a buyer has made stating that he will correct deficiencies within a specified time. Under no circumstances shall a conditional occupancy permit be issued if the listed v under the discretion of the public works director, are deemed to be health or safety issues. No conditional occupancy permit shall be issued for ren units. Once a conditional occupancy permit is issued, the dwelling may then be occupied while repairs are being made. If the deficiencies are not co within the time specified, the conditional occupancy certificate may be revoked. At such time as the dwelling complies with all the provisions of this occupancy permit will be issued as provided in subsection (a) of this section.
Application; required information. Every application shall provide basic identifying information, and other identifying information determined to be necessary by the director of public works to verify the number and identity of the occupants; such information may include photographic identification of adult occupants and a copy of signed leases in the case of rental property.
Applicability. This section shall not apply to any occupancy in existence on November 11, 1975, nor shall a family be considered in violation of this section by reason of births or deaths within a family, nor by reason of the return of a family member.
Fee. The fee for such occupancy permit shall be $15.00 for each dwelling unit occupied.

False information. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement in his application for an occupancy permit as to the names, ages, relationship, or number of occupants who will occupy the premises.
Revocation. The certificate of occupancy shall always be subject to this Code. Noncompliance with the regulations of this Code shall be deemed a violation subject to the penalties set forth herein, and in addition the director of public works or his authorized representative shall be empowered to revoke the certificate of occupancy for the unit in question, until such time as the violations are corrected and in compliance.
 
(Code 1972, § 803.04; Code 1982, § 7-20; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 4645, § 1, 5-10-
1994; Ord. No. 4941, § VIII, 5-23-2000; Ord. No. 5085, § III, 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 5464, § II, 3-25-2008)


Sec. 12-26. - Noncompliance—Notice to be given.

 
(a)



(b)


(c)
 
Notice of violation. Whenever the director of public works or his designated representative finds evidence of a violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of same in writing, delivered in person or via first class mail to the owner or agent of the building, structure, and/or property as shown on the city records.
Notice of public nuisance. In addition to or as an alternative to the notice of violation in subsection (a) of this section, a notice of public nuisance may be given pursuant to, and in the manner provided in, s e c t i o n 1 2 - 3 2 .
Stop work order. A stop work order shall be posted where the public works director or his designated representative determines that any of the following exists:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
 
Work has been started prior to the acquisition of a permit as required by this Code. Work being done is outside the scope of a previously issued permit.
Work is being done in an unsafe and/or dangerous manner.

Work being done is not in compliance with any requirements of this Code, including any codes adopted thereby.
 

(d)



(e)
 

Notice to owner. The public works director or his authorized representative shall give written notice of the stop work order to the owner, authorized representative or person doing the work. Notwithstanding sections 118.1 and 118.2 of the BOCA National Building Code, such written notice may be given by posting the property with the stop work order notice.
Continuance of work after issuance of stop work order. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, and the owner of the property or structure who permits any such prohibited work, shall be liable for a fine as provided in  s e c t i o n  1 - 1 1 .
 
(Code 1972, § 803.05; Code 1982, § 7-21; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 4645, § 1, 5-10-
1994)


Sec. 12-27. - Same—Correction.

 
(a)






(b)
 
Remedy of defects. Unless a shorter time period is provided by this Code, the owner of any building shall have 30 days from the issuance of the notice provided for in s e c t i o n 1 2 - 2 6 in which to commence a remedy of the condition therein specified, and shall proceed continuously without unnecessary delay to completion, except when emergency conditions shall require immediate action as provided in s e c t i o n 1 2 - 3 5 (emergency measures); provided, however, that the director of public works or his designated representative, may, at his discretion, extend the time for compliance with any such notice.
Reinspection. At the time when the violations have allegedly been brought into compliance by either notification or lapse of time, the director of public works or the designated representative shall reinspect the building or structure within ten working days. At this time, the director shall make a complete inspection, taking particular notice that the violations previously noted have been brought into compliance, and that no new violations have come into existence in the time which has elapsed since the first inspection.
 
(Code 1972, § 803.06; Code 1982, § 7-22; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4068, § 1, 10-28-1980; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 1-24-
1984; Ord. No. 4645, § 1, 5-10-1994)
 

Sec. 12-28. - Broken glass—Dwelling units.

 
(a)






(b)





(c)
 
Temporary repairs. Every window, glazed exterior door, exterior transom, or exterior sidelight shall be provided with properly installed glass or other approved glazing material. In the event of breakage, the owner shall cause the immediate removal of broken glass from the premises and shall temporarily board up the affected openings with suitable material to provide protection from the elements and to prevent entry of birds or animals and to provide security to occupants or contents of the building. Within ten days after boarding up, the owner shall cause the boarding material to be removed, and all affected openings shall be simultaneously reglazed by the owner.
Provision of adequate lighting and ventilation. Adequate ventilation and natural lighting shall be provided for all occupied dwelling units. Whenever any exterior openings are found boarded up, it shall be the duty of the director of public works or his designated representative to notify the owner or agent of this requirement giving him a period of not more than ten working days in which to properly replace the broken glass or cause the dwelling unit to be vacated. This notice shall be given in the manner required by s e c t i o n 1 2 - 2 6 .
Specifications. Since the presence of boarded up buildings, particularly those where the boarding is unpainted or applied in an insecure, careless, or unpresentable fashion, invites vandalism, and creates a blighting influence which adversely affects the general welfare of the people of this city, it is hereby required that all boarding up of exterior openings be accomplished in a neat workmanlike manner with not less than one-half- inch thick, weather-resistant plywood, cut to fit within the openings, fastened in place as securely as possible, and suitably coated with an appropriate neutral color blending with or harmonizing with the exterior colors of the building as inconspicuously as possible. It shall be the duty of the director of public works or his designated representative to notify the owner or agent of any boarded-up dwelling unit not complying with the above requirements, of the necessity of immediate compliance and ordering him to replace the broken glass, or repair, replace or paint the boarding. This notice shall be given in the manner required in s e c t i o n 1 2 - 2 6 .
 
(Code 1972, § 803.09; Code 1982, § 7-25; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 1-24-1984)


Sec. 12-29. - Same—Buildings other than dwelling units.

 
(a)


(b)



(c)


(d)



(e)
 
Every window, glazed exterior door, exterior transom, or exterior sidelight on all buildings within the city, except dwelling units, shall be provided with properly installed glass or other approved glazing material.
In the event of breakage, the owner of such building shall cause the immediate removal of all broken glass from the premises and shall temporarily board up the affected openings with suitable material to provide protection from the elements and to prevent entry of birds, animals or persons, and to provide security to the occupants or contents of the building.
Within ten days after boarding up, the owner shall cause the boarding material to be removed, and all affected openings shall be simultaneously reglazed by the owner.
In the event of breakage of poster case glass, the owner of the building shall cause all broken glass to be removed from the premises and shall temporarily board up such poster case. Within ten days after boarding up, the owner shall cause the boarding material to be removed and either simultaneously reglaze the affected opening or remove the entire poster case and refinish the affected building surface.
This section does not apply to dwelling units within the city since the same is covered by s e c t i o n 1 2 - 2 8 .
 

(Code 1972, §§ 805.01—805.04, 805.04A, 805.04B; Code 1982, § 7-26; Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 10-28-1980; Ord. No. 4074, § 1, 12-9-1980)


Sec. 12-30. - Holiday decorations.

All exterior holiday decorations must be removed 60 days after the holiday. Any exterior holiday decorations left up longer than 60 days shall be in violation of this Code subject to the general penalty outlined in s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 .

(Code 1982, § 7-27; Ord. No. 5282, § I, 9-27-2005)


Sec. 12-31. - Prosecution of violation.

 
(a)
 
In case any violation of this chapter is not remedied within the prescribed time period, the director of public works or his designated representative may use any or all of the following remedies:
 
(1)

(2)


(3)



(4)

(5)
 
Restrain the owner from performing or allowing any further execution of pending work on the building or structure;

Prevent the occupation or use of the building, structure or part thereof erected, installed or altered in violation of, or not in compliance with, the provisions of this chapter or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or certificate was issued;
Require the removal of any building, structure, or part thereof, which is erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in compliance with, the provisions of this chapter or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or certificate was issued, or when any of the above is done without obtaining the required permits from the city;
Enforce the penalty provisions of this chapter or of s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 or any other penalty provisions available to the city;

Request that the city attorney institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law (to compel compliance or otherwise) against the person or firm responsible for the failure to comply.
 
(b)
 
In addition to the remedies available under subsection (a) of this section, for any violation that is a public nuisance as defined in  s e c t i o n  1 2 - 3 2 ,
 

the director of public works or his representative may order the violation corrected or the building demolished at the owner's expense, as provided in sections 1 2 - 3 2 through 1 2 - 3 4 . The director of public works shall not be obligated to pursue any of the remedies in subsection (a) of this section as a condition to pursuing remedies under this subsection (b).
 
(c)
 
The procedures and remedies in this chapter are independent of and in addition to:
 

(1)

(2)
 

Any actions authorized by c h a p t e r 3 4 , article VIII (nuisances) or successor provisions; and

Any remedy for violations provided in the building code as adopted by article III of this chapter.
 

(d)
 

Failure to obtain occupancy permit. A property owner, landlord or agent who allows a tenant to move initially into their property without an occupancy permit shall be summoned into municipal court and shall be subject to the following minimum penalties:
 

First ofense	
$ 50.00 plus court costs

Second ofense	
75.00 plus court costs

Third and subsequent ofenses	
100.00 plus court costs



(Code 1972, § 803.14; Code 1982, § 7-28; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 4645, § 1, 5-10-
1994; Ord. No. 5085, § IV, 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 5282, § II, 9-27-2005)


Sec. 12-32. - Public nuisance.

 
(a)
 
Declaration. Any structure found to have any of the following defects shall be deemed to be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the city and shall be declared a public nuisance:
 
(1)


(2)


(3)


(4)


(5)



(6)

(7)

(8)
 
Bearing wall, earth retaining wall, column, or other vertical structural member which leans or buckles to such an extent that it is likely to partially or completely collapse and injure the occupants or members of the public.
Floor, roof, wall, structural member or structural connection which is overloaded or which has insufficient strength to be safe for the purpose used so as to be likely to collapse and injure the occupants or members of the public.
A building, structure or part thereof, or property, which is so attached that it is unsafe or dangerous to either the occupants or the general public.
A building, structure or part thereof, or property which has been so damaged by fire, wind, or other causes, so as to become unsafe or dangerous to the occupants or the general public.
A building, structure or part thereof, or property which because of the degree of disrepair or lack of maintenance is so unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, filthy or contaminated, or lacking in ventilation, sanitary facilities, heating facilities or other code required equipment that is hazardous to the health or safety of the occupants or members of the public.
Any violation of the zoning code.

Where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than one year.

Any one or more violations of any provision of this chapter which is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city.
 

(b)



(c)
 

Mandatory demolition or repair of a public nuisance. The following steps shall be taken to effect the mandatory demolition or repair of a building, structure or part thereof, or property which is deemed to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the general public and which is declared a public nuisance.
Notice of declaration of nuisance. A notice of declaration of nuisance and prehearing order shall be prepared in substantially the following form: NOTICE OF DECLARATION OF NUISANCE AND PRE-HEARING ORDER
THE STRUCTURE OR STRUCTURES DESCRIBED BELOW HAS BEEN DECLARED A NUISANCE

(Insert address or other adequate description of the building or structure.) (Use either or both of the following paragraphs.)
(1)	NO PERSON MAY OCCUPY THIS BUILDING, OR ANY PART THEREOF, AFTER	, 20	. After such date, no person shall occupy, enter, refuse to leave, or remain in this building or any part thereof, except persons directly employed in securing, repairing or removing such building.

(2)	THIS STRUCTURE OR PROPERTY MUST BE REPAIRED TO CURE THE FOLLOWING DEFECTS:
 

WORK MUST BEGIN ON OR BEFORE	, 20	AND PROCEED CONTINUOUSLY WITHOUT UNNECESSARY DELAY TO
COMPLETION. Upon failure to repair or demolish as herein required, the director of public works may, after hearing, order repairs to be made and the cost charged to the owner of this property as a special tax lien.

AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO THE REPAIRS DESCRIBED ABOVE, THIS STRUCTURE MAY BE DEMOLISHED AND REMOVED FROM THE PREMISES NOT LATER THAN	, 20	.
 

(d)

(e)






(f)





(g)










(h)
 

Posting. A copy of the notice of declaration of nuisance and pre-hearing order shall be posted in a prominent place on the premises.

Service. The notice of declaration of nuisance and pre-hearing order shall be served on the affected parties, consisting of owner, occupants, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all persons having an interest in the property, all as shown by the records of the county recorder of deeds. The notice may be served personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or if service cannot be had by either of these modes of service, then by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The affected parties shall have not less than 30 days from the date of service to complete demolition or to begin the repairs.
Notice of hearing. If the affected parties fail to commence work on repairs or complete demolition within the time specified, or fail to proceed continuously with the work without unnecessary delay, the director of public works shall call a hearing upon the matter, giving the affected parties ten days written notice of the hearing. Said notice may be served personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or if service cannot be had by either of these modes of service, then by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
Hearing. The director of public works or the duly designated representative of the director of public works shall conduct a full and adequate hearing. Any affected party may be represented by counsel and all affected parties shall have an opportunity to be heard. After the hearing, if the evidence supports a finding that the building or structure is a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the city, the director of public works shall issue a post-hearing order making specific findings of fact based on competent and substantial evidence which shows the building or structure to be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city, and ordering the building or structure to be demolished and removed, or repaired. The post-hearing order shall be served in the same manner as the notice of declaration of nuisance and pre-hearing order. If the evidence does not support a finding that the building or structure is a nuisance or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city, no order shall be issued.
Upon failure to obey order. If any order of the director of public works is not obeyed within the time specified therein, the director of public  works shall cause such building or structure to be vacated and repaired or demolished as provided in his order. The director of public works shall certify the cost for such action, including all administrative costs, to the city clerk, who shall cause a special tax bill against the property to be prepared, filed and collected, as outlined in this section.
 
(Code 1972, § 803.17; Code 1982, § 7-29; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 4645, § 1, 5-10-
1994; Ord. No. 4889, § I, II, 4-13-1999; Ord. No. 5282, § II, 9-27-2005)


Sec. 12-33. - Special tax bill.

If the director of public works issues an order whereby the building or structure is demolished, secured or repaired, or the property is cleaned up, the cost of performance shall be certified to the city clerk or officer in charge of finance who shall cause a special tax bill therefor against the property to be prepared, filed and collected by the city collector or other official collecting taxes, unless the building or structure is demolished, secured or repaired by a contractor pursuant to an order issued by the city and such contractor files a mechanic's lien against the property where the dangerous building is located. The contractor may enforce this lien as provided in RSMo 429.010 to 429.360. Except as provided in s e c t i o n 1 2 - 3 8 , at the request of the taxpayer, the tax bill may be paid in
installments over a period of not more than ten years. Such assessment shall bear interest of nine percent per annum, or, if such amount exceeds the maximum rate that the law will allow, then at such maximum rate, until paid. The tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be deemed a personal debt against the
property owner and also shall be a lien on the property until paid.

(Code 1972, § 803.17; Code 1982, § 7-30; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 4645, § 1, 5-10-
1994; Ord. No. 4889, § III, 4-13-1999; Ord. No. 5282, § II, 9-27-2005)


Sec. 12-34. - Appeal to circuit court of county.

The decision by the director of public works or his designated representative made following a hearing held pursuant to s e c t i o n 1 2 - 3 2 , may be appealed by a party aggrieved thereby to the circuit court of the county, pursuant to RSMo ch. 536; provided that any party so aggrieved, other than the city, may either appeal directly to the circuit court of the county or to the housing board of appeals of this city. The decision by the housing board of appeals may be appealed by any party aggrieved thereby to the circuit court of the county pursuant to RSMo ch. 536.

(Code 1972, § 803.18; Code 1982, § 7-31; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 4645, § 1, 5-10-
1994; Ord. No. 5282, § II, 9-27-2005)


Sec. 12-35. - Emergency measures.

 
(a)
 
Applicability. When any dwelling unit has become so damaged by fire, wind or other causes, or has become so unsafe, unhealthful or unsanitary,
 

that, in the opinion of the director of public works or his designated representative, life or health is immediately endangered by the occupation of the dwelling unit or property, the director of public works or his designated representative is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke without notice any occupancy permit for such dwelling unit and to order and require the occupants to vacate the same forthwith and to order the owner or agent to proceed immediately with the corrective work and repairs required to make the dwelling unit temporarily safe and fit for human habitation, whether or not a notice of violation has been given as described in this chapter, and whether or not legal procedures  described by this Code have been instituted.
 
(b)
 
Procedures. If the owner does not complete such corrective work or repairs when and as necessary to avoid an immediate danger to the health, safety, or welfare of any person, the director of public works or his designated representative may take emergency measures to vacate and repair the structure or otherwise remove the immediate danger at the owner's cost.
 
(Code 1972, § 803.20; Code 1982, § 7-32; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 1, 5-26-1981; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 4645, § 1, 5-10-
1994; Ord. No. 5282, § II, 9-27-2005)


Sec. 12-36. - Registration of agents.

Owners of residential property in the city who are not residents of the city or the county shall designate an agent who shall either reside or have a place of business in the city or the county, as authorized to accept service of notice under the provisions of this article. It shall be the owner's responsibility to register such agent with the director of public works.

(Code 1972, § 803.11; Code 1982, § 7-33; Ord. No. 3784, § 1, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 5282, § II, 9-27-
2005)


Sec. 12-37. - Confict of interest.

No person shall be appointed or remain in office as director of public works or his designated representative, or inspector or member of the housing board of appeals who is engaged directly or indirectly in the business of repair, construction or alteration in the city.

(Code 1972, § 803.21; Code 1982, § 7-34; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 5282, § II, 9-27-
2005)


Sec. 12-38. - Proceeds of insurance.

 
(a)






(b)
 
If there are proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered claim payment made for damage or loss to a building or other structure caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion, or other casualty loss, the insurer shall withhold from the covered claim payment an amount equal to 25 percent of the covered claim payment, and shall pay such moneys to the city to deposit into an interest-bearing account. Any named mortgagee on the insurance policy shall maintain priority over any obligation under this section. This section shall apply only to a covered claim payment which is in excess of 50 percent of the face value of the policy covering a building or other structure.
The city shall release the proceeds and any interest which has accrued on such proceeds received under subsection (a) of this section to the insured or as the terms of the policy and endorsements thereto provide within 30 days after receipt of such insurance moneys, unless the city has instituted legal proceedings under the provisions of s e c t i o n 1 2 - 3 2 . If the city has proceeded under the provisions of s e c t i o n 1 2 - 3 2 , then:
 
(1)



(2)
 
To the extent permitted under section RSMo 67.410, the city may apply the proceeds (and any interest which has accrued thereon) to the costs necessary to comply with the provisions of s e c t i o n 1 2 - 3 2 for the removal of the building or structure, less salvage value, to board up the building or structure, or to clean up the property after a casualty loss; and
All moneys in excess of that necessary to comply with the provisions of s e c t i o n 1 2 - 3 2 for the removal of the building or structure, less salvage value, to board up the building or structure, or to clean up the property after a casualty loss, shall be paid to the insured.
 
(c)
 
If there are no proceeds of any insurance policy as set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, at the request of the taxpayer, the tax bill may be paid in installments over a period of not more than ten years. The tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be a lien on the property until paid.
 
(Code 1982, § 7-35; Ord. No. 4889, § IV, 4-13-1999; Ord. No. 5282, § II, 9-27-2005)


Secs. 12-39—12-64. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - DESIGN AND REVIEW BOARD



Sec. 12-65. - Composition; appointment; terms; oicers.

 
(a)
 
There is hereby created a board to be known as the design and review board which will consist of five members. The members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council and shall serve without compensation for terms of three years. The initial appointment of members shall be staggered so that one member will have a one-year term, one member a two-year term, and three members a three-year term.
 

Thereafter, all terms shall be for a period of three years.
 

(b)


(c)
 

The membership of the design and review board shall consist of five members of which three members shall be representatives of the business community. At least three members of the board must be citizens of the city.
The mayor shall appoint the chairperson of the design and review board and the members shall elect their own secretary.
 

(Code 1982, § 7-41; Ord. No. 4221, § 1, 8-13-1985)


Sec. 12-66. - Plan approval for commercial, industrial, institutional or multiple-family dwelling.

All applications for building permits and all plans for proposed exterior alterations, repairs or maintenance that will affect the exterior appearance of a building, including fences and signs, shall be submitted to the design and review board prior to issuance of a building permit or the commencement of such work for approval if:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

Same is commercial, industrial, institutional or multiple dwelling in character; Same is a new fence, or sign construction in the city; or
The building official finds that the proposed building structure, improvement, fence or sign would be detrimental to the stability and values of surrounding property by reason of its incompatibility and inappropriateness thereto, is inharmonious and inconsistent with the surrounding property or is inconsistent with the zoning plan and the map and regulations thereunder.
 

(Code 1982, § 7-42; Ord. No. 4221, § 1, 8-13-1985)


Sec. 12-67. - Plan approval for single-family residential.

All applications for building permits and all plans for proposed exterior alterations, excluding retaining walls (less than four feet in height), decks, storage buildings, fences and swimming pools that will affect the exterior appearance of a building, shall be submitted to the design and review board prior to issuance of a building permit or the commencement of such work for approval.

(Code 1982, § 7-43; Ord. No. 4221, § 1, 8-13-1985)


Sec. 12-68. - Application for building permit—Submissions; board action required.

In the event the approval of the design and review board is required under  s e c t i o n  1 2 - 6 6 , the building official shall, upon receipt of legal processing fee, as specified in this Code, from the applicant, no more than seven days after the filing of the application for the building permit, certify such application, together with all attached plans, specifications, plot diagrams and other instruments required by law to the design and review board by delivering same to the chairperson thereof. Within 21 days after such delivery, the board shall, in writing, deliver to the building official its approval, conditional approval, rejection or disapproval of the said application. Failure of the board to act within said 21-day period shall constitute approval of said application. Such approval shall be deemed to include any stipulations as may have been applied by the building official upon his plan examination. Under the terms of this section, resubmission by the applicant of a conditionally approved, rejected or disapproved application shall constitute a new application.

(Code 1982, § 7-44; Ord. No. 4221, § 1, 8-13-1985)


Sec. 12-69. - Same—Consideration by board; hearing.

Following the certification of such application and attached documents to the board, said board shall consider same and may hold a hearing on the matter, written notice of which shall be given the applicant at least five days in advance of said hearing, as to time, place and purpose and at which the applicant shall be accorded an opportunity to be heard.

(Code 1982, § 7-45; Ord. No. 4221, § 1, 8-13-1985)


Sec. 12-70. - Same—Conditions.

The board shall approve or conditionally approve the application if it finds:

 
(1)

(2)
 
The application conforms to the zoning plan and map; and

With respect to single-family dwellings and structures, the subject matter of the application, if erected, would not be detrimental, inharmonious or inconsistent with the property in the surrounding area. Such finding shall be based on a determination that neither of the following conditions will be created by erection of the proposed dwelling or fence:
 
a.	Excessive similarity to any other structure existing or for which a permit has been issued, or to any other structure included in the same permit application, facing upon the same side of the street and within 250 feet of the proposed site unless differing substantially in overall exterior design or in four or more of the following features of exterior design and appearance:
1.	Landscaping;
 

2.	Combination of materials;

3.	Texture of materials;

4.	Site setting;

5.	Location of carports and garages;

6.	Finished grade levels;

7.	Type of roof;

8.	Height of roof;

9.	Number and size of windows.

b.	Excessive and unreasonable dissimilarity or inappropriateness in relation to any other structure existing or for which a building permit has been issued, or to any other structure included in the same permit application, facing upon the same side of the street and within 250 feet of the proposed site in respect to one or more of the following features:
1.	Cubical contents;

2.	Gross floor area;

3.	Height of building or height of roof;

4.	Other significant design features such as material or quality or architectural design, provided that a finding of excessive dissimilarity or inappropriateness exists, but further that it is of such a nature as to be expected to provoke beyond reasonable doubt an adverse effect on the stability and value of surrounding property, and that finding is not based on personal preference as to taste or choice of architectural style.
 
(3)



(4)
 
With respect to fences (excluding single-family residential) the subject matter of the application, if erected, would not be detrimental, inharmonious or inconsistent with the property in the surrounding area; that its erection shall not injure the rights of adjacent property owners nor shall the welfare and safety of the public be adversely affected.
With respect to the erection, improvement or alteration of commercial, industrial, institutional or multiple-dwelling buildings and structures, including signs, that same shall be in the interest of the public health, welfare, safety and morals; and harmonious and consistent with the property in the surrounding area with respect to the following factors:
 
a.	Use of space.

1.	Ratio of structures to the building site;

2.	Position of structures and other improvements on the site;

3.	Relation of structures and other improvements to adjoining properties and streets;

4.	Landscaping;

5.	Effective screening, such as fences, walls or landscaping;

6.	All other factors contributing to the most desirable use of space;

7.	Parking facilities.

b.	Design.

1.	Plans and elevations;

2.	Color, material and texture;

3.	Relation to the site and to adjoining properties;

4.	Signs as related to proposed structures and adjoining properties;

5.	Landscaping, fences, garden walls and entrances;

6.	Other factors pertaining to overall design and appearance.

(Code 1982, § 7-46; Ord. No. 4221, § 1, 8-13-1985)


Sec. 12-71. - Appeals.

Appeals from the granting or denial of a building permit by the building official shall be to the board of adjustment as is in such cases provided by law. (Code 1982, § 7-47; Ord. No. 4221, § 1, 8-13-1985)

Sec. 12-72. - Consultation; advice.

The design and review board shall, to the greatest extent practicable, upon request, furnish advice and consultation to applicants for building permits or other persons contemplating building or development in the city.

(Code 1982, § 7-48; Ord. No. 4221, § 1, 8-13-1985)
 

Sec. 12-73. - Architect or engineer certiication.

All plans and specifications filed for building permits shall be compiled, stamped or signed by a registered architect or engineer if estimated cost of construction, as shown on the application for permit, exceeds $25,000.00.

(Code 1982, § 7-49; Ord. No. 4221, § 1, 8-13-1985)


Secs. 12-74—12-91. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CODE


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 12-92. - Adoption of building code; amendments.

 
(a)



(b)
 
Adoption. The International Building Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the building code of the city for new construction and incorporated herein by reference, subject only to the specific provisions of the Code of Ordinances of this city.
Additions, insertions and changes. The International Building Code, 2015 edition, is amended and revised in the following respects:
 

Section 101.1 Title. Insert City of Maplewood, Missouri

Delete all text in Section 105.2 and replace with the following: 105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:

Building:

 
1.


2.


3.


4.

5.

6.


7.

8.


9.

10.
 
One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 100 square feet.
Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.
Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18 925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1.
Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.
Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18 925 L) and are installed entirely above ground.
Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings.

Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support of Groups R-3 and U occupancies.
Non-fixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height. Modification of an existing fire alarm system involving 5 or fewer fire alarm system devices.
 

Insert the following new section:

Section 105.6.1. Qualifications of contractors and workers. The Building Official shall not be required to issue a building permit unless the contractor and workers are qualified to carry out the proposed work in accordance with the requirements of this code. Refusal or inability to comply with code requirements on other work shall be considered as evidence of lack of such qualifications.

Delete Section 111 Certification of Occupancy in its entirety. Delete Section 113 Board of Appeals in its entirety.
Section 202 Definitions Insert definition for RETAINING WALL. A structure constructed of natural or manmade inorganic material. Wood tie walls are not permitted. Existing tie walls may be repaired if the extent of the repair does not exceed 20 percent of the length and/or area of the wall. Tie walls requiring more than 20 percent repairs must be replaced with a retaining wall. A wall less than 24 inches in height is considered landscaping.

Section 1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. Insert St. Louis County, Missouri, February 4, 2015
 

(Ord. No. 5558, § I, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 5830, § I, 9-27-2016)


Sec. 12-93. - Adoption of residential code; amendments.

 
(a)



(b)
 
Adoption. The International Residential Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the residential building code of the city for new construction and incorporated herein by reference, subject only to the specific provisions of the Code of Ordinances of this city.
Additions, insertions and changes. The International Residential Code, 2015 edition, is amended and revised in the following respects:
 

Section 101.1 Title. Insert City of Maplewood, Missouri

Delete all text in Section 105.2 and replace with the following: 105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:

Building:

1.	One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 100 square feet (18.58 m2).
2.	Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge.
3.	Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18 927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1.
4.	Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.

5.	Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep.

6.	Swings and other playground equipment.

7.	Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.

Insert the following new section:

Section 105.6.1. Qualifications of contractors and workers. The Building Official shall not be required to issue a building permit unless the contractor and workers are qualified to carry out the proposed work in accordance with the requirements of this code. Refusal or inability to comply with code requirements on other work shall be considered as evidence of lack of such qualifications.

Delete the text in Section 108.3 and replace with the following text in its stead: Section 108.3. Building Permit Valuations. Building permit fees shall be determined in accordance with C h a p t e r 1 2 Article II. Division 1 of the Maplewood Municipal Code.

Insert the following new section:

Section 108.7. Penalty fee. The Public Works Director is authorized to assess a penalty of up to $500.00 or 50 percent of the permit fee based on the cost of construction, whichever is greater, for work performed without a valid permit issued by the City of Maplewood. The payment of penalty fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this code or from other penalties prescribed herein.

Section 202 Definitions Insert definition for RETAINING WALL. A structure constructed of natural or manmade inorganic material. Wood tie walls are not permitted. Existing tie walls may be repaired if the extent of the repair does not exceed 20 percent of the length and/or area of the wall. Tie walls requiring more than 20 percent repairs must be replaced with a retaining wall. A wall less than 24 inches in height is considered landscaping.

Table R301.2(1) Insert:

TABLE R301.2(1)

CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA


GROUND SNOW LOAD	
WIND DESIGN	
SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY	
SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM	
WINTER DESIGN TEMP	
ICE BARRIER
UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED	
FLOOD HAZARDS	
AIR FREEZING INDEX	
MEAN ANNUAL TEMP
	
Speed (mph)	
Topo- graphical Efects		
Weathering	
Frost line depth	
Termite					

20	
90		
C	
Severe	
30"	
Moderate	
6°	
No	
Yes	
1000	
54°
 


Delete the text in Section R309.5 and replace with the following text in its stead:

Section R309.5. Fire sprinklers. Private garages shall be protected by fire sprinklers where the garage wall has been designed based on Table 302.1(2), Footnote a, and the homeowner has opted to purchase a fire sprinkler system for their residence, as per Missouri Revised Statutes 67.281. Sprinklers in garages shall be connected to an automatic sprinkler system that complies with Section P2904. Garage sprinklers shall be residential sprinklers or quick-response sprinklers, designed to provide a density of 0.05 gpm/ft2. Garage doors shall not be considered obstructions with respect to sprinkler placement.

Delete the text in Section R310.6 and replace with the following text in its stead:

Section R310.6 Alterations and additions. All unfinished areas and reconfigured space converted to sleeping rooms and unfinished basement spaces being converted to habitable space shall have emergency escape and rescue openings.

Insert the following new section:

Section R310.7 Bathrooms in unfinished basements. Bathrooms or bathroom rough-ins shall not be permitted within unfinished basements on new construction unless an emergency escape and rescue opening is provided to allow for future conversion to habitable space.

Delete the text in Section R313 .1 and replace with the following text in its stead:

R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses in accordance with
§ 67.281 of the Missouri Revised Statutes.

Delete the text in Section R313 .2 and replace with the following text in its stead:

Section R313.2. One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems. A single-family dwelling or residence or multi-unit dwellings of four or fewer units shall offer to any purchaser on or before the time of entering into the purchase contract the option, at the purchaser's cost, to install or equip fire sprinklers in the dwelling, residence, or unit. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no purchaser of such a single- family dwelling, residence, or multi-unit dwelling shall be denied the right to choose or decline to install a fire sprinkler system in such dwelling or residence being purchased by any code, ordinance, rule, regulation, order, or resolution by any county or other political subdivision. Any county or other political subdivision shall provide in any such code, ordinance, rule, regulation, order, or resolution the mandatory option for purchasers to have the right to choose and the requirement that builders offer to purchasers the option to purchase fire sprinklers in connection with the purchase of any single-family dwelling, residence, or multi-unit dwelling of four or fewer units.

Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for additions or alterations to existing buildings that are not already provided with an automatic residential sprinkler system

Delete the text in Section R403.1.7 and replace with the following text in its stead:

Section R403.1.7 Footings on or adjacent to slopes. The placement of buildings and structures on or adjacent to slopes steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3 - percent slope) shall conform to Sections R403.1.7.1 through R403.1.7.4 or have plans signed and sealed by a registered engineer.

(Code 1982, § 7-61; Ord. No. 5293, § I, 10-11-2005; Ord. No. 5558, § I, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 5830, § II, 9-27-2016)


Sec. 12-94. - Adoption of existing building code; amendments.

 
(a)



(b)
 
Adoption. The Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the building code for existing structures within the city and incorporated herein by reference, subject only to the specific provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the city.
Additions, deletions, insertions and changes. The Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition, is amended and revised in the following respects:
 

Section 101.1 Title. Insert City of Maplewood, Missouri

(Code 1982, § 7-62; Ord. No. 5293, § II, 10-11-2005; Ord. No. 5558, § II, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 5830, § III, 9-27-2016)


Secs. 12-95—12-116. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



Sec. 12-117. - Adoption of property maintenance code.
 

(a)






(b)
 

Adoption. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Prop Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and amended by the city, be and is hereby adopted as the pro maintenance code of the city, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures as herein provi each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code, as amended, are hereby referred to, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this division, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes set forth in subsection (b) of this sect
Additions, insertions and changes. The International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, is amended and revised in the following respects:
 

Section 101.1 Title. Insert: City of Maplewood, Missouri.

Section 102.3 Application of other codes. Delete all references to code within the subsection, and insert the following codes in their place: the Building Code of St. Louis County, Missouri, the Plumbing Code of St. Louis County, Missouri, the Electrical Code of St. Louis County, Missouri, the Mechanical Code of St. Louis County, Missouri, the International Fire Code, and the International Existing Structures Code, and the Maplewood Code of Ordinances, including the Maplewood Zoning Code.

Section 102.6 Historic buildings. Delete subsection in its entirety.

Section 103.1 General. Delete section in its entirety.

Section 103.2 Appointment. Delete subsection in its entirety. Section 103.3 Deputies. Delete subsection in its entirety. Section 103.5 Fees. Delete subsection in its entirety.
Section 104.7 Department records. Delete text of said subsection, and insert the following text in its stead. "Department records. The code official shall maintain records of inspections, notices of violations, and documents related to such inspections and violation notices for a period of three years from the date of the issuance."

Section 106.4 Violation; penalties. Delete text of said subsection, and insert the following text in its stead. "Violation penalties. Violation of any provision of this code, or failure to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be subject to the penalties as established in
 S e c t i o n  1 - 1 1 . General penalty; continuing violations of the Maplewood Code of Ordinances."

Section 107.1 Notice to person responsible is hereby amended to insert at the beginning "Unless otherwise provided in the Maplewood Code of Ordinances . . ."

Section 107.2 Form is hereby amended to insert at the beginning "Unless otherwise provided in the Maplewood Code of Ordinances . . ."

Section 107.3 Method of service is hereby amended to insert at the beginning "Unless otherwise provided in the Maplewood Code of Ordinances . . ."

Section 107.5 Transfer of ownership. Delete subsection in its entirety. Section 109 Emergency measures. Delete section in its entirety. Section 110 Demolition. Delete section in its entirety.
Section 111 Means of Appeal. Delete section in its entirety.

Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Delete all references to code within the subsection, and insert the following codes in their place: the Building Code of St. Louis County, Missouri, the Plumbing Code of St. Louis County, Missouri, the Mechanical Code of St. Louis County, Missouri, the International Fire Code, or the Maplewood Code of Ordinances, including the Maplewood Zoning Code.

Section 202 General Definitions. Add the following definitions:

Agent. A person authorized to accept service of notice who either resides or has a place of business within St. Louis County or the City of St. Louis.

Accessory structure. A structure subordinate to the main or principal structure, which is not used for living by human occupants.

Bathroom. A room affording privacy containing bathing and sanitary facilities provided within each living unit consisting of a water closet, a tub or shower, and a lavatory basin.

Change of occupancy. Any circumstances wherein the composition of the residents of a dwelling unit changes either through the sale, lease, rental or other provision for the occupancy of any dwelling unit or by the addition of one or more persons to the number of residents of a dwelling unit, except by birth, assumed legal responsibility of minors or relatives of blood or marriage; provided however, in no event shall the relatives of blood or marriage be an exemption from the change of occupancy if such occupancy violates maximum space requirements.
 

Conditional occupancy permit. A document which states the names, ages, relationships and number of occupants of a dwelling unit which does not comply with all of the provisions of the Property Maintenance Code. It is issued only under specified circumstances listed in s e c t i o n 1 2 - 2 5 for a limited, specified length of time.

Debris. Unused or discarded items or portions of items of any type including furniture, play items, used building materials or fixtures, tools, appliances, equipment or machinery, containers, lumber, wood, rocks, bricks, broken concrete, metal or plastic items, vehicle parts, and any other material which has been placed or scattered on any lot, yard, open area, or underneath, or within a structure or part of a structure.

Deterioration. The condition or appearance of a building or part thereof, characterized by breaks, holes, rot, crumbling, peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, excessive use, or lack of maintenance.

Family. One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, occupying a dwelling unit as an individual housekeeping organization, or two unrelated persons having a child or children related by blood, adoption or foster care relationship to both such persons, and/or the biological, adopted or foster children of either such individual. A family may include two additional persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption. Foster children, who are legal wards of the court, are construed as adopted children for purposes of enumeration.

Flush water closet. A toilet bowl flushed with water under pressure with a water sealed trap above the floor level.

Gutter. A trough under an eave to carry off water.

Harborage. Any place where insects, pests or rodents can live, nest or seek shelter.

Kitchen. Any room containing any or all of the following equipment, or any area of a room within three feet of such equipment, sink or other devices for dish washing, stove or other device for cool storage of food, cabinets or shelves for storage of equipment and utensils, and counter or table for food preparation.

Maximum occupancy. The maximum number of persons permitted to reside in a dwelling unit.

Open storage. Storage of any items outside any residential structure, but not including lawn furniture, water hoses, lawn sprinklers, outdoor cooking equipment, or firewood that is intended for use by the occupant of the premises that is cut for use and stacked in an orderly manner at least 12 inches off the ground and stored behind the front building line.

Plumbing. Facilities and equipment including, but not limited to, the following: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, steam pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, toilets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, vent or gas lines.

Privacy. The existence of conditions which will permit a person or persons to carry out an activity without interruption or interference either by sight or sound, by unwanted persons.

Rental property. (1) Any dwelling or part of any dwelling for the use of which money is paid by someone; or (2) any occupied dwelling that is not occupied by the owner.

Renter. (1) Any person, other than the owner, occupying a dwelling unit for the use of which money is paid; or (2) any person occupying a dwelling that is not occupied by the owner.

Repair. To restore to a sound and acceptable state of operation, serviceability or appearance. Repairs shall be expected to last approximately as long as would the replacement by new items.

Replace. To remove an existing item or portion of a system and to construct or install a new item of similar or improved quality as the existing item when new. Replacement will ordinarily take place when the item is beyond repair.

Rodent extermination. Extermination by methods approved by the St. Louis County Health Department, and shall include removal of any condition which may provide food, shelter or protection for rats, thus favoring their existence or multiplication, and the closing of all openings in exterior walls at the ground and first floor levels.

Rodent harborage. Any condition which may provide food, shelter or protection for rats, thus favoring their existence or multiplication.

Rubbish container. A watertight container with tightfitting lid for the temporary storage of garbage and rubbish that is constructed of metal, or other durable material impervious to rodents, that is capable of being serviced without creating unsanitary conditions.

Space heater. A self-contained heating appliance of either the circulating type or the radiant type and intended primarily to heat only one room.

Substandard. All dwellings which do not conform to the minimum standards established by this Property Maintenance Code or of the city's Code of Ordinances.

Yard. An open space at grade on the same lot as a building or structure located between the main building and the adjoining lot line, and/or street line. The measurement of a yard shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the building structure.
 

Amended to insert Section 301.4 Lead-based paint. Interior and exterior painted surfaces of dwellings and child and day care facilities, including fences and out buildings, which contain in excess of 0.06 percent lead by weight shall be removed or covered in an approved manner.

Amended to insert Section 302.1.1 Domestic animals. The occupant shall maintain the exterior property free of the excrement of the occupant's domestic animals by removal with reasonable frequency.

Section 302.4 Weeds. Insert: 12 inches (304.8 mm).

Amended to insert Section 302.4.1 Trees. All exterior property areas shall be maintained free of dead, diseased or dangerous trees, and dead, diseased or dangerous tree limbs. Such trees which are located on single or two-family residential properties shall be removed to ground level. Such trees which are located on multifamily or commercial properties shall be removed to ground level, and the remaining stump shall be ground to a level of tree (3) inches (76 mm) below grade.

Amended to insert Section 302.4.2 Landscape materials. All lawn areas and landscaping shall be maintained on a continual basis. All plant materials specified in screening and landscape plans required under Appendix A—Zoning of the Maplewood Code of Ordinances that are dead or diseased shall be replaced in conformity with the approved plan with identical or like species in the size required by the plan.

Section 302.8 Motor Vehicles. Delete in its entirety. (see  C h a p t e r  1 9  Motor Vehicles and Traffic, Article IV. Abandoned Vehicles Sections 19-101 through 19-106, Maplewood Code of Ordinances)

Amended to insert Section 302.10 Open storage. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained free of open storage.

Section 304.13.1 Glazing is hereby amended to read as follows: All glazing materials shall be maintained in a safe condition, and free of cracks longer than one and a half (1.5) inches.

Section 304.14 Insect screens. Insert: April 15, November 15.

Amended to insert Section 304.15.1 Garages and storage structures. All garages and storage structures shall be provided with operable doors.

Section 307.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Delete title and text of said section, and insert the following title and text in their stead. "Accumulation of rubbish, debris and garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish, debris or garbage."

Section 401.3 Alternative devices. Insert Building Code of St. Louis County, Missouri.

Section 402.2 Common halls and stairways. Insert the words "or equivalent" to the first sentence between the words incandescent and light.

Section 403.2 Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Insert the following text, "or to a nonhabitable outer or upper attic space which is ventilated to the outdoors, and shall not be recirculated to any habitable space, including the space from which such air is withdrawn."

Section 404.3 Minimum ceiling heights. Delete text of said section, and insert the following text in its stead. "Habitable spaces, except kitchens, shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet, four inches. Kitchens, bathrooms, toilet rooms, hallways, corridors and laundry areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet."

Exceptions:

1.	Beams or girders spaced not less than four feet on center and projecting not more that six inches below the required ceiling height, provided that the minimum clear height is not less than six feet, eight inches.

2.	Dropped or furred ceilings over not more than one-half of the minimum floor area required by this code, provided that no part of such dropped or furred ceiling is less than seven feet in height.

3.	Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet over not less than one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five feet or more shall be included.

4.	Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than six feet, eight inches with not less than six feet, four inches of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions."

Section 404.4 Bedroom and living room requirements. Delete title and text of said section, and insert the following title and text in their stead. "Minimum area. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum occupancy area requirement set forth in this chapter."

Amended to insert Section 404.4.1 Dwelling units. The minimum habitable area of a dwelling unit shall be at least 250 square feet of floor space for one occupant and at least 100 square feet for each additional occupant of the dwelling unit. Floor areas shall be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area per dwelling unit.
 

Amended to insert Section 404.4.2 Living rooms. Every dwelling unit occupied by three to five persons shall be provided with a living room which shall contain a minimum of 120 square feet of floor area. Dwelling units inhabited by six or more occupants shall contain a living room with a minimum of 150 square feet of floor area.

Amended to insert Section 404.4.3 Dining rooms. Every dwelling unit occupied by three to five persons shall be provided a dining room which  shall contain at least 80 square feet of floor area. Every dwelling unit occupied by six or more persons shall be provided a dining room which shall contain at least 100 square feet of floor area.

Amended to insert Section 404.4.4 Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements set forth in Sections 404.4.2 and 404.4.3 if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room.

Amended to insert Section 404.4.5 Kitchens. Every dwelling unit shall be provided a kitchen which shall contain at least 50 square feet, measured from wall to wall or defined area, except in dwelling units occupied by six or more persons, the kitchen shall contain at least 60 square feet of floor area. Every kitchen shall be equipped with a sink, cooking appliance or microwave oven and refrigerator, and shall contain suitable space to store and prepare foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate space and facilities for the temporary storage of food wastes and refuse.

Amended to insert Section 404.4.6 Bedrooms. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain 70 square feet for one occupant, and shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each additional occupant of the room.

Amended to insert Section 404.4.7 Closets. Every bedroom shall have access to a closet opening into the room, with a minimum area of six square feet of floor to ceiling closet space with a minimum depth of two feet. The area of closets shall not be counted as part of the habitable room area used in determining permissible occupancy.

Amended to insert Section 404.4.10 Illegal sleeping rooms. Living rooms, dining rooms, kitchens, closets, hallways, bathrooms, storage areas and interior public areas shall not be occupied for sleeping purposes.

Amended to insert Section 404.4.12 Basement rooms. Any room in a basement to be used to satisfy the habitable room requirements shall meet all applicable requirement, particularly, ceiling heights, ventilation, and window area and meet the following additional requirements:

1.	The lowest point of the ceiling shall be at least three feet six inches above the surface of the ground immediately adjoining the room.

2.	The required minimum window area is entirely above ground level.

3.	No floor area three feet below grade shall be used in determining habitable living space.

4.	Two independent means of unobstructed egress doors must be provided, at least one of which leads directly to the exterior of the building.

5.	The floors and walls shall be constructed in a manner that prevents the entry of moisture and shall be insulated to prevent the condensation of moisture within the room.

6.	A wired smoke alarm system shall be provided for the basement level that complies with all requirements set forth in Section 704 of this code.

7.	Playrooms, workshops, rathskellers and the like are permissible, but will not be included in the floor area for determining the maximum occupancy.

Section 404.5 Overcrowding. Delete title and text of said section, and insert the following title and text in their stead. "Section 404.5 Occupancy by more than one family. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or permit the occupancy of a dwelling unit or part thereof unless all occupants of the dwelling unit are members of one family, as defined in this chapter."

Section 505.1 General. Delete reference to International Plumbing Code and insert in its stead the Plumbing Code of St. Louis County, Missouri.

Section 602.1 Facilities required. Delete text of said section, and insert the following text in its stead. "Every dwelling unit and indoor occupiable work space shall have heat supplied by an approved heating system of standard manufacture designed to provide heat to the entire dwelling unit or occupiable work space. Space heating devices shall not be used to provide the required heat supply to any dwelling unit or occupiable work space."

Amended to insert Section 602.1.1 Toilet rooms. Space heaters shall not be used in toilet rooms or bathrooms.

Section 602.2 Residential occupancies. Delete reference to International Plumbing Code and insert in its stead. "Plumbing Code of St. Louis County, Missouri."
 

Section 602.3 Heat supply. Insert: October 1, May 15. Delete reference to International Plumbing Code and insert in its stead. "Plumbing Code of St.
Louis County, Missouri."

Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Insert: October 1, May 15.

Amended to insert Section 603.1.1 Prohibited fuels. Liquified petroleum gas "LP" gas and "LPG," propane propylene, butane, isobutene, butylenes gasoline or kerosene shall not be used as a fuel for appliances for heating, cooking, refrigeration or water heating within a structure.

Section 604.2 Service. Delete reference to the International Electrical Code and insert the Electrical Code of St. Louis County, Missouri.

Section 605.2 Receptacles. Revise the following sentence which begins with the words "Every laundry area . . ." to read as follows. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter, supplied from a 20 ampere dedicated circuit.

Amended to insert Section 702.5 Exit signs. All means of egress shall be indicated with approved exit signs where required by the International Fire Code.

Section 704.2 Smoke detectors. Delete subsections 2 and 3 of said section, and insert the following text in their stead. "Sleeping areas. 1. The owner shall install and maintain at least one smoke alarm to protect each sleeping area. In an efficiency, the owner shall install the smoke alarm in the room used for sleeping. In all other dwelling units, the owner shall install the smoke alarms outside the bedrooms but in the immediate vicinity of the sleeping area. An owner subject to this section shall install each smoke alarm on the ceiling at a minimum of four inches from the sidewall to the near edge of the alarm or on a wall located four to 12 inches from the ceiling to the top of the detector and within ten feet of all rooms used for sleeping purposes. The smoke alarm shall not be installed in dead air space, such as where the ceiling meets the wall. Where one or more sleeping areas are located on a level above the cooking and living area, the smoke alarm for such sleeping area(s) shall be placed at the top of the stairway. An owner shall also install not less than one smoke alarm on the upper-most ceiling, not less than four inches from any wall or on a
wall, located four to 12 inches from the uppermost ceiling of all interior stairwells. For good cause, the Building Inspector shall have the authority to modify the location requirements of this section. 2. Other areas. The owner shall install and maintain a smoke alarm in each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.

Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with the International Fire Code."

Amended to insert Section 704.2.1 Installation and maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply and install all required smoke alarms. The owner shall be responsible for testing and maintaining alarms in common stairwells. It shall be the responsibility of the tenant to provide and maintain functional batteries for each alarm to test and maintain alarms within dwelling units and to notify the owner or authorized agent in writing of any deficiencies. The owner shall be responsible for providing each tenant with written information regarding alarm testing and maintenance.

Amended to insert Section 704.2.2 Unlawful to make inoperable. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove batteries or in any way make smoke alarms inoperable.

 C h a p t e r  8  Referenced Standards. References to the International Building Code, International Existing Building Code, International Mechanical Code, International Electrical Code and International Plumbing Code shall be deleted and replaced with references to the Building Code of St. Louis County, Existing Building Code of St. Louis County, Mechanical Code of St. Louis County, Electrical Code of St. Louis County and Plumbing Code of St. Louis County.

(Code 1982, § 7-63; Ord. No. 4645, § 2, 5-10-1994; Ord. No. 4718, § 1, 2-27-1996; Ord. No. 4885, § I, 4-13-1999; Ord. No. 5035, § I, 1-8-2002; Ord. No. 5037, §§ I—V,
1-22-2002; Ord. No. 5468, § I, 4-8-2008)


Secs. 12-118—12-147. - Reserved.


DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS



Sec. 12-148. - Brick and stone; defnitions and exceptions.

 
(a)
 
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
Brick means rectangular prismatic units which are used as a facing component that are applied over or anchored to an exterior wall backing. Brick shall be manufactured from clay, shale or similar naturally occurring earth substances and kiln fired. Brick shall be solid units, having a minimum thickness of 2 5/8 inches, and meeting all the requirements of ASTM Designation C-216, Standard Specification for Facing Brick.
 

Natural building stone means granite, limestone, marble, slate, soapstone, sandstone or other natural stones of similar characteristics and physical properties which are used as a facing component that are applied over or anchored to an exterior wall backing.
 

(b)
 

Exceptions. Materials specifically excluded from the definitions of brick and stone shall include, but not be limited to: all hollow masonry units exceeding five inches in height and 16 inches in length, facing tile, customized architectural concrete masonry units, ceramic glazed facing brick, all concrete masonry units, plastic and/or composite blocks, molded, cast or otherwise artificially aggregated stone type units composed of fragments, metal panels, all exterior insulation finish systems, Novabrik, precast concrete panels or any composition panels, and all cast-in-place concrete walls, and tilt-up concrete panels.
 
(Code 1982, § 7-70; Ord. No. 5212, § II, 10-12-2004)


Sec. 12-149. - Brick or stone construction—Required in certain residential districts.

All single-family and duplex residential buildings constructed after October 28, 2004, shall have exterior finished walls, excluding porches and foundations, built with brick or stone, as defined in this article, on all first floor and upper floor levels on the front and both side elevations in the following areas within the city:
 

(1)





(2)



(3)
 

District 1 North of Manchester-East of Big Bend District. Beginning at east curb of Big Bend Boulevard at the north city limit line, proceeding along the north city limit line in an eastwardly direction to the east city limit line; then southwardly to point where the east city limit line meets Manchester Avenue; then westwardly along the north right-of-way line of Manchester Avenue to Big Bend Boulevard; then northwardly along the east right-of-way line of Big Bend Boulevard to the point of beginning.
District 2 West Bruno-Williams District. Beginning at the intersection of Bredell Avenue and West Bruno Avenue, proceeding in an eastwardly direction along West Bruno Avenue to Big Bend Boulevard; then southwardly to south property lines of the south side of Williams Avenue; then proceeding westwardly to Bredell Avenue, then northwardly along the center line of Bredell Avenue to the point of beginning.
District 3 Manchester-South District. Beginning at the intersection of Manchester Avenue and Big Bend Boulevard, proceeding in an eastwardly direction along Manchester Avenue to Sutton Boulevard; then southwardly along the center line of Sutton Boulevard to Pacific Avenue (Railroad Street); then westwardly along Pacific Avenue (Railroad Street) to Big Bend Boulevard; then northwardly along the center line of Big Bend Boulevard to the point of beginning.
 

(Code 1982, § 7-71; Ord. No. 5212, § II, 10-12-2004)


Sec. 12-150. - Same—Required for attached residential buildings and residential buildings of three or more units.

All attached single-family dwellings as defined in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 3 shall have exterior finish walls excluding porches and foundations built with brick or stone as defined in this article on all first floor and upper floor levels on the front and both side elevations. All condominium and owner occupied attached townhouses and residential buildings consisting of three or more units constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall have exterior finish walls built with brick or stone as defined in this article on all elevations excluding porches and foundations.

(Code 1982, § 7-72; Ord. No. 5212, § II, 10-12-2004)


Sec. 12-151. - Same—Required for buildings classifed as assembly, business, educational, institutional, and mercantile type.

 
(a)





(b)
 
All buildings classified as assembly, business, educational, institutional and mercantile type as defined in the building code constructed after October 28, 2004, shall have exterior finished walls built with brick or stone, as defined in this article, excluding foundations, on a minimum of 90 percent of the facade on the front and both side elevations. On the rear elevation, concrete masonry units may be substituted for brick or stone. Windows and doors shall be excluded from the calculation of the facade size.
Building construction regulated by this section constructed on corner lots shall have exterior finished walls built with brick or stone, as defined in this article, on a minimum of 90 percent of the facade on all four sides, excluding foundations.
 
(Code 1982, § 7-73; Ord. No. 5212, § II, 10-12-2004)


Sec. 12-152. - Same—Exceptions.

The regulations of this article shall not apply to the construction of the following:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)


(4)

(5)
 
Accessory structures;

Additions to any wood, aluminum or vinyl sided or similarly sided single-family or duplex residences;

Additions to any brick faced single-family or duplex residences where the addition is less than 33 percent of the total square footage of the existing residence;
Structures classified as factory, hazard, storage, utility and miscellaneous type as defined in the building code; or Any commercial planned unit development (PUD) passed before June 30, 2004.
 

(Code 1982, § 7-74; Ord. No. 5212, § II, 10-12-2004)


Sec. 12-153. - Appeals limitation; housing board of appeals to adjudicate.

 
(a)
 
Appeals regarding the application of the regulations of this article shall be limited to practical difficulty regarding the use of brick on certain elements of a structure. Appeals shall not be permitted for the following matters:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Substitution of materials for brick or stone as herein defined;

Elimination of brick or stone on the entirety of any elevation of a structure as required by these regulations; or Economic hardship or for reduction of project cost.
 
(b)
 
The process for an aggrieved party to appeal the decision of the director of public works or his designated representative shall be the same as that set forth in article XIII of this chapter.
 
(Code 1982, § 7-75; Ord. No. 5212, § II, 10-12-2004)


Secs. 12-154—12-174. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IV. - MECHANICAL CODE



Sec. 12-175. - Mechanical code adopted.

The International Mechanical Code, 2009 edition, with amendments, as adopted by St. Louis County Ordinance No. 24,438 on July 14, 2010, effective November 1, 2010, is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the city as if fully set out herein.

(Code 1982, § 7-76; Ord. No. 3985, § 1, 5-8-1979; Ord. No. 4094, § 1, 6-9-1981; Ord. No. 4230, § 2, 8-27-1985; Ord. No. 4437, § 2, 2-27-1990; Ord. No. 4680, § 2, 3-
14-1995; Ord. No. 4989, § I, 5-22-2001; Ord. No. 5278, § I, 8-9-2005; Ord. No. 5586, § I, 10-26-2010)


Secs. 12-176—12-203. - Reserved.


ARTICLE V. - AMUSEMENT CODE



Sec. 12-204. - County code adopted.

See s e c t i o n 1 2 - 1 7 5 .

(Ord. No. 4230, § 3, 8-27-1985; Ord. No. 4437, § 3, 2-27-1990; Ord. No. 4882, § I, 3-9-1999)


Secs. 12-205—12-231. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VI. - ELEVATOR CODE



Sec. 12-232. - Adopted.

See sections 1 2 - 9 2 , 1 2 - 9 3 and 1 2 - 1 7 5 .

(Ord. No. 3907, § 1, 10-10-1977; Ord. No. 4094, § 1, 6-9-1981; Ord. No. 4230, § 4, 8-27-1985; Ord. No. 4437, § 4, 2-27-1990; Ord. No. 4883, § I, 3-9-1999)


Secs. 12-233—12-257. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VII. - FENCES



Sec. 12-258. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Division fence or division screen means any partition erected parallel to and along a property line and setting off the property of one person from that of another person.
 

Person means any person, firm, partnership or corporation whether as owner, tenant, occupant or lessee of any real estate in the city or as the contractor or subcontractor of such owner, tenant, occupant or lessee.

(Code 1972, § 804.01; Code 1982, § 7-106; Ord. No. 4021, § 1, 12-11-1979)


Sec. 12-259. - Prohibited materials.

No person shall erect or maintain any division fence or screen, in whole or in part, of cloth, canvas or other like material. Also, no barb wire shall be permitted across the top of any fence.

(Code 1972, § 804.02; Code 1982, § 7-107; Ord. No. 4021, § 1, 12-11-1979)


Sec. 12-260. - Heights.

 
(a)



(b)





(c)
 
No person shall erect or maintain any solid division fence or screen which exceeds six feet in height; provided, however, that a division fence or screen of wood or metal not exceeding eight feet in height may be erected if such fence or screen is penetrated with openings at regular intervals, or latticed so that the combined area of openings shall be at least 50 percent of the actual surface of such fence or screen.
Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a solid division fence or screen up to eight feet in height may be erected on properties that are zoned commercial or industrial and that border a residential zoning district if such fence or screen is constructed of wood or similar type of material (chainlink fencing with slabs is prohibited), provided that the proposed fence is approved by the design and review board pursuant to article II, division 2 of this chapter, or successor provisions.
No person shall erect or maintain any division fence or any other fence, wall, screen, or exterior partition, no matter how built, or of what material constructed, which exceeds ten feet in height.
 
(Code 1972, § 804.03; Code 1982, § 7-108; Ord. No. 4021, § 1, 12-11-1979; Ord. No. 4754, §§ 1, 2, 9-24-1996)


Sec. 12-261. - Advertising.

No person shall permit any fence erected or maintained on premises owned, occupied or leased by him to be used for advertising purposes. (Code 1972, § 804.04; Code 1982, § 7-109; Ord. No. 4021, § 1, 12-11-1979)

Sec. 12-262. - Front yards.

Front yard fences already in existence as of January 1, 2000, and not meeting the standards listed below may remain until such time as they become in a state of disrepair or the property is sold. Once the existing fence becomes in a state of disrepair or the property is sold, all front yard fencing must be in compliance with the standards listed below. Ornamental type fences meeting the following standards hereafter set forth may be erected upon application for a permit and approval of the design and review board:
 

(1)


(2)



(3)

(4)
 

The primary purpose, as reasonably determined by the design and review board, of the ornamental fence shall be aesthetic and not a barrier.
Such ornamental fence shall not exceed 42 inches in height, including height of any columns or imbedded vertical support, and at least 50 percent of its surface shall be open as viewed on any line perpendicular to the vertical plane of the fence, for the entire thickness of the fence.
The only materials allowed for construction of such ornamental fence shall be wrought iron, vinyl, coated aluminum or steel.

No front yard ornamental fence may be constructed, modified or altered without the approval of the design and review board pursuant to article II, division 2 of this chapter, or successor provisions.
 

(Code 1972, § 804.05; Code 1982, § 7-110; Ord. No. 4021, § 1, 12-11-1979; Ord. No. 4728, § 1, 5-14-1996; Ord. No. 4949, § I, 7-11-2000)


Sec. 12-263. - Intersections.

No fence, screen, structure or planting higher than 2½ feet above the street grades shall be maintained within 15 feet of any street intersection. (Code 1972, § 804.06; Code 1982, § 7-111; Ord. No. 4021, § 1, 12-11-1979)

Sec. 12-264. - Location requirements.

Division fences and screens shall be erected with the finished side out, that is, the fence posts shall be installed on the permit holder's property so that the fence material and hardware shall be located on and along the property line.

(Code 1982, § 7-112; Ord. No. 4942, § I, 6-13-2000)
 

Sec. 12-265. - Permit.

 
(a)





(b)
 
No person shall erect or alter any fence, screen, wall or other exterior partition in the city without first filing an application with and receiving a permit from the building commissioner or his representative, for the erection of such fence, screen, or wall. Such application shall be filed upon forms provided by the building commissioner and shall clearly show the type of fence, screen, or wall proposed to be erected, the material of which it is to be constructed and the location where it is to be erected.
An application for a permit under the provisions of this article shall be accompanied by a fee of $5.00 to cover the cost of the permit and inspection of the fence, screen, wall or exterior partition proposed to be erected.
 
(Code 1972, § 804.07; Code 1982, § 7-113; Ord. No. 4021, § 1, 12-11-1979; Ord. No. 4942, § II, 6-13-2000)


Sec. 12-266. - Nonconformance.

Any division fence or screen or any other fence, wall, screen, or exterior partition which does not conform to the provisions of this article shall, within ten years from December 11, 1979, be dismantled or taken down and the use thereof discontinued. In lieu of dismantling such division fence or screen or other fence, wall, screen or exterior partition, it may be altered so as to bring it into conformity with the provisions of this article; provided that a permit for such alteration shall have first been applied for and received, as provided in s e c t i o n 1 2 - 2 6 5 .

(Code 1972, § 804.08; Code 1982, § 7-114; Ord. No. 4021, § 1, 12-11-1979; Ord. No. 4942, § II, 6-13-2000)


Sec. 12-267. - Common driveways.

 


lots.
 
A division fence may be erected along the driveway edge rather than on the property line in locations where the driveway is shared between two residential
 

(Code 1982, § 7-115; Ord. No. 5390, § I, 2-27-2007)


Secs. 12-268—12-297. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VIII. - DEMOLITION AND REMOVAL OF STRUCTURES, BUILDINGS OR TREES



Sec. 12-298. - Permit required.

No person shall remove, demolish or tear down any structure, building, tree or any other object without first making application with the director of public works, or his designated representative, for a permit to take such action and pay a fee of $20.00. Such application and permit shall be on forms provided by the director of public works or his representative.

(Code 1982, § 7-126; Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 4941, § IX, 5-23-2000)


Sec. 12-299. - Minimum requirements.

Minimum requirements which are to be adhered to by those persons performing the work of removal, demolition or tearing down as described in s e c t i o n 
 1 2 - 2 9 8  are as follows:

 
(1)


(2)

(3)


(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)
 
No material shall be dropped or thrown outside the exterior walls of any structure or building unless a wood or metal chute is provided for that purpose, and all structural materials and related debris shall be removed from the premises.
All material which will cause any dust will be wetted down with water to prevent the creation of a nuisance.

Excavations remaining shall be immediately filled with no combustible materials of any kind, graded to their original grade and maintained in conformity with the existing grade immediately adjacent to such excavation.
The top 24 inches of the site shall be clean dirt or sod.

Notification shall be made to adjoining property owners of the removal, demolition or tearing down contemplated.

Concrete floors shall be broken up to allow drainage and concrete steps and entrance walks to public streets or sidewalks shall be removed. Any broken sidewalks or driveways and curbs shall be replaced.
All public utilities shall be notified in order for disconnection or turnoff of utilities. Street rights-of-way cannot be used for storage or materials.
Barricades, warning lights, signs or any other devices to warn and safeguard pedestrians and vehicular traffic shall be provided. If no development is planned within six months of demolition, the property owner shall seed the site with grass and maintain it.
 

(Code 1982, § 7-127; Ord. No. 3998, § 2, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 4442, §§ I—III, 3-13-1990)
 

Sec. 12-300. - Performance bond; exemption.

 
(a)





(b)
 
There is to be deposited with the city at the time of applying for a permit for removal, demolition or tearing down as indicated, the sum of
$500.00 for a single-family residence; $1,000.00 for a multifamily residence; $1,500.00 for a commercial structure to ensure faithful performance of the requirements set forth in this article and for the repair of any damage caused to the city's property as a result of such action. Such amount of deposit shall be returned to the depositor upon completion and direction of the director of public works or his representative.
The city does not have to comply with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section if the city undertakes to remove, demolish or tear down any structure, building or tree within the city.
 
(Code 1982, § 7-128; Ord. No. 3998, §§ 3, 6, 8-28-1979)


Sec. 12-301. - Time for completion.

There shall be set forth on the application and permit required by this article the time for completion of the removal, demolition or tearing down and the restoration of the property as provided for in this article. Failure to complete in the time allowed under the permit shall cause the individual or permit holder to be in violation of this article.

(Code 1982, § 7-129; Ord. No. 3998, § 4, 8-28-1979)


Sec. 12-302. - Historic and preservation code.

All applications for demolition permits shall be reviewed as provided in the historic and preservation code and no demolition permit shall be issued unless a certificate of appropriateness for such demolition is issued pursuant to the historic and preservation code.

(Code 1982, § 7-130.1; Ord. No. 4978, § II, 2-27-2001)


Secs. 12-303—12-324. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IX. - SOIL EXCAVATION AND EROSION CONTROL



Sec. 12-325. - Purpose.

 
(a)






(b)
 
The purpose of this article is to control soil erosion on land that is undergoing development for nonagricultural uses and to preserve the natural terrain and waterways of land within the city. The provisions in this article are intended to provide a natural community environment and to prevent soil erosion which makes necessary costly repairs to gullies, washed-out fill, roads and embankments. The resulting sediment of soil erosion clogs storm sewers, road ditches and chokes streams and creates silt lakes, all of which pose a threat to public health and safety. Interpretation and application of the provisions of this article shall be pursuant to these purposes.
This article supplements the demolition, street, sidewalk, excavation and subdivision provisions of the city, and does not alter the requirements of those provisions except as specifically provided herein. Should this article conflict with those provisions or other ordinances of the city, the more restrictive provision shall govern.
 
(Code 1982, § 7-131; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 7-27-1993)


Sec. 12-326. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Debris or silting basin means a barrier or dam built across a waterway or at other suitable locations to retain rock, sand, gravel or silt, or other materials.

Diversion means a channel with or without a supporting ridge on the lower side constructed across or at the bottom of a slope.

Erosion means the wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind, water or gravity.

Excavation or cut means the removal, stripping or disturbance of soil, earth, sand, rock, gravel or other similar substances from the ground.

Existing grade means the vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.

Fill or filling means the placing of any soil, earth, sand, rock, gravel or other substance on the ground. Finished grade means the final grade or elevation of the ground surface conforming to the proposed design. Grading means any excavating or filling or combination thereof.
 

Grassed waterway means a natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct surface water from a field, diversion or other site features.

Ground means and includes, but shall not be limited to, the banks and beds of any river or waterway. (Code 1982, § 7-132; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 7-27-1993)

Sec. 12-327. - Penalties.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Violations of any provisions of this article by any person shall be punishable as provided under s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 , and the director of public works shall immediately issue a stop work order for any such violations.
The director of public works has the right, at his discretion and upon documentation of violations, to revoke a grading permit issued hereunder, for repeated or serious violations of this article and to refuse to issue a new grading permit to the owner or operator/contractor involved in such violation.
 
(Code 1982, § 7-143; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 7-27-1993)


Sec. 12-328. - Permit required.

No grading, excavating or filling shall be commenced in the city except as hereinafter provided, without first obtaining from the director of public works a grading permit.

(Code 1982, § 7-133; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 7-27-1993)


Sec. 12-329. - Permit exceptions.

 
(a)
 
Exempted grading operation classes. No grading permit shall be required for the following classes of grading operations:
 

(1)


(2)



(3)





(4)


(5)
 

Building permit. Under provisions of a duly issued building permit where no grading is involved, except excavation for the basement or footings and the backfilling thereof, and there is no filling in excess of 100 cubic yards per acre.
Incidental excavations, grading or filling. Excavation and removal of excavated material, and filling, shall be permitted provided such operation is clearly incidental to the improvement of the property, consists of not more than 15 cubic yards of material, and the area is graded and covered by revegetation or other suitable means immediately thereafter.
Excavation for streets and drains. Necessary grading or removal or excavation of soil or other material shall be permitted within the limits of the right-of-way or slope rights of any existing street, or for the purpose of constructing streets and other related improvements within the area of new subdivisions when made in accordance with approved subdivision plans and for which the appropriate permits have been issued for street and drain construction.
Other construction work. Construction work relating to drains, utilities or sanitary sewer systems in a public street or right-of-way for which an excavation or other necessary permit has been issued by the city.
Farming. The provisions of this article shall not be construed as prohibiting or limiting the lawful use of land for farming, nurseries or gardening, or similar agricultural or horticultural use whenever there is substantial compliance with recommendations or standards of the local soil conservation authority.
 
(b)
 
Grading, filling and excavating subject to permit and plan. Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, all grading, filling or excavating that causes a change in the amount or direction of flow of water shall require a grading permit and shall also require plans bearing a seal of a licensed engineer under s e c t i o n 1 2 - 3 3 1 (1).
 
(Code 1982, § 7-134; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 7-27-1993)


Sec. 12-330. - Commercial operation prohibited.

The provisions of this article are intended to allow grading that is incidental to and necessary to the construction or operation of use permitted by the zoning ordinance of the city and shall not be construed as permitting the applicant to carry on any commercial operations or business or use any premises or buildings or structures thereon for any purpose not permitted by c h a p t e r 5 6 , zoning.

(Code 1982, § 7-135; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 7-27-1993)


Sec. 12-331. - Application procedure.

Application for a grading permit shall be made by the property owner or his authorized agent, and shall be made to the director of public works on forms provided by the city. An application form in duplicate shall be accompanied by a detailed statement of proposed grading, filling or excavating and the purpose thereof. An application shall be accompanied by the following:
 

(1)
 

Two sets of maps and plans with specifications showing proposed excavation, grading or filling. Such plans shall be prepared by and shall
 

bear the seal of a licensed engineer or architect, except when the engineering design for excavation or construction is unnecessary to ensure compliance with the standards established by this regulation, in which event such plans may be prepared by a licensed surveyor. All such plans shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, and shall show the following:
a.	Full name and address of owner of property;

b.	Designation of property by street address;

c.	The location of the premises and its geographic relation to neighboring properties showing all buildings and roads within 100 feet of the boundaries of the plot on which the excavation, grading or filling is proposed;
d.	The portion of the property that is to be excavated, graded or filled;

e.	The estimated maximum quantity of material to be excavated, graded or filled, and the estimated part thereof that will be used for grading or filling;
f.	The location of all utilities, including, but not limited to, overhead utility poles with locations and elevations of power lines shown, a sewage disposal system or underground utility line, any part of which is within 50 feet of the proposed excavation, grading or filling area, and the location of any gas transmission pipe line operated at a maximum service pressure in excess of 200 psi, any part of which is within 100 feet of the proposed excavation, grading or filling area;
g.	Existing topography and grade of the premises at a contour interval of not more than two feet and the proposed final contour and finished grade elevation at intervals of not more than two feet, except that whenever the existing grade is extremely steep and hilly, the contour intervals may be not more than five feet if approval is first secured from the director of public works;
h.	The location and present status of any previous permitted grading operations on the property within the previous five years of the present permit application date;
i.	The details of any current and proposed drainage system to be installed and maintained by the applicant, designed to provide for proper surface drainage for land, both during the performance of the work applied for and after the completion thereof;
j.	If the proposed excavation or filling is for the purpose of constructing a lake or pond, the details of the proposed dam or other structures and the embankments intended to impound the water, together with the details and locations of the proposed discharge to a valved outlet for drainage purposes, and the proposed level of any impounded water;
k.	Details of soil preparation and of revegetation of the finished grade or of other methods of soil erosion control;

l.	The proposed truck and equipment accessways to the work site;

m.	The flow lines of surface water drainage, streams, and any existing farm drains, inlets and outfalls, springs, or other flowing wells, and width of stream beds or flowage lines;
n.	A comprehensive drainage plan designed to handle safely the surface water, streams or other natural drains following heavy rain storms during grading operations;
o.	Proposed debris basins, grass waterways and diversions;

p.	A statement from the property owner or his agent assuming full responsibility for the performance of the operation as stated in the application; this statement shall also contain an assurance that all city property or city roads will be adequately protected.
 
(2)





(3)

(4)
 
For excavations, grading or filling of more than 3,000 cubic yards of material, a performance bond in form and with surety approved by the director of public works in such amount as he shall deem sufficient to ensure completion of all work following excavation, grading or filling pursuant to the conditions of approval; provided the city may accept a letter of credit, a certified bank officer's check or other surety from a bank or financial institution in lieu of a bond.
The permit fee shall be $50.00, not including inspection fees.

The applicant shall submit with the application a statement showing estimated time schedules for completion of rough grading, finished grading and revegetation.
 

(Code 1982, § 7-136; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 7-27-1993)


Sec. 12-332. - Issuance of permit.

 
(a)
 
The director of public works shall establish the amount of the performance bond, if any, and if the application and plans comply with the standards contained in this article, he shall issue a permit in accordance therewith. In acting upon such application and plans, the director of public works shall be guided by and shall take into consideration the public health, safety and general welfare and particular consideration shall be given as to whether the plan will create any of the following conditions:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Interfere with surface water flow and drainage; Interfere with lateral supports and slopes;
Cause excessive erosion, alteration of the natural topography and grade of land, depletion of natural deposits of topsoil and other natural materials, disturbance of the plant and wildlife, creation of nuisance, or dangerous open pits and creation of stagnant water pools.
 
(b)
 
The director of public works shall not grant a permit for any excavation which does not comply with the standards, requirements and provisions
 

of this article and shall have the power to issue orders to stop any grading, filling or excavation work being done in violation of this article, or in violation of the terms of any permit issued hereunder. The director of public works may impose such conditions or requirements upon the issuance of a permit as he deems necessary or proper to ensure faithful compliance with this article.
(Code 1982, § 7-137; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 7-27-1993)


Sec. 12-333. - Permit expiration.

A permit issued under this article shall expire six months from the date of issuance, except that the director of public works may, for due cause shown, extend any permit for six-month periods after complete review of all plans and examination of work accomplished and proposed; provided, application is made at least 30 days prior to the expiration date of such permit. In no case shall a permit be extended if the provisions of this regulation have not been complied with; provided, however, that in connection with continuing operations, the director of public works may waive, for a six-month period, those requirements which would make continuing operations impractical.

(Code 1982, § 7-138; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 7-27-1993)


Sec. 12-334. - Approval of plans.

Approval of plans and specifications for excavation shall be based upon the following standards:

 
(1)





(2)



(3)


(4)






(5)












(6)





(7)

(8)
 
All excavations, grading or filling shall have a finished grade not to exceed three to one (3:1), except that embankments less than three feet in height shall be exempt if properly mulched and seeded. Steeper grades may be allowed, at the discretion of the director of public works, if the excavation is through rock or the excavation or fill protected by a properly designed head wall or toe wall approved by the director of public works. If such walls exceed a height of six feet, a protective fence or barrier shall be required.
Grading plans for more than one acre of soil shall provide for sediment basins, diversions, grass waterways, mulching and seeding, whenever necessary to avoid damage to adjoining properties, city rights-of-way, ditches and storm sewers, and in accordance with the requirements of the state department of natural resources.
Time schedules for grading operations shall be categorized as six months or less, 12 months or less, and 12 months or more, depending upon the amount of time that the soil shall be exposed or subjected to erosion under normal weather conditions for the season.
Truck and equipment accessways to the site of the operation shall be located so as to minimize danger to traffic and nuisance to surrounding properties. Such access shall be kept wet or oiled, or treated with a chemical dust deterrent, or paved to the extent necessary to prevent any dust nuisance to surrounding properties. All such access ways shall be posted approximately 200 feet distant from such accessways or other traveled areas. Such signs shall read "Caution: Trucks entering" and be of size, type, coloring, lettering and format used by the street department of the city. Debris, soil and other materials shall be removed daily from public streets and sidewalks.
The finished grade shall provide that surface water is from drainage areas in excess of two acres and that crosses grades steeper than eight to one (8:1) shall be intercepted with diversions and lowered to a stable outlet constructed with concrete flumes or pipe. The adjoining ground to the concerned plot shall be provided with protection from accelerated and increased surface water, silt from erosion, and any other consequences of erosion or the change in flow or direction of water. Where it is necessary for the protection of such property, to enter upon private property for such purposes of taking appropriate protecting measures, the applicant shall obtain consent from the owner of such private property for such purpose, and if he cannot obtain such consent, the city may, but shall not be obligated to take appropriate legal steps including eminent domain, to allow entry upon the private premises for the purpose of making the property safe or
controlling a watercourse. The applicant shall, at his own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the grading, and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from his failure to properly protect and carry out such grading.
All lots shall be seeded and mulched or sodded within ten days after completion of the work or expiration of the permit, whichever occurs first; and all lots shall be seeded and mulched or sodded before an occupancy permit shall be issued except that an occupancy or conditional occupancy permit may be issued by the building commissioner in cases of undue hardship because of unfavorable ground conditions or seasonal conditions.
Protective devices will be used to protect tree trunks from being scarred by machinery and building materials. Wells or revetments will be constructed around trees where the grade is made higher or lower, respectively.
 

(Code 1982, § 7-139; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 7-27-1993)


Sec. 12-335. - Operations.

All grading operations shall be restricted as follows:

 
(1)
 
Processing of any kind on the excavation site or the erection or use of any structure thereon, such as, but not limited to, hoppers, washers, crushers or sheds, except simple screens to remove oversize aggregates during loading, shall be deemed a commercial use and are hereby prohibited except upon the issuance of a special permit by the director of public works.
 
connection with an excavation, grading or filling operation, except that, under a duly issued permit, an owner or his contractor shall not be allowed temporarily to store such material incidental to the operation, but such storage shall not be for a longer term than the term of the permit issued.
 
(3)





(4)
 
It shall be unlawful to keep or store any trucks, machinery or equipment on any city right-of-way without issuance of a special use permit from the director of public works. All such trucks, machinery or equipment shall be removed from such property within ten days after completion of the work or expiration of the permit, whichever occurs first. Any such equipment stored on private property must also be removed within the ten-day time frame.
The applicant shall notify the director of public works of the following, when and as completed:
 

a.	Rough grading;

b.	Finished grading before seeding;

c.	All reestablishment and construction work.

The director of public works, upon such notification, shall make field inspections on the site before rough grading, after final grading, before seeding and at completion to determine if work in progress and the completed operation have been performed in accordance with this article.
 

(5)
 

All pits, quarries, holes or other excavated areas shall be refilled with, and no new filling operation shall be conducted with any material except clear, nonburnable fill containing no trash, refuse or harmful matter; and such excavated areas and new filling operations shall be graded to the level of adjoining property or to an elevation from which all surface and other waters collected therein may find natural drainage therefrom.
 
(6)	a.




b.
 
Stumps and roots in cut areas shall be grubbed to a depth of not less than 12 inches below the finished earth grade. Grubbing of Osage orange or locust hedge shall include removal of roots. Stumps and roots shall not be placed as fill under any presently proposed or future structure but may be used for fill material in open areas only when a minimum of three feet below the finished earth grade. Excess material shall either be removed from the premises or leveled and covered with topsoil and seed, as herein provided.
Any burning requires a permit or official approval letter from the state department of natural resources and the county air, land, and water department. When burning is permissible, all burning of products of clearing and grubbing shall be done under the care of a competent watchman at such times and in such manner that neither vegetation on adjacent property nor that designated to remain on the lot shall be jeopardized.
 
(7)


(8)
 
It shall be unlawful to change, modify, abolish or alter any of the debris basins, grass waterways, diversions, and other soil erosion control structures as permitted in a grading permit, except with the prior consent and written approval of the director of public works.
Gullies which may develop due to erosion which have a depth or width of more than nine inches shall be repaired and reseeded or resodded.
 

(Code 1982, § 7-140; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 7-27-1993)


Sec. 12-336. - Inspections.

By applying for a grading permit, the applicant consents to the city inspection of the proposed graded plot and all work in process until such time as the project is completed and signed off by the director of public works or his designated official.

(Code 1982, § 7-141; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 7-27-1993)


Sec. 12-337. - Corrections.

All violations shall be corrected within the time limit set forth by the director of public works specified in the issuance of a written notice to correct. All persons failing to comply with such notice shall be deemed in violation of this article, and shall be issued a stop work order until such time as the violations are corrected to the satisfaction of the director of public works. Additionally, violations of this article may be remedied in the manner provided by s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 .

(Code 1982, § 7-142; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 7-27-1993)


Sec. 12-338. - Appeals.

Any person denied a grading permit and alleging an error in the application or interpretation of this article shall have the right, within 30 days of the date of such denial, to appeal such denial to the board of adjustment in the same manner as provided for in c h a p t e r 5 6 , article IV, division 7, subdivision II for appeals of decisions of the zoning administrator.

(Code 1982, § 7-144; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 7-27-1993)


Secs. 12-339—12-364. - Reserved.
 


ARTICLE X. - ELECTRICITY


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 12-365. - Electrical code adopted.

The National Electrical Code, 2008 edition, with amendments, as adopted by St. Louis County Ordinance No. 24,439 on July 14, 2010, effective November 1, 2010, is hereby adopted as the electrical code of the city as if fully set out herein.

(Code 1982, § 10-16; Ord. No. 3907, § 1, 10-10-1977; Ord. No. 4094, § 1, 6-9-1981; Ord. No. 4231, § 1, 8-27-1985; Ord. No. 4438, § 1, 2-27-1990; Ord. No. 4681, § 1,
3-14-1995; Ord. No. 4957, § I, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 5136, § I, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 5356, § I, 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 5584, § I, 10-26-2010)


Secs. 12-366—12-388. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND INSPECTION



Sec. 12-389. - Permit required.

 
(a)



(b)



(c)
 
Every person engaging in the erection, construction, installation, alteration or extension of any electrical apparatus, device, fixture, attachment, wire or wiring to be operated or used in connection with any electric current or power or plant, and requiring for its use and operation electric current or power, shall pay in advance all permit and inspection fees required under this article.
No alteration or change shall be made in the wiring of any building, nor shall any building be wired for the placing of electric lights, motors or hearing devices without first securing a permit therefor, nor shall any change be made in the electrical wiring or apparatus after inspection without first notifying the electrical inspector and securing a permit.
The electrical inspector shall disconnect any electrical service where any installation or alteration has been made in the electrical service without the securing of a permit.
 
(Code 1972, § 1001.02; Code 1982, § 10-29)


Sec. 12-390. - Inspections.

 
(a)






(b)
 
Upon the completion of the wiring of any building, the person doing the work shall notify the electrical inspector. Within 24 hours after notification, the electrical inspector shall inspect the work and, if he approves it, issue a certificate of satisfactory inspection, which certificate shall contain the date of its issuance and inspection, an outline of the result of the inspection, and a statement that all apparatus, fixtures and wires connected with it are in strict conformity to the standards set forth in the city's electrical code. No current shall be turned on until such certificate is issued.
The electrical inspector shall have the authority to enter any building, manhole or subway in the city in the discharge of his duties or for the purpose of making any test of the electrical apparatus. If the electrical inspector has probable cause to believe that there exists a violation of this article in any building to which he is denied access, he may obtain a warrant from any magistrate or other person authorized to issue warrants.
 
(Code 1972, § 1001.03; Code 1982, § 10-30)


Secs. 12-391—12-408. - Reserved.


ARTICLE XI. - PLUMBING



Sec. 12-409. - Plumbing code adopted.

The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2009 edition, with amendments, as adopted by St. Louis County Ordinance No. 24,441 on July 14, 2010, effective November 1, 2010, is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the city as if fully set out herein.

(Code 1982, § 25-16; Ord. No. 3907, § 1, 10-10-1977; Ord. No. 4094, § 1, 6-9-1981; Ord. No. 4232, § 1, 8-27-1985; Ord. No. 4440, § 1, 2-27-1990; Ord. No. 4629, § 1,
10-12-1993; Ord. No. 4855, § I, 10-27-1998; Ord. No. 4990, § I, 5-22-2001; Ord. No. 5277, § 1, 8-9-2005; Ord. No. 5585, § I, 10-26-2010)


Secs. 12-410—12-431. - Reserved.


ARTICLE XII. - ALARM SYSTEMS
 



Sec. 12-432. - Applicability of article.

This article shall apply to the operation of all alarm systems designed to summon the police, fire or emergency medical service that have been or will be installed in all commercial, institutional and residential structures or premises in the city as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived.

(Code 1982, § 7-145; Ord. No. 4979, § I, 3-13-2001)


Sec. 12-433. - Installation by licensed installer.

Any alarm business or installation representative installing an alarm system in the city shall be licensed and bonded and have obtained an installation permit, when applicable, in compliance with the ordinances of the county, and shall have obtained a contractor's license with the city.

(Code 1982, § 7-146; Ord. No. 4979, § I, 3-13-2001)


Sec. 12-434. - Automatic dialing devices prohibited.

No person shall install or use an automatic dialing device that is programmed to dial the telephone number of the police, fire or emergency medical service dispatching center of the city to transmit a prerecorded message. Any owner or person having control over a structure or premises previously equipped with an automatic dialing device shall have the alarm system modified so that it connects to the telephone number of a designated person who may relay the emergency message to the dispatching center by live voice.

(Code 1982, § 7-147; Ord. No. 4979, § I, 3-13-2001)


Sec. 12-435. - Audible alarms to terminate automatically.

Alarm systems designed to emit an audible alarm capable of being heard outside the structure shall be equipped to automatically terminate any audible sound within ten minutes of activation.

(Code 1982, § 7-148; Ord. No. 4979, § I, 3-13-2001)


Sec. 12-436. - Authority to inspect.

The director of public works, chief of police or the fire chief, or their designated representative, shall have the authority, at reasonable times and upon reasonable oral notice, to enter any structure or premises in the city to inspect the installation or operation of an alarm system.

(Code 1982, § 7-149; Ord. No. 4979, § I, 3-13-2001)


Sec. 12-437. - False alarms.

 
(a)
 
A false alarm shall be defined as an intentional, negligent, inadvertent or unintentional activation of an alarm system to summon the police, fire or emergency medical service, including an alarm activated by the malfunction of the alarm system, wherein an emergency situation does not exist, with the exception of an alarm resulting from one of the following causes:
 
(1)

(2)


(3)

(4)
 
Alarms caused by an attempted illegal or unauthorized entry of which there is visible or demonstrated evidence;

Alarms caused by damage, testing or repair of the means of transmission, provided that such alarms are promptly reported to the business providing said means of transmission;
Alarms caused by acts over which the user has no control, such as earthquakes, windstorm, or similar violent weather conditions;

Alarms followed by an immediate telephone notification to the police, fire and emergency medical service dispatching center to cancel the service request.
 
(b)
 
The chief of police shall administer regulations for false alarms for police, fire or emergency medical service in the city. The following regulations and fees for service are established:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
 
For the first two false alarms, a written warning notification shall be made; For the third false alarm, a fee of $30.00 shall be charged;
For the fourth false alarm, a fee of $40.00 shall be charged;

For the fifth and any subsequent false alarm, a fee of $50.00 shall be charged.
 

(c)

(d)

(e)
 

The number of false alarms shall be calculated on an annual basis, beginning each year on January 1. All fees for service shall be paid to the city clerk.
All fees not remitted to the city after two notices shall be subject to the following provisions:
 

(1)


(2)
 

For premises used for business or institutional purposes, the license for said activity shall be subject to revocation in accordance with provisio of licenses as set forth in c h a p t e r 1 4 .
For premises used for residential purposes, a special tax bill against the property shall be prepared and issued by the city clerk. If unpaid, the special tax bill shall accrue interest at a rate of nine percent after 30 days. If unpaid, the special tax bill shall be filed as a lien on the property.
 
(Code 1982, § 7-150; Ord. No. 4979, § I, 3-13-2001)


Secs. 12-438—12-457. - Reserved.


ARTICLE XIII. - BOARD OF APPEALS



Sec. 12-458. - Creation; appointment; terms.

There shall be a housing board of appeals consisting of five members who are freeholders of the city and who are appointed by the mayor for terms of three years with the approval of the city council.

(Code 1972, § 803.19(A); Code 1982, § 16-16; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981)


Sec. 12-459. - Persons eligible for appointment.

No person who is an employee of the city or who holds an elective office of the city shall be eligible to serve as a member of the housing board of appeals. (Code 1972, § 803.19(A)(1); Code 1982, § 16-17; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4051, § 1, 7-8-1980; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981)

Sec. 12-460. - Removal of members.

Any member of the housing board of appeals may be removed by the city council for cause upon written charges and after a public hearing. (Code 1972, § 803.19(A)(3); Code 1982, § 16-18; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981)

Sec. 12-461. - Organization.

The housing board of appeals shall elect its own chairperson and vice-chairperson who shall serve for one year. (Code 1972, § 803.19(A)(4); Code 1982, § 16-19; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981)

Sec. 12-462. - Presiding ofcer; quorum.

The chairperson of the housing board of appeals, or in his absence the vice-chairperson, shall preside at all meetings. Four members present shall constitute a quorum. All rulings of the board shall be upon a majority vote of all members present.

(Code 1972, § 803.19(A)(5); Code 1982, § 16-20; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981)


Sec. 12-463. - Meetings to be public.

All meetings of the housing board of appeals shall be open to the public and all records of its proceedings shall be public records. (Code 1972, § 803.19(B); Code 1982, § 16-21; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981)

Sec. 12-464. - Jurisdiction and authority re appeals.

 
(a)





(b)


(c)


(d)
 
The housing board of appeals shall fairly hear and adjudicate all appeals brought before it and shall render its decision so as to substantially preserve the intent of this chapter and all city building and zoning regulations. The board shall have the power to sustain, rescind or modify any order of the director of public works or his designated representative and to extend any period of time allowed for compliance. The decision of the board shall be final and binding on all parties unless appealed to the circuit court of the county.
Appeals shall be commenced by the filing of a notice of appeal by the aggrieved party with the director of public works or his designated representative. Such notice shall be in writing and shall state the grounds for appeal with specificity.
The board shall fix a time for hearing the appeal within 30 days; provided, however, that the board may extend the time for hearing upon the reasonable request of either party.
A bond of $10.00 shall be posted upon filing of notice of appeal. The bond shall be redeemed to the appellant at the conclusion of the hearing and rendering of the board's decision.
 

(e)


(f)


(g)


(h)
 

No fee or costs shall be charged the appellant unless the board shall determine that the appeal was taken for vexation or delay. In such event, the a shall be ordered forfeited and paid over to the city treasurer.
Upon filing of a notice of appeal, all orders and decisions of the director of public works or his designated representative are stayed until the board shall render its decision.
If no notice of appeal is filed within 30 days, the order of the director of public works or his designated representative shall become final unless the aggrieved party shall appeal to the circuit court of the county.
All parties shall have the right to appear in person or by agent and to be represented by counsel. All parties shall have the right to present evidence and testimony bearing upon the issues.
 
(Code 1972, § 803.19(C); Code 1982, § 16-22; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 1-24-1984)


Sec. 12-465. - Appeal from board's decisions.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)

(d)







(e)
 
Any person aggrieved, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city, may present to the circuit court of the county a petition in proper form and verified, for a writ of certiorari to the board to test the legality in whole or in part of the order or decision of the board.
The petition may be presented to the circuit court no later than 30 days after the board's decision is filed. The return to the writ of certiorari shall be required within a period of not less than ten days and may be extended by the court.
The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings under the decision of the board unless the court grants a restraining order.

The board shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified. If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take additional evidence or appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court with his findings of fact and conclusions of law which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review.
Costs shall not be allowed against the board unless it shall appear to the court that it acted with gross negligence, or in bad faith, or with malice in making the decision appealed from. All issues in any proceedings under this section shall have preference over all other civil actions and proceedings.
 
(Code 1972, § 803.19(D); Code 1982, § 16-23; Ord. No. 3784, § 2, 11-14-1974; Ord. No. 4090, § 2, 5-26-1981)


Chapter 14 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING GENERALLY


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 14-19. - License—Required; issuance.

No person shall engage in any business, occupation, profession, vocation, activity or thing whatsoever that is subject to the provisions of this division unless he has a valid license which shall be issued to that person upon application to the city clerk and the payment of the license fee set forth in this division if the city clerk believes that the applicant has complied with all ordinances governing the issuance of a license.

(Code 1972, § 605.01; Code 1982, § 18-16; Ord. No. 4425, § I, 1-9-1990)


Sec. 14-20. - Same—Applications.

Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, application for licenses shall be made to the city clerk. The application shall state:

 
(1)


(2)

(3)
 
The name, age and address of the applicant; or if the applicant is a partnership, the name, age and address of each partner; or if the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of each officer of the corporation;
The name and address of the place of business for which the license is sought; and Such other information as is required to conform to the provisions of this article.
 

(Code 1972, § 602.01; Code 1982, § 18-1; Ord. No. 3751, § 1, 10-24-1973; Ord. No. 4044, § 1, 10-9-1979; Ord. No. 4323, § 1, 9-22-1987; Ord. No. 4491, §§ 1—4, 4-
23-1991; Ord. No. 4543, §§ 1, 2, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 4581, §§ 1, 2, 2-23-1993)


Sec. 14-21. - Fees.

 
(a)






























(b)
 
The fees for licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall be:






























All businesses, occupations, professions, vocations, activities or things whatsoever, except those excluded by subsection (c) of this section, that may be the object of licensing, taxing or regulation under  s e c t i o n  1 3 . 1  (or any successor provision) of the Charter of the city, including home occupations as defined in  c h a p t e r  5 6 , zoning, or similar home businesses, shall be assessed according to the gross square footage of any portion of any building used in connection with such business operation as follows:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
 
Licensees with total square feet of 0—500 shall pay a minimum license fee of $75.00 or $0.25 per square foot, whichever fee is greater. Licensees with total square feet of 501—1,000 shall pay a minimum license fee of $125.00 or $0.20 per square foot, whichever is greater. Licensees with total square feet of 1,001—2,500 shall pay a minimum license fee of $200.00 or $0.15 per square foot, whichever is greater. Licensees with total square feet of 2,501—5,000 shall pay a minimum license fee of $375.00 or $0.10 per square foot, whichever is greater. Licensees with total square feet greater than 5,001 shall pay a minimum license fee of $500.00 or $0.08 per square foot, whichever is
greater.
 

(c)
 

The provisions of this section shall not apply to junk dealers, massage parlors, merchants and manufacturers, pawnbrokers, solid fuel business, penny arcades and amusement centers, peddlers, solicitors, hawkers, hucksters, mobile vendors, vehicles for hire, or refuse haulers, as those entities are defined in this chapter.
 
(Code 1972, § 605.03; Code 1982, § 18-18; Ord. No. 3766, § 1, 3-11-1974; Ord. No. 4116, § 1, 5-25-1982; Ord. No. 4425, § II, 1-9-1990; Ord. No. 5122, § I, 9-9-2003)


Sec. 14-22. - Term of licenses; prorated fees; exceptions; renewals; late iling fees.

 
(a)
 
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, all business licenses shall be valid for a period of one year, beginning July 1 and ending June 30. If application is made for a business license after July 1, the business license fee shall be prorated according to the following schedule:
 

July 1 through September 30	
100 percent of the full year's license fee

October 1 through December 31	
75 percent of the full year's license fee

January 1 through March 31	
50 percent of the full year's license fee

April 1 through June 30	
25 percent of the full year's license fee.
 


No license fee will be refunded. Each license shall be issued for one year and for one business only.

 
(b)



(c)
 
The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to junk dealers, massage parlors, merchants and manufacturers, pawnbrokers, solid fuel business, penny arcades and amusement centers, peddlers, solicitors, hawkers, hucksters, mobile vendors, vehicles for hire, or refuse haulers, as those entities are defined in this chapter.
Renewal license applications not received by the specified time will be required to pay an additional $25.00 as and for a late fee and is not to be included in the regular license fee.
 
(Code 1972, § 602.01; Code 1982, § 18-1; Ord. No. 3751, § 1, 10-24-1973; Ord. No. 4044, § 1, 10-9-1979; Ord. No. 4323, § 1, 9-22-1987; Ord. No. 4491, §§ 1—4, 4-
23-1991; Ord. No. 4543, §§ 1, 2, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 4581, §§ 1, 2, 2-23-1993)


Sec. 14-23. - Prerequisites to issuance of license.

 
(a)



(b)





(c)


(d)
 
Inspections of certain businesses. No new business license will be issued nor can the applicant commence business operations until after city building and fire inspectors, and in cases where food and liquor by the drink are sold the county health inspector, have determined that the place of business meets all city Code and county health requirements.
Approval of zoning administrator. No new business license will be issued nor can the applicant commence business operations until the zoning administrator has determined that the proposed business activity complies with the provisions of c h a p t e r 5 6 . Violators will be subject to a misdemeanor charge of violation of this Code or the city reserves the right to prohibit further business activity until judgment of the municipal court is made as provided by RSMo 144.083.
State sales tax license. Pursuant to RSMo 144.083, no merchant or manufacturer may be granted a city business license without proof of a valid state sales tax license.
Basis for revocation of previous license must be cured. No license that has been revoked shall be reissued until the basis for revocation has been cured.
 
(Code 1972, § 602.01; Code 1982, § 18-1; Ord. No. 3751, § 1, 10-24-1973; Ord. No. 4044, § 1, 10-9-1979; Ord. No. 4323, § 1, 9-22-1987; Ord. No. 4491, §§ 1—4, 4-
23-1991; Ord. No. 4543, §§ 1, 2, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 4581, §§ 1, 2, 2-23-1993)


Sec. 14-24. - Disclosure to purchasers and lessees of city licensing requirements.

 
(a)



(b)

(c)



(d)
 
There is hereby established the requirement for a written disclosure statement by all owners, lessors and sellers to all buyers, lessee's and tenants of property within the city advising such buyers, lessees and tenants of the licensing, inspection, occupancy permits, motor vehicle stickers, and other requirements of the city.
The city will provide the disclosure statements required and make proper distribution.

The disclosure statement must be signed by all parties involved and mailed or delivered to the city at its city hall before any sale, occupancy or conducting of business is accomplished. Upon compliance with all provisions of this Code, the parties may proceed with the transaction warranting such disclosure.
Such disclosure statement is not intended to invade the privacy of any individuals involved but is to ensure that violations of the Code of the city do not occur.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-2; Ord. No. 4010, §§ 1—4, 10-23-1979)


Sec. 14-25. - To be kept in conspicuous place.

A licensee under this article shall keep the license in a conspicuous place so that it may be seen by any police officer or other officer of the city. (Code 1982, § 18-17)

Secs. 14-26—14-53. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - REVOCATION



Sec. 14-54. - Grounds for revocation of business license.

 
(a)
 
In addition to any other revocation procedure contained in this Code, any license issued under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following reasons:
 
(1)
 
Violation of any provision of this Code applicable to the business activity or premises licensed, including causing, maintaining or assisting in the cause or maintenance of a nuisance, whether public or private, provided that the determination of such violation is made in accordance with any specific procedures contained in this Code applicable to determining violations of that provision;
 

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)


(7)
 

Violation of the terms and conditions upon which the license was issued;

Failure of the licensee to pay any license fee or any applicable sales tax arising from the business activity or premises licensed; Illegal or improper issuance of the license;
Any misrepresentation or false statement in the application for such license;

Causing, maintaining or assisting in the cause or maintenance of conduct on or about the licensed premises that is hazardous to the public health, safety or welfare;
Violation of the terms of a conditional use permit.
 

(b)
 

Revocation of any license shall be in addition to any penalty prescribed in this Code.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-146; Ord. No. 4543, § 3, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 4581, § 3, 2-23-1993)


Sec. 14-55. - License revocation procedure.

Upon a complaint made to the city council by the city manager, city clerk or other appropriate city official, stating that cause exists for the revocation of a business license, any business license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the following procedure:
 

(1)

(2)



(3)


(4)
 

The city council shall set a hearing to consider the question of revocation;

At least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, a written notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his last known address as shown in the records of the city clerk or the city manager advising the licensee of the date, time and place of the hearing and reasons for considering revocation of the license;
At the hearing set by the city council, the licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard by the city council and the city council shall consider all evidence relevant to grounds for revocation of the license;
The affirmative vote of a majority of the city council shall be necessary to revoke any license.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-147; Ord. No. 4543, § 4, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 4581, § 4, 2-23-1993)


Sec. 14-56. - Efect of license revocation.

 
(a)



(b)

(c)
 
Immediately upon revocation of any license issued pursuant to any provision of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to continue to engage in the business, occupation or other activity for which that license was issued, and for any officer, director or manager of a corporate licensee or any partner or manager of a partnership licensee to assist or permit such continuation.
A license that has been revoked may not be reissued until the basis for the revocation has been cured.

No revocation of a license issued pursuant to this c h a p t e r 1 8 shall entitle a licensee to a refund of any portion of any fee paid to the city for such license.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-148; Ord. No. 4543, § 5, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 4581, § 4, 2-23-1993)


Secs. 14-57—14-85. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - ADVERTISING


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Secs. 14-86—14-113. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - BILLBOARDS



Sec. 14-114. - License required.

No person, including, but not limited to, any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, organization or any other group or entity, shall construct, operate, maintain, possess, lease or own a billboard (as that term is defined in s e c t i o n 6 - 2 9 ) on any lot without first obtaining a billboard occupation license from the city clerk as provided in this article.

(Code 1982, § 18-269; Ord. No. 4848, § 1, 10-13-1998)


Sec. 14-115. - Application.
 

Any applicant wishing to obtain a billboard occupation license must make written application to the city clerk. Such application must contain the following information:
 

(1)


(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)





(6)
 

The name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of each officer of the corporation; or if the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company or other entity, the name and address of each partner, member or managing agent;
The address or location of the lot on which the billboard is to be constructed, operated and maintained; The location of the billboard on the lot;
The proposed uses for the billboard;

Upon initial application and prior to July 1 of each subsequent year, a statement of the gross annual revenue produced during the applicant's fiscal year immediately preceding July 1 of that year. As used in this article, the term "gross annual revenue" shall mean the aggregate amount of all rents, commissions, fees or other income produced by all billboards owned or placed in the city by the applicant; and
Such other information as the director of public works may reasonably require.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-270; Ord. No. 4848, § 1, 10-13-1998)


Sec. 14-116. - Issuance.

The city clerk shall issue a billboard occupation license upon receipt of a proper written application and when the director of public works has certified that the proposed billboard satisfies the requirements of c h a p t e r 6 , that the applicant has performed all of the obligations imposed by any provision of this Code and that the applicant has paid the first year's annual billboard license fee, as required by s e c t i o n 1 4 - 1 1 7 .

(Code 1982, § 18-271; Ord. No. 4848, § 1, 10-13-1998)


Sec. 14-117. - Fee.

The fee for such billboard occupation license shall be an amount equal to two percent of the gross annual revenue produced during the applicant's fiscal year immediately preceding July 1 of that year. The fee for the first year, or portion thereof (without proration or offset), in which a taxpayer owns a particular billboard shall be payable prior to issuance of the billboard occupation license referred to in s e c t i o n 1 4 - 1 1 4 .

(Code 1982, § 18-272; Ord. No. 4848, § 1, 10-13-1998)


Sec. 14-118. - Renewal and revocation.

Each billboard occupation license shall be valid for the period beginning July 1 of each year and ending on June 30 of the following year. A billboard occupation license may be renewed upon payment of the license fee as required in s e c t i o n 1 4 - 1 1 7 , provided that the billboard is in compliance with all provisions of this Code. The city clerk, the director of public works or the city manager may recommend to the city council revocation of any billboard occupation license, at any time, subject to the procedures of s e c t i o n 1 4 - 5 5 , if a billboard is no longer in compliance with the provisions of c h a p t e r 6 .

(Code 1982, § 18-273; Ord. No. 4848, § 1, 10-13-1998)


Secs. 14-119—14-149. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IV. - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Secs. 14-150—14-166. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - PENNY ARCADES AND AMUSEMENT CENTERS



Sec. 14-167. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Automatic coin-operated amusement machine means any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, token, slug or other insertion device, operates or may be operated as a game or contest of skill or amusement of any kind or description, exclusive of jukeboxes.
 

Penny arcade establishment or amusement center means any establishment which provides five or more automatic coin-operated amusement machines for use or operation by the public.

(Code 1982, § 18-215; Ord. No. 4132, § 1(A), 1-25-1983)


Sec. 14-168. - Violations.

Any person violating any of the terms of this division shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided for violation of city ordinances. (Code 1982, § 18-225; Ord. No. 4132, § 1(K), 1-25-1983)

Sec. 14-169. - Permit required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a penny arcade or amusement center within the city until a permit shall have been obtained in accordance with the provisions of this article.

(Code 1982, § 18-216; Ord. No. 4132, § 1(B), 1-25-1983)


Sec. 14-170. - Application; required information; approval by city personnel.

Any person desiring to engage in the business of operation of a penny arcade or amusement center shall file a verified application for a license with the city clerk on such form as shall be prescribed by him, and containing the name of the proposed operator (if a partnership, the names of all partners, and if a corporation, the names of all officers and shareholders), the proposed location of the business, the number and type of machines to be provided, the names of all proposed employees, and a statement of the business experience of all persons having an interest in the proposed operation and of all proposed employees, and such other information as shall be specified on such application. Said application shall be accompanied by accurately scaled and fully dimensioned plans of the premises, showing the proposed location of the machines. Each such application shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall investigate the character and fitness of the proposed licensee as well as any other persons listed as having an interest in or to be employed by the proposed licensee. The plans attached to each such application shall be referred to the city engineer/building inspector, who shall verify that a special permit authorizing the designated location to be used for such activity has been granted by the city council and that the plans conform with all requirements hereof and with all applicable requirements of the city ordinances.

(Code 1982, § 18-217; Ord. No. 4132, § 1(C), 1-25-1983)


Sec. 14-171. - Grounds for nonissuance.

A license shall not be issued if the applicant, or any parties interested in the proposed business, or any proposed employees have been convicted of any violation of statute or ordinance involving moral turpitude; or have previously had a business license revoked or suspended; or if the application contains any false or misleading statement; or if the premises do not conform with all applicable requirements of the ordinances of the city. Upon receipt of the reports of the chief of police and city engineer/building inspector, the city clerk shall issue or deny the license in accordance with the foregoing standards.

(Code 1982, § 18-218; Ord. No. 4132, § 1(D), 1-25-1983)


Sec. 14-172. - Term; fee, renewal; transferability.

The term of any license issued hereunder shall be for one year. The license fee per machine is $50.00 and the license may be renewed upon payment of such fee. No license issued hereunder shall be transferable.

(Code 1982, § 18-219; Ord. No. 4132, § 1(E), 1-25-1983)


Sec. 14-173. - Revocation; suspension.

A license may, after notice to the licensee and an opportunity for hearing, be revoked or suspended by the city council upon a finding by it that the licensee has violated the requirements of this article and that the public interest requires revocation or suspension.

(Code 1982, § 18-220; Ord. No. 4132, § 1(F), 1-25-1983)


Sec. 14-174. - Employees.

No person shall be employed in a supervisory position in a penny arcade or amusement center who is under the age of 18 years or who has been convicted of any violation of statute or ordinance involving moral turpitude. Prior to employing any person in a supervisory position, the operator shall submit the name  of such person and such other information as may be required to the police chief, who shall determine whether such person has been so convicted and shall notify the operator thereof.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-221; Ord. No. 4132, § 1(G), 1-25-1983)


Sec. 14-175. - Operation requirements.

The operation of a penny arcade or amusement center shall be conducted in accordance with the following:

 
(1)


(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)






(6)





(7)

(8)
 
Hours. The premises shall be closed during the hours between 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on Sundays.
Number of occupants. Occupancy shall not exceed at any time the number of persons established by the fire department.

Security. Security personnel shall be provided at such times as shall be directed by the chief of police of the city.

Orderly manner. The premises shall be maintained at all times in an orderly manner.

Minors. No child under the age of 16 years shall be permitted in the premises without having on his person an identification card issued by the operator, containing his name, age, home address and phone number. No such identification card shall be issued by the operator until he has received the written permission of the parent or legal guardian. The operator shall maintain a permanent record of the names of the parents or legal guardians who have granted such permission and the names of the children for whom they have granted such permission. Such record shall be available for inspection at all times by members of the police department.
Curfew. The operator shall be responsible for observance of the curfew law of the city by any person within his establishment. Every operator shall post in a conspicuous location on the premises one or more placards, containing the limitations hereof as to the presence of minors and further containing the curfew standards of the city, conspicuously painted or written or printed thereon in letters of not less than one inch in size.
Supervision. There shall be one supervisor on duty at all times the premises are open to the public.

Beverages. No alcoholic beverages are permitted on the premises.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-222; Ord. No. 4132, § 1(H), 1-25-1983)


Sec. 14-176. - Maximum licenses permitted; number of facilities and machines.

 
(a)

(b)
 
The maximum number of licenses issued under this section shall be two licenses. The maximum number of machines permitted shall be 20 machines.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-223; Ord. No. 4132, § 1(I), 1-25-1983)


Sec. 14-177. - Nonapplicability of article provisions.

The provisions hereof shall not apply to any person having set up in his private residence one or more automatic coin-operated amusement machines when used for his own private use or for the use of his family, nor to clubs where automatic coin-operated amusement machines are used exclusively by club members and upon which no charge for playing is made.

(Code 1982, § 18-224; Ord. No. 4132, § 1(J), 1-25-1983)


Secs. 14-178—14-207. - Reserved.


ARTICLE V. - BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Secs. 14-208—14-237. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS



Sec. 14-238. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Construction contractor.

 
(1)
 
The term "construction contractor" means any person conducting or managing a business to, or who purports to have the capacity to undertake to, or submits bids to, or does himself, or by or through others, construct, alter, repair, add to, improve, move, remove, install any
 

equipment used to operate or maintain, excavate, or demolish any building, structure, scaffold, pavement, or utility, whether on grade or below grade.
 
(2)
 
Any person engaged as follows shall not be considered a "construction contractor" as that term is defined in subsection (1) of this definition:
 

a.	A person who performs labor or services for a contractor for wages or salary.

b.	An employee of the owner of the property, structure or utility.

c.	The owner of the building, property, structure or utility.

d.	A subcontractor of a contractor with whom the parties have an agreement, whether written or verbal, to perform work at the property, structure or utility.

(Code 1982, § 18-56; Ord. No. 5161, § I, 3-23-2004)


Sec. 14-239. - License—Required.

It shall be unlawful to engage in business in the city as a construction contractor or perform work as a construction contractor, or act in any other manner as a construction contractor as defined herein without first having obtained a license therefor as provided in this article. Every construction contractor shall obtain a construction contractor's license prior to engaging in any work as construction contractor within the city. Engaging in the construction, as defined herein, of any building, structure, pavement or utility in the city shall be construed as doing business as a construction contractor in the city.

(Code 1982, § 18-57; Ord. No. 5161, § I, 3-23-2004)


Sec. 14-240. - Same—Applications; term; renewal.

The regulations for license applications, the term of licenses and license renewals shall be the same as set forth in article II, division 1 of this chapter. (Code 1982, § 18-58; Ord. No. 5161, § I, 3-23-2004)

Sec. 14-241. - Same—Fee.

The fee for a construction contractor's license shall be $75.00. (Code 1982, § 18-59; Ord. No. 5161, § I, 3-23-2004)

Sec. 14-242. - Insurance required.

 
(a)



(b)
 
Every construction contractor seeking to obtain a construction contractor's license from the city shall present to the city clerk, in addition to those items required in article II, division 1 of this chapter, evidence satisfactory to the city clerk that employees of the applicant are covered by workers compensation and employers' liability insurance.
The city clerk shall establish insurance coverage limits based on industry standards.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-60; Ord. No. 5161, § I, 3-23-2004)


Sec. 14-243. - Suspension.

 
(a)
 
The city manager, director of public works, or designees of the city manager or the director of public works shall have the authority to suspend a construction contractor's license for a period of time not to exceed the duration of the construction contractor's current license period for the following reasons:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Performing construction work without a building permit, if applicable; Failure to perform work in a workmanlike manner; or
Failure to maintain insurance as required herein during the duration of the license period.
 

(b)
 

While the construction contractor's license is suspended, no work, other than work to make the structure or site safe or secure, or to remove debris from the site, may occur. The suspension shall be lifted by the city manager, director of public works, or designees of the city manager or director of public works if the matter for which the license was suspended has been corrected to the satisfaction of the city.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-61; Ord. No. 5161, § I, 3-23-2004)


Sec. 14-244. - License revocation.

A construction contractor's license may be revoked by application of the procedures set forth in article II, division 2 of this chapter. (Code 1982, § 18-62; Ord. No. 5161, § I, 3-23-2004)

Secs. 14-245—14-266. - Reserved.
 

ARTICLE VI. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Secs. 14-267—14-295. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS



Sec. 14-296. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Drive-in restaurant means any establishment where food or beverage of any kind is sold for consumption in motor vehicles parked upon the premises, or in any place on the premises outside the building where the food or beverage is prepared.

Waste material means paper cups, straws, napkins, garbage, beverages and other waste matter intended for disposal which, if not placed in a proper receptacle, tends to render the premises unsightly, unclean or unsafe.

(Code 1972, § 602.08(A); Code 1982, § 13-16)


Sec. 14-297. - License—Required.

No person shall construct, operate or maintain a drive-in restaurant in the city without having a valid license. (Code 1972, § 602.08(B); Code 1982, § 13-17)

Sec. 14-298. - Same—Applications.

 
(a)
 
Applications for the license required by s e c t i o n 1 4 - 2 9 7 shall be made to the city clerk upon forms prepared at the direction of the city council. The applicant shall include the following information:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
 
The name, home address and business address or proposed business address of the applicant; The number of motor vehicles to be accommodated at the proposed drive-in restaurant;
The hours of operation of the proposed drive-in restaurant;

Such other information relevant to determining whether the provisions of this section have been or will be complied with.
 

(b)
 

The application shall be accompanied with:
 

(1)


(2)

(3)
 

A plat or drawing of the proposed drive-in restaurant showing its location, size and capacity, the location and size of its entrances and exits, the kind of ground surface, the location, size and construction of all structures, and the location, size and construction of surrounding walls;
An application fee of $100.00;

A bond approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by a bonding or surety company approved by the city council, in the sum of
$1,000.00, conditioned upon the payment of any judgments for injury or damage resulting to persons or property arising out of the operation or maintenance of the drive-in restaurant. The bond shall run to the city for the benefit of persons who may claim redress for
such damage or injury. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for the full period of the license. In lieu of such bond, the applicant may submit a liability insurance policy issued by an insurer authorized to do business in the state that conforms to the requirements for a bond.
 
(Code 1972, § 602.08(B)(1), (2); Code 1982, § 13-18)


Sec. 14-299. - Same—Issuance upon certain indings.

The city council shall require the issuance of a license required by  s e c t i o n  1 4 - 2 9 7  upon finding:

 
(1)

(2)


(3)


(4)
 
That there is no apparent danger to the health, morals or safety of the people of the city;

That the applicant, its officers or agents are morally responsible and have a good reputation, and that they are capable of operating the proposed drive-in restaurant in a manner consistent with the public health, morals and safety;
That the conduct of the drive-in restaurant during the hours for which application is made will not result in the violation of any ordinance or law and will not cause disturbance of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood;
That the bond or insurance policy required in this article has been obtained;
 

(5)
 

That the requirements of this article and of other relevant laws and ordinances have been met.
 

(Code 1972, § 602.08(B)(3); Code 1982, § 13-19)


Sec. 14-300. - Same—Payment of license tax prerequisite to issuance.

As a prerequisite to the issuance of the license required by this article, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk an amount payable by him as a license tax for a merchant's license.

(Code 1972, § 602.08(B)(4); Code 1982, § 13-20)


Sec. 14-301. - Same—Revocation or suspension.

 
(a)





(b)

(c)
 
The license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked or suspended by the city council if it is determined, after a hearing of which due notice was given to the licensee, and at which the licensee had a full and fair opportunity to defend, that the licensee is operating the drive-in restaurant in violation of any law or ordinance, or in such a way as to constitute a nuisance by reason of noise, disorderly conduct or immoral activity on the premises.
Such notice shall contain the specific grounds upon which the revocation or suspension is to be based.

Such notice shall be served in the manner in which service of process is allowed under the laws of the state.
 

(Code 1972, § 602.08(B)(5); Code 1982, § 13-21)


Sec. 14-302. - Maintenance of premises.

The premises of a drive-in restaurant shall conform to the following requirements:

 
(1)



(2)


(3)


(4)
 
The licensee shall provide access available to public streets or other public ways from at least two points at all times. Such means of access shall be kept clear by the licensee at all times to facilitate departure of persons in motor vehicles and to permit entrance of fire apparatus or ambulances in case of an emergency.
The parking area of any drive-in restaurant shall be adequately illuminated by electric lights, but such illumination shall be so arranged by the licensee as to reflect away from any adjoining residential property.
The parking area on the premises of a drive-in restaurant shall be satisfactorily paved or treated by the licensee so as to avoid creating dust and so as to provide for adequate drainage of surface water.
The licensee of a drive-in restaurant shall provide a wall or fence of adequate height to screen the patrons and motor vehicles on the premises from the view of the surrounding property. Such fence or wall shall be of design and structure approved by the city engineer. The perimeter of that fence or wall shall be landscaped by the licensee with suitable plants and shrubbery to preserve, as far as possible, harmony with the appearance of the surrounding property.
 

(Code 1972, § 602.08(C); Code 1982, § 13-22)


Sec. 14-303. - Sanitary regulations.

The following regulations shall be observed and enforced:

 
(1)



(2)



(3)
 
The sale of food, frozen desserts, beverages, candy and other products from a window or other openings in a drive-in restaurant shall not be permitted unless such window or openings are at least 30 feet from the property line. Such windows or openings shall not be greater than 30 inches by 30 inches, unless enclosed by a glass or a screen vestibule.
The licensee shall, at least once in 24 hours, dispose of waste materials that tend to create a public nuisance on the premises. The licensee shall keep the premises whereon the drive-in restaurant is located, together with the parking area and that portion of any street or alley adjoining the drive-in restaurant, supplied with a sufficient number of adequate refuse containers.
No person shall place, throw or deposit any waste material upon the outside premises or parking area of a drive-in restaurant or on any street, alley or adjoining property or in the vicinity of a drive-in restaurant, except in adequate receptacles provided for that purpose, nor shall the licensee permit such conduct.
 

(Code 1972, § 602.08(D)(1)—(3); Code 1982, § 13-23)


Sec. 14-304. - Alcoholic beverages.

No person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant, whether in or out of a motor vehicle, shall drink, have in his possession or under his control, or offer to give to another to drink, any beer, wine or intoxicating liquor; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any person when served inside the building by a drive-in restaurant duly licensed to serve such beverages.
 

(Code 1972, § 602.08(D)(4); Code 1982, § 13-24)


Sec. 14-305. - Disorderly conduct.

A licensee under this article shall maintain quiet and good order upon the premises of a drive-in restaurant and shall not permit disorderly or immoral conduct or loitering. The licensee shall not cause or create any noise or other nuisance on the parking area of a drive-in restaurant whereby the quiet and good order of the premises or of the neighborhood is disturbed.

(Code 1972, § 602.08(D)(5); Code 1982, § 13-25)


Sec. 14-306. - Racing of motors, etc.

No person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant shall race the motor of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any motor vehicle, blow any horn, or make or cause to be made any other loud or unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby the quiet and good order of the premises or of the neighborhood disturbed.

(Code 1972, § 602.08(D)(6); Code 1982, § 13-26)


Sec. 14-307. - Applicability of restaurant provisions.

The provisions of  c h a p t e r  2 6  relating to restaurants shall apply to drive-in restaurants, where appropriate. (Code 1972, § 602.08(E); Code 1982, § 13-27)

Secs. 14-308—14-332. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VII. - MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURING



Sec. 14-333. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Gross receipts means the aggregate amount of all sales, transactions, fees, commissions, rental or leasing fees, and shall include the receipt of cash, credits and property of any kind or nature without any deductions therefrom on account of the cost of any items sold, the cost of any materials used, or of any labor, service costs, interest paid or payable, or any losses or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however, that the following shall be excluded from any computations of gross receipts if the books of accounts segregate the amount so as to reflect such exclusions:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

Receipt of taxes levied by state and federal government collected by the seller.

Receipts from sales, goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property for delivery outside the state to nonresidents of the state. Receipts of traded merchandise recorded as cash receipts and resold and recorded as a sale upon resale.
 

Manufacturer means any person who holds or purchases personal property for the purpose of adding to the value thereof by any process of manufacturing or refining, or by a combination of different materials.

Merchant means any person who sells or deals in goods, wares, parts or merchandise at any store, stand, service shop, repair shop or place occupied for that purpose.

(Code 1972, § 603.02; Code 1982, § 18-126; Ord. No. 3763, § 1, 2-25-1974; Ord. No. 4491, § 6, 4-23-1991)


Sec. 14-334. - Enforcement.

 
(a)






(b)
 
In addition to any penalties generally applicable to the violation of provisions of this Code, if any person licensed under the provisions of this article fails to make the statement or pay the license provided for under the provisions of this article, the license collector shall assess the raw materials, merchandise, finished product, tools, machinery and appliances (in the case of manufacturers), or goods, wares and merchandise (in the case of merchants) and the aggregate amount of sales of such person at double their value, and shall report the delinquent person to the city attorney.
If any person licensed under the provisions of this article makes or files with the collector under the provisions of this article any false statements under oath, before any penalty is sought, the collector shall give the licensee the opportunity to explain the statement and correct it if it was inadvertently made. If the collector finds that the statement was wilfully and corruptly made, he shall report the facts of the case to the grand jury.
 

Sec. 14-335. - License.

 
(a)


(b)

(c)

(d)



(e)

(f)
 
Required. No person defined to be a merchant or a manufacturer shall do or offer to do the business of such a person without having a valid license issued by the city under the provisions of this article.
Forms. The license applications and forms shall be available in the office of the city clerk at city hall.

Effective date. All licenses issued under this article shall be effective from July 1 to June 30 of the following calendar year.

Maintained on file with city clerk. The licenses issued under this article shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. The file for each merchant or manufacturer operating within the corporate city limits of the city will include the amount of tax and license collected and a sworn statement of the applicant's amount of gross receipts as defined in s e c t i o n 1 4 - 3 3 3 reported to the city.
Nontransferable, unassignable. The license issued under this article shall be nontransferable and unassignable.

Other business or occupation. Any other business or occupation not specifically described as a merchant or manufacturer shall be licensed according to the provisions of article II of this chapter unless otherwise provided for or excepted in this chapter.
 
(Code 1972, § 603.02; Code 1982, § 18-127; Ord. No. 4491, § 6, 4-23-1991)


Sec. 14-336. - Statement required; tax imposed.

 
(a)





(b)


(c)

(d)
 
The city clerk or his deputies shall, after May 1 and before July 1 of each year, call upon the merchants and manufacturers and notify them to furnish and they shall furnish whether or not so notified, a statement of gross receipts made by the merchant or manufacturer during the merchants' or manufacturers' fiscal year immediately preceding July 1 of that year, which shall be made and verified by affidavit or the merchant/manufacturer or an authorized officer of the merchant/manufacturer.
There shall be levied and collected, based on the affidavit, a license fee of $1.00 on each $1,000.00 or fractional part thereof of gross receipts attributable to selling, dealing, manufacturing or refining in the city.
No license shall be less than $75.00.

Renewal license applications not received by the specified time will be required to pay an additional $25.00 as and for a late fee and is not to be included in the regular license fee.
 
(Code 1972, § 603.04; Code 1982, § 18-129; Ord. No. 4003, § 1, 10-9-1979; Ord. No. 4227, § 1, 8-27-1985; Ord. No. 4445, § VII, 1-9-1990; Ord. No. 4491, § 6, 4-23-
1991)


Sec. 14-337. - Account of sales open to inspection; statements, returns not public.

 
(a)





(b)
 
Each merchant and manufacturer shall keep a proper book in which shall be entered an account of all sales made by him. The account shall always be open to inspection of the license collector or his deputy, the councilman in charge of the department of accounts and finance or any qualified deputy authorized by him, to verify the returns made by the merchant or manufacturer to him, and all information obtained shall be confidential.
The statement or return made to the collector or his deputy under the provisions of this article shall not be made public but shall be subject to the inspection only of the mayor, the city treasurer, the city attorney and members of the city council.
 
(Code 1972, § 603.05; Code 1982, § 18-130; Ord. No. 3758, § 1, 1-14-1974)


Sec. 14-338. - Conformity with liquor regulation.

No license hereunder shall entitle or authorize any person to sell or manufacture intoxicating liquors or nonintoxicating beer or do any other act for which a license is required under c h a p t e r 8 .

(Code 1972, § 603.06; Code 1982, § 18-131)


Sec. 14-339. - Number of licenses limited as to used automobile sales.

 
(a)

(b)


(c)
 
No more than one license to sell used automobiles shall be granted for every 3,000 inhabitants of the city or any fractional part thereof. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a license to sell used automobiles may be granted to the operator of a full service
automobile dealership.

Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a license to sell used automobiles may be granted to the operator of a full service automobile leasing agency which leases a minimum of 50 new vehicles a year. Used vehicles allowed to be sold by the leasing agency are only those vehicles originally leased by the agency and returned to the leasing agency at the end of the leasing period.
 
(Code 1972, § 603.08; Code 1982, § 18-132; Ord. No. 3923, § 1, 1-23-1978; Ord. No. 4214, § 1, 6-11-1985; Ord. No. 4771, § 1, 4-8-1997; Ord. No. 5662, § I, 4-24-
2012)
 

ARTICLE VIII. - MASSAGE PARLORS


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 14-367. - Short title.

This article shall be cited as the Massage Establishment Code.

(Code 1972, § 602.23(A); Code 1982, § 18-101; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 12-11-1978)


Sec. 14-368. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Applicant means any person who applies for a license as required by this section.

Employee means any person, other than a masseur or masseuse, who renders any service to the licensee, who receives compensation or any consideration, and who has no physical contact with the licensee's customers or clients.

Licensee means any person receiving a license to operate a massage establishment or outcall massage service under the provisions of this article.

Massage means any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external parts of the body, for medical or hygienic purposes, with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, unguents or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice.

Massage establishment means any establishment having a fixed place of business, wherein massage is given, engaged in or carried on, or permitted to be given, engaged in, or carried on, for any form of consideration.

Masseur or masseuse means any person who administers to another person, for any form of consideration, massage.

Outcall massage service means any business not licensed as a massage establishment under the provisions of this article wherein massage is given, engaged in or carried on, or permitted to be given, engaged in, or carried on, for any form of consideration, not at a fixed location but at a location designated by the masseur or masseuse, customer or client.

Sexual conduct means acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person be a female, breasts.

(Code 1972, § 602.23(B)(1)—(6), (8), (H); Code 1982, § 18-102; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 12-11-1978)


Sec. 14-369. - Exemptions.

The provisions of this article shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitaria, persons holding an unrevoked certificate of entitlement to practice the healing arts under the laws of the state, barbers and beauticians duly licensed by the state, athletic trainers, or persons working under the direction and control of such persons or in any such establishments.

(Code 1972, § 602.23(C); Code 1982, § 18-103; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 12-11-1978)


Secs. 14-370—14-396. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - LICENSES



Sec. 14-397. - Required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city, the operation of a massage establishment or an outcall massage service as herein defined without first having obtained a license duly issued by the council as set forth in this article.

(Code 1972, § 602.23(D); Code 1982, § 18-104; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 12-11-1978)
 

Application for a license to engage in the business of a massage establishment or outcall massage service shall be made to the council by filing it with the city clerk and shall contain the following information:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)


(9)


(10)
 

The two previous addresses, if any, within the three years immediately prior to the present address of applicant; Written proof that the individual or partnership applicant is over the age of 18 years;
Individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color eyes, hair and sex; Two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches;
Businesses, occupations or employments of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application;

The history of the applicant in the operation of a massage establishment, outcall massage service or similar business or occupation; All criminal violations other than misdemeanor traffic violations, and lawful pardons or rehabilitative activity related thereto;
The name and address of each masseur, masseuse, or employee who is or will be employed in such establishment or service, or work as an independent contractor therein, and the terms and conditions of such employment or contract;
Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application;
If the applicant is a corporation, the name and residence of each of the officers and directors of such corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation.
 

(Code 1972, § 602.23(D)(1); Code 1982, § 18-105; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 12-11-1978)


Sec. 14-399. - Investigation of application.

 
(a)


(b)
 
All applications for a massage establishment or outcall massage service license shall be accompanied by an investigation fee of $50.00, no part of which shall be refundable.
Upon the receipt of such application, the city clerk shall refer the application to the building inspector, the plan and zoning commission, and the police department and the department of public health and sanitation. Each of these departments shall within 30 days from the date of such application review records or make an inspection of the premises proposed to be used as a massage establishment and shall make a written recommendation to the council concerning compliance with the respective requirements.
 
(Code 1972, § 602.23(D)(2), (3); Code 1982, § 18-106; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 12-11-1978)


Sec. 14-400. - Issuance; denial.

 
(a)
 
The council shall issue the license required by s e c t i o n 1 4 - 3 9 7 if it is found:
 

(1)


(2)
 

That the operation, as proposed by the applicant, complies or would comply with all applicable laws and ordinances, including, but not limited to, the city's building code, zoning laws and health regulations.
That the applicant, or, if the applicant is a corporation, the officers, directors and stockholders as stated herein, are of good moral character.
 

(b)
 

Otherwise, such license shall be denied. In the event of denial, notification and reasons for denial shall be set forth in writing and shall be sent to the applicant by means of certified mail or hand delivery.
 
(Code 1972, § 602.23(D)(4); Code 1982, § 18-107; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 12-11-1978)


Sec. 14-401. - Appeals.

An appeal may be taken by any aggrieved party to the circuit court of the county, pursuant to the provisions of RSMo 536.150. (Code 1972, § 602.23(D)(5); Code 1982, § 18-108; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 12-11-1978)

Sec. 14-402. - Fee.

The license fee to be paid upon approval of the application as a precondition to the issuance of the license required by  s e c t i o n  1 4 - 3 9 7  shall be $100.00. (Code 1972, § 602.23(D)(6); Code 1982, § 18-109; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 12-11-1978)

Sec. 14-403. - Display required; list of personnel.

A licensee under this article shall display the massage establishment or outcall massage service license issued in an open and conspicuous location on the premises or in the principal place of business. In addition, the licensee shall maintain a written listing of all masseurs, masseuses or employees, whether employed by him or as independent contractors. Such written list shall be available for inspection during regular business hours.
 

Sec. 14-404. - Transferability.

No massage establishment or outcall massage service license shall be transferable except upon the proposed transferee first having obtained a new license from the city council pursuant to all the requirements for a new application, and which shall be accompanied by a filing and investigation fee of $50.00, no part of which shall be refundable. The application for such transfer shall contain the same information as required herein for an initial application for such license.

(Code 1972, § 602.23(J); Code 1982, § 18-111; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 12-11-1978)


Sec. 14-405. - Suspension; revocation.

 
(a)



(b)



(c)


(d)
 
Any massage establishment's or outcall massage service's license issued under this article shall be subject to suspension for up to 90 days or revocation by the council for violation of any provision of this article or for any grounds that would warrant the denial of the issuance of such license in the first instance.
The licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the council prior to the suspension or revocation of any license under this article. At such hearing, evidence will be received for the purpose of determining whether or not such license shall be suspended or revoked or whether the license may be retained.
The licensee shall be notified by certified mail or hand delivery of the decision of the council. Such decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions of law.
An appeal may be taken by any aggrieved party to the circuit court of the county, in accordance with the provisions of RSMo 536.100 et seq.
 

(Code 1972, § 602.23(F); Code 1982, § 18-112; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 12-11-1978)


Secs. 14-406—14-423. - Reserved.


DIVISION 3. - RULES AND REGULATIONS



Sec. 14-424. - Promulgation of sanitation regulations.

The director of the department of public health and sanitation is authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to sanitary requirements for the operation of massage establishments or outcall massage services.

(Code 1972, § 602.23(G); Code 1982, § 18-113; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 12-11-1978)


Sec. 14-425. - Sexual conduct prohibited.

A masseur or masseuse, or an employee, shall not engage in or offer or agree to engage in sexual conduct in return for compensation or other consideration.

(Code 1972, § 602.23(H)(1); Code 1982, § 18-114; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 12-11-1978)


Sec. 14-426. - City's right of entry.

Officials of the city shall have the right to enter the portion of the premises open to the public generally from time to time during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations, and for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this article, and other provisions of law or ordinance are being complied with.

(Code 1972, § 602.23(I); Code 1982, § 18-115; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 12-11-1978)


Secs. 14-427—14-450. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IX. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND MOBILE VENDORS


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Secs. 14-451—14-468. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, HAWKERS AND HUCKSTERS
 



Sec. 14-469. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Canvass soliciting means and includes any one or more of the following activities:

 
(1)

(2)
 
Disseminating written materials or oral views; or

Requesting information on the background, occupation, economic status, social status, religious status, political status, attitudes or viewpoints of another person.
 

Charitable soliciting means and includes any one or more of the following activities:

 
(1)



(2)
 
Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group which is registered as a nonprofit organization under the laws of any state of the United States or of the federal government or under the election laws of any state of the United States or of the federal government.
Seeking to obtain money, clothing or any other valuable thing in return for literature, artifacts or goods of any individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group which is registered as a nonprofit organization under the laws of any state of the United States or of the federal government or under the election laws of any state of the United States or of the federal government or is subject to the election laws of any state or of the United States.
 

Commercial soliciting means and includes any one or more of the following activities:

 
(1)


(2)





(3)

(4)
 
Seeking to sell or to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs or other services, goods or contracts of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever, or dissemination thereof without consideration;
Requesting information on the background, occupation, economic status, social status, religious status, political status, attitudes, viewpoints, occupants of a residence, telephone number, address, furnishings or the like of any person for the actual or alleged purpose of compiling such information as raw data or refined data into a document, record, book or directory to be sold, or to be used wholly or in part for commercial purposes;
Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers or any other type or kind of publication; or

Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group not falling within the definition of "charitable soliciting" as set forth in subsection (1) of this definition.
 

Registered solicitor or registrant means and includes any person who has complied with the requirements for registration as hereinafter provided.

Residence means and includes every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.

Solicitor, peddler, hawker or huckster means and includes any person or organization conducting activities falling within the scope of the definitions of charitable soliciting, commercial soliciting and canvass soliciting set forth in this section. Each individual in a firm, corporation, organization, association or group shall be considered a solicitor.

(Code 1982, § 18-235; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 1-10-1984)


Sec. 14-470. - Exemptions and exceptions.

The provisions of sections 1 4 - 4 7 1 through 1 4 - 4 7 6 shall not apply to:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
 
Officers or employees of a city, county, state or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business; Any solicitation conducted entirely by mail or by telephone;
Any newsgathering activity for any news medium;

Any solicitor who is invited to a residence by an occupant of that residence; or

Any persons under the age of 16 years selling goods for the support of their school, school extracurricular activities, or youth organizations.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-236; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 1-10-1984; Ord. No. 5134, § I, 10-28-2003)


Sec. 14-471. - Requirement for registration.
 

Except as otherwise provided by this article, every individual desiring to engage in soliciting, as herein defined, from persons and residences within this municipality is hereby required to make written application for a certificate of registration as hereinafter provided. No person shall be permitted to engage in soliciting unless that person has been issued a certificate of registration. Such certificate shall be carried by the solicitor. Any person soliciting within this city shall, upon demand, exhibit his certificate of registration to any police officer, other city official or private resident upon whose premises he is soliciting.

(Code 1982, § 18-237; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 1-10-1984)


Sec. 14-472. - Procedure for registration—Commercial soliciting.

 
(a)
 
Application for a certificate of registration. Any person desiring to engage in commercial solicitation in this city shall file, on a form to be supplied by the city clerk, an application with the city clerk stating the following information:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)


(11)


(12)



(13)


(14)
 
Name of the applicant;

Permanent home address of the applicant;

Name and address of the individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group represented;

Nature of merchandise to be sold or offered for sale, the nature of the services to be furnished, or purpose for solicitation; Date on which he desires to commence soliciting;
Period of time for which a certificate is requested;

The make, model, year, color and license number and state of licensing of the applicant's motor vehicle; Place of residence of the applicant for the preceding three years;
Names of other communities in the state in which the applicant has worked as a solicitor or canvasser in the past two years;

Names of other communities in the state in which the individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group for which applicant is soliciting has engaged in soliciting in the past two years;
Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of a felony under the laws of the state, or any other state or federal law of the United States;
Said application shall also be accompanied by a letter or other written statement from the individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group for which the applicant will be soliciting, certifying that the applicant is authorized to act as a representative of that individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group;
The applicant shall upon request submit to fingerprinting and photographing by the police department in connection with the application for the certificate; and
All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath.
 

At the time of filing of the application, a fee of $5.00 shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of processing the application.

 
(b)






(c)
 
Processing of application. The city clerk shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application received, together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of registration or exemption issued under the provisions of this article, and of the denial of applications. Applications for certificates of registration shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed; and every certificate issued,
and any renewal thereof, shall be identified with a duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. Within two working days of receipt of the application by the city clerk, the original of said application shall be referred to the chief of police for investigation.
Investigation and approval. The chief of police shall cause such investigation to be made of the applicant's business and moral character and the business and moral character of the individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group for which the applicant will be soliciting as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. The chief of police shall endorse on such application his approval and return the application to the city clerk within ten working days from the date of receipt of the application by the chief of police, unless:
 
(1)
 
The individual requesting the certificate of registration has, within seven years of the date of the application:
 

a.	Been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the United States;

b.	Been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article;

c.	Lost his certificate of registration by revocation as herein provided;

d.	Been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or violation of any ordinance concerning canvassing or soliciting; or

e.	Falsified any information required by this article as part of the application process; or
 

(2)
 

The individual, firm, corporation, association, organization or group for which the applicant will be soliciting has, within two years of the date of the application:
 
a.	Been convicted of a violation of any provisions of this article;

b.	Lost its certificate of registration by revocation as herein provided;

c.	Been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or violation of any ordinance concerning canvassing or soliciting; or

d.	Been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving or found civilly liable for fraud or misrepresentation in solicitation, or misuse of
 

funds solicited.
 

(d)





(e)
 

Refusal of application. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant is not entitled to receive a certificate of registration under this article for any of the reasons set forth in subsection (c) of this section, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no certificate will be issued.
Issuance of certificate of registration.
 

(1)



(2)





(3)
 

By clerk. If, after such investigation, the applicant is found to be entitled to receive a certificate of registration under this article, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval and return the application to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of all fees, if any, required by this article or any other ordinance, deliver to the applicant his certificate of registration.
Contents of certificate. Such certificate shall contain the signature and seal of the clerk and shall show the name, address and photograph of the solicitor, the kind of solicitation to be made thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance of the certificate and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle to be used in such soliciting or canvassing. The clerk shall keep a permanent record of all certificates issued.
Fee. The fee which shall be charged by the city clerk for issuance or renewal of such certificate of registration shall be $25.00 per year or prorated at $5.00 for up to 30 days; provided, however, when more than one individual plans to solicit for the same group, organization, corporation or cause, no more than one fee shall be required with respect to the total number of all such solicitors for the period of validity of the certificate issued on payment of that fee. A certificate of registration shall be good for one year unless a shorter period of time is specified in the application.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-238; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 1-10-1984; Ord. No. 5134, § II, 10-28-2003)


Sec. 14-473. - Same—Charitable soliciting.

 
(a)
 
Application for certificate of registration. Any individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group desiring to engage in charitable solicitation in this city shall file on a form, to be supplied by the city clerk, an application with the city clerk stating the following information:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)


(8)


(9)
 
Name of the applicant;

Permanent home address of the applicant;

Name and address of the individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group represented;

Nature of merchandise to be sold or offered for sale, the nature of the services to be furnished or purpose for solicitation; Date on which he desires to commence soliciting;
Period of time for which a certificate is requested;

Names of other communities in the state in which the individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group for which applicant is soliciting has engaged in soliciting in the past two years;
Said application shall also be accompanied by written evidence of the nonprofit status or registration under election laws of the individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group for which applicant will be soliciting; and
All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath.
 

At the time of filing the application, a fee of $5.00 shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of processing the application.

 
(b)






(c)







(d)





(e)
 
Processing of application. The city clerk shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application received, together with all other information and data pertaining thereto, and all certificates of registration or exemption issued under the provisions of this article, and of the denial of applications. Application for certificates of registration shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed; and every certificate issued, and any renewal thereof, shall be identified with a duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. Within two working days of the receipt of the application by the city clerk, the original of the application shall be referred to the chief of police for investigation.
Investigation and approval. The chief of police shall cause such investigation to be made of the business and moral character of the applicant and individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group for which the applicant shall be soliciting as he deems necessary for the  protection of the public good. The chief of police shall endorse on such application his approval and return the application to the city clerk within ten working days from the date of receipt of the application by the chief of police, unless the investigation of the chief of police reveals that the individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group is not entitled to a certificate of registration for any of the reasons set forth in
 s e c t i o n 1 4 - 4 7 2 (c)(1) and (2).

Refusal of application. If, as a result of such investigation, the individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group is not entitled to receive a certificate of registration under this article for any of the reasons set forth in s e c t i o n 1 4 - 4 7 2 (c)(1) and (2), the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that the application is disapproved and that no certificate will be issued.
Issuance of certificate of registration.
 

(1)
 

By clerk. If after such investigation, the individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group is found to be entitled to receive a certificate of registration under this article, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval and return the application to the
 

city clerk, who shall, upon payment of all fees, if any, required by this article or any other ordinance, deliver to the applicant the certificate of registration.
 
(2)
 
Contents of certificate. Such certificate shall contain the signature and seal of the clerk and shall show the name and address of the individual, firm, corporation, organization, association or group registered, the kind of solicitation to be made thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance of the certificate and the length of time the same shall be operative. A certificate of registration shall be good for one year unless a shorter period of time is specified in the application. The clerk shall keep a permanent record of all certificates issued.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-239; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 1-10-1984; Ord. No. 5134, § III, 10-28-2003)


Sec. 14-474. - Registration of canvass solicitors.

No person desiring to engage in canvass solicitation in the city shall be required to register; provided, however, that an individual, group, organization, corporation or cause engaged in canvass soliciting, as defined in s e c t i o n 1 4 - 4 6 9 , who engages in any activity which comes within the definition of commercial soliciting or charitable soliciting, as defined in s e c t i o n 1 4 - 4 6 9 , shall be subject to the provisions of this article applicable to commercial or charitable solicitors; provided further that canvass solicitors shall be subject to all provisions of this article except the requirement to register.

(Code 1982, § 18-240; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 1-10-1984; Ord. No. 5134, § IV, 10-28-2003)


Sec. 14-475. - Regulation of soliciting on private property.

 
(a)







(b)


(c)
 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether registered under this article or not, to go uninvited upon any premises and ring the door bell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting, as herein defined, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. of any day, including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, or for any solicitor to solicit from the paved portion of any public street. Entering inside a private residence of the city by a solicitor, not having been invited or requested to do so by the occupant or owner of such residence, is declared to be a nuisance.
Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant.
When any solicitor takes a partial payment for goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, service or subscription from a person who has been solicited, he shall execute and give to the person solicited a written receipt for the order, which receipt shall be signed by the solicitor and shall set forth a brief description of the item ordered, the total purchase price thereof, including the principal and, separately, any interest or service charge, and the amount of the partial payment received by the solicitor from the person being solicited.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-241; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 1-10-1984; Ord. No. 5134, § V, 10-28-2003)


Sec. 14-476. - Regulation of soliciting in the right-of-way.

 
(a)





(b)
 
Commercial solicitation prohibited; sale of newspapers exempted. No person shall engage in commercial solicitation from occupants of vehicles in the public right-of-way or on property owned by the bi-state development agency, which is in close proximity of trafficways or rail lines, or provides for the boarding or disembarking of transit passengers, or its successor agency, except that persons selling newspapers while occupying the right-of-way or on property owned by the bi-state development agency or its successor agency are exempt from the provisions of this article.
Qualifications. Any person who engages in charitable or canvass solicitation from the occupants of vehicles in the public right-of-way or on property owned by the bi-state development agency, which is in close proximity of trafficways or rail lines, or provides for the boarding or disembarking of transit passengers, or its successor agency shall:
 
(1)

(2)
 
Be at least 18 years of age;

Be properly registered as a solicitor, as set forth in this article, as applicable.
 

(c)
 

Regulations. Any person who engages in charitable or canvass solicitation in the public right-of-way or on property owned by the bi-state development agency or its successor agency shall:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)


(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)
 
Contact the police department at least 24 hours prior to any anticipated solicitation; Conduct solicitations only between dawn and dusk;
Wear a light-colored vest, apron or jacket, said clothing item shall have lettering in letters at least three inches high on the chest side denoting the name of the organization that is conducting the solicitation;
Adhere to direction of a police officer or fire officer to cease solicitation if conditions become unsafe for motorists, pedestrians or solicitors; Conduct solicitations only at intersections controlled by electric traffic signals;
Not solicit on any approach to a street intersection when two or more solicitors are already present;

Not conduct solicitations on rail transit platforms which provide for the boarding or disembarking of rail transit passengers; Not flag down vehicles, nor unduly delay motorists, nor impede the flow of traffic;
Not confront motorists or pedestrians in a rude or threatening manner; and
 

(10)
 

Not conduct a charitable solicitation more than four days in a week, nor more than four weeks per calendar year.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-242; Ord. No. 5134, § VI, 10-28-2003)


Sec. 14-477. - Duty of police to enforce.

 
(a)



(b)
 
It shall be the duty of the city police, as well as the city clerk, to see that the provisions of this article are enforced and obeyed. The police shall at all times keep vigilant watch for any violation and shall issue summons in case of any violation detected, whether or not any complaint has been made.
The police department shall report to the city clerk all convictions for violation of this article, and the city clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of violation therein.
 
(Code 1982, § 18-243; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 1-10-1984)


Sec. 14-478. - Denial, revocation or expiration of certiicate; appeal from decision of denial or revocation.

 
(a)






(b)






(c)
 
Any certificate of registration issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by written order of the chief of police because of any violation by the registrant of this article or any other ordinance of the city, or of state or federal law, or upon proof that the registrant has been participating in disorderly conduct, fraud or misrepresentation in connection with his solicitation, or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and character required in this article for the original registration. The registrant shall promptly be mailed written notice of such decision.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police to deny or revoke a certificate of registration shall have the right to appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to the registrant's last known address, a written statement fully setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a place and time for hearing the appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the appellant, postage prepaid, at his last known address, at least five days prior to the date set for hearing. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
Each certificate of registration shall expire at the end of the period stated on the certificate.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-244; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 1-10-1984)


Secs. 14-479—14-496. - Reserved.


DIVISION 3. - MOBILE VENDORS



Sec. 14-497. - Applicability of division.

This division shall apply to all persons who sell or offer ice, cream, milk, butter, tea or coffee from any conveyance of any kind on any street, alley or public place, or going from place to place in the city.

(Code 1982, § 18-252; Ord. No. 4491, § 8, 4-23-1991)


Sec. 14-498. - License required.

No person shall sell or offer to sell ice, cream, milk, butter, tea or coffee as provided in s e c t i o n 1 4 - 4 9 7 without having a valid license, for which application is to be made to the collector with the payment of a fee of $75.00.

(Code 1982, § 18-253; Ord. No. 4491, § 8, 4-23-1991)


Sec. 14-499. - Stopping time restricted.

No licensee under the provisions of this division shall hold or stop any wagon, vehicle or other conveyance in any street, alley or other public place and keep it stationary for more than 15 minutes at any one time and place, nor shall such conveyance be operated in reverse from such place of stopping.

(Code 1982, § 18-254; Ord. No. 4491, § 8, 4-23-1991)


Sec. 14-500. - Food trucks.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)
 
Mobile food trucks shall be permitted in the Light Manufacturing Zoning District, the Sunnen Business Park PUD and the Deer Creek Center PUD provided that no mobile food trucks shall operate within 250 feet of single-family or multifamily zoned residential property.
Food trucks will not be allowed to operate on public right-of-way and would have to have permission of the property owner to operate on their property.
Food trucks must procure from the city clerk a business license in accordance with  c h a p t e r  1 4 . The issuance of such a business license shall be
 

subject to the operator first acquiring the appropriate licenses or permits from the St. Louis County Department of Health.
 

(d)

(e)



(f)


(g)


(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(l)

(m)


(n)

(o)
 

Mobile food trucks shall be prohibited on vacant, unimproved or unpaved lots.

Mobile food trucks shall not stand or operate within 1,000 feet of another food truck except for special events approved by the city. For purposes of this section, the distance between any two mobile food trucks shall be measured in a straight line and without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries from the closest exterior wall of the vehicle, trailer, etc. from which each mobile truck is located.
Mobile food trucks shall provide a trash receptacle with a self-closing lid near the front of the vending counter for use by patrons. The area around the mobile food truck shall be kept clean and free from litter, garbage and debris.
Mobile food truck vehicles and any other equipment shall not be stored outdoors overnight on any property within the city other than the property owned by the operator of the mobile food truck on which such operator has a fixed-based food service operation.
Mobile food trucks may utilize outside seating consisting of one portable table with a maximum seating capacity of four. No mobile food truck shall operate between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Sales other than food and beverage items are prohibited.

Signage shall be contained to the surface of the mobile food truck.

The use by a mobile food truck of any temporary structure other than a vehicle or cart described in this chapter is prohibited.

All exterior lights shall be designed so that the light source is shielded with an opaque material and is not visible at adjacent businesses or residences.
Mobile food trucks shall comply with the Maplewood Noise Code.

Mobile food trucks shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations, including, without limitation, applicable provisions of the Maplewood Zoning Code Ordinance and all applicable St. Louis County regulations.
 
(Ord. No. 5687, § I, 10-23-2012)


Secs. 14-501—14-521. - Reserved.


ARTICLE X. - SECONDHAND GOODS


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Secs. 14-522—14-550. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - JUNK DEALERS



Sec. 14-551. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Junk dealer means a person who is engaged in the business of buying, selling, exchanging or dealing in old junk, bottles, metals, siphons, old rope, old iron, brass, copper, tin or lead, secondhand plumbing materials, secondhand gas and electrical fixtures, secondhand or old lumber, secondhand automobile parts, old rubber tires, wrecked automobile parts, or other used articles commonly designated as junk, and having a store, stand or place of business.

(Code 1972, § 602.10(A); Code 1982, § 18-81)


Sec. 14-552. - License—Required; fee.

No person shall engage in the business of junk dealer without having a valid license, for which the fee shall be $100.00. (Code 1972, § 602.10(B); Code 1982, § 18-82)

Sec. 14-553. - Same—Application.

The application for the license required by s e c t i o n 1 4 - 5 5 2 shall state the name, age and address of the applicant, the name of the street and number of the store, stand or place of business of the applicant.

(Code 1972, § 602.10(B)(1); Code 1982, § 18-83)


Sec. 14-554. - Same—Transferability.
 

The license required by  s e c t i o n  1 4 - 5 5 2  shall be nontransferable and shall be only for the address for which it is issued. (Code 1972, § 602.10(B)(2); Code 1982, § 18-84)

Sec. 14-555. - Building requirements.

The building used by the junk dealer shall be so constructed as to comply with the provisions of this Code related to building, and so that none of the contents of the building shall be visible from the streets on which the building abuts or which it faces. The business carried on under the authority of this article and the license issued pursuant to it shall be conducted wholly within the building.

(Code 1972, § 602.10(C); Code 1982, § 18-85)


Secs. 14-556—14-573. - Reserved.


DIVISION 3. - PAWNBROKERS



Sec. 14-574. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Pawnbroker means a person who lends money on the security of personal property deposited with him, or who purchases personal property for resale on condition that the property will be sold back to the person from whom he purchased it at a stipulated price, or a person who makes a public display at his place of business of a sign designating him as a pawnbroker.

(Code 1972, § 602.15(A); Code 1982, § 18-161)


Sec. 14-575. - License—Required; fee.

No person shall do business as a pawnbroker without having a valid license, the fee for which is $300.00. (Code 1972, § 602.15(B); Code 1982, § 18-162)

Sec. 14-576. - Same—Application.

Application for the license required by s e c t i o n 1 4 - 5 7 5 shall be made to the collector, and as part of such application the applicant shall provide the following information:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

His name;

The address at which the business for which a license is sought is to be carried on; Such other information as is deemed necessary by the city council.
 

(Code 1972, § 602.15(B)(1); Code 1982, § 18-163)


Sec. 14-577. - Same—Bond prerequisite to issuance.

As a prerequisite to the issuance of a license required by s e c t i o n 1 4 - 5 7 5 , the applicant shall deposit with the city a bond, with good and sufficient surety approved by the city council, in a penal sum of $1,000.00, conditioned upon the applicant's observance of the provisions of this Code relating to pawnbrokers.

(Code 1972, § 602.15(B)(3); Code 1982, § 18-164)


Sec. 14-578. - Same—Issuance.

The application for a license required by s e c t i o n 1 4 - 5 7 5 shall be sent to the city council which shall grant the application if it appears to it that the applicant is of good moral character.

(Code 1972, § 602.15(B)(2); Code 1982, § 18-165)


Sec. 14-579. - Same—Transferability.

The license required by s e c t i o n 1 4 - 5 7 5 is not transferable nor may it be used for any but the place for which it is issued. (Code 1972, § 602.15(B)(4); Code 1982, § 18-166)
 

Sec. 14-580. - Same—Suspension; revocation.

In addition to all other penalties and fines, the city council may suspend or revoke the license required by s e c t i o n 1 4 - 5 7 5 if the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article. Before revoking or suspending the license, the licensee shall be given notice of the specific grounds on which the revocation or suspension is to be based, and of the time, place and date of the hearing which shall be held and at which the licensee shall have the opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked.

(Code 1972, § 602.15(B)(5); Code 1982, § 18-167)


Sec. 14-581. - Register of transactions.

 
(a)



(b)
 
The pawnbroker shall keep a register of all loans and purchases or deposits of articles affected, received or made by him, which shall also show the date of all loans and purchases and the names of all persons who have left any description of property on deposit as collateral security or as a delivery on sale. Opposite such name shall be a full description of the property purchased or deposited.
The pawnbroker's register kept under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be open to the inspection of the police.
 

(Code 1972, § 602.15(C), (G); Code 1982, § 18-168)


Sec. 14-582. - Pawn tickets and receipts.

The pawnbroker shall give, to the party negotiating or selling, a plain written or printed ticket for the loan, and a plain written or printed receipt for the article purchased or deposited, with a copy on each such ticket and receipt of the entry required by s e c t i o n 1 4 - 5 8 1 (a). No charge shall be made for the ticket or receipt.

(Code 1972, § 602.15(D); Code 1982, § 18-169)


Sec. 14-583. - Purchases from minors; hours of operation.

No pawnbroker shall receive, either by way of pledge, pawn or purchase, any goods or things of any kind whatever from a person who is under the age of 18 years, nor shall he do any business at all between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(Code 1972, § 602.15(E); Code 1982, § 18-170)


Sec. 14-584. - Loan on divided part of article prohibited.

No pawnbroker shall make any loan on the separate or divided part of an article. (Code 1972, 602.15(F); Code 1982, § 18-171)

Secs. 14-585—14-601. - Reserved.


DIVISION 4. - GARAGE SALES



Sec. 14-602. - Rules and regulations for conducting sales; license required.

 
(a)
 
All so-called "garage sales" or other sales involving the offering for sale of multiple items of personal property on property zoned and occupied as a residence shall be and are henceforth subject to the following rules and regulations, to wit:
 
(1)



(2)


(3)

(4)



(5)


(6)
 
No one may employ the services of a professional sales person, auctioneer or promoter in connection with any such sale; provided, however, that such persons may be employed to conduct estate sales of household goods, jewelry, furniture and furs, in the dwelling of a person who has recently died or has moved, or is in the process of moving his place of residence.
No personal property of any type belonging to any one not living in the residence, or which the person living in such residence has not owned for at least six months, shall be brought upon the premises for the purpose of being sold in such sale.
There shall be no display or sale of any property in the front yard of the premises.

No signs shall be posted anywhere in the city advertising such sales, except that the property owner may install on the residential lot on which such sale is to be held one sign not larger than two feet by three feet, advertising such sale. Such sign shall be erected not sooner than two days prior to the date of the sale and shall be removed at the end of the last day upon which the sale is held.
Not more than two such sales per year (lasting not more than two consecutive days) shall be held at the same premises if occupied by the same family or any member of such family. Six months must elapse between sales.
Any person holding such a sale shall give the city five days' notice of such sale and such notice shall include the name and address of the premises where the sale will be held and the name and address of any professional person conducting the sale.
 

 
(b)
 
No person shall engage in the business of conducting sales, as allowed under subsection (a)(1) of this section, within the city, without first having obtained and unless holding a valid, outstanding license therefor from the city as provided below and subject to the regulations set forth:
 
(1)





(2)
 
Such license shall be issued for a one year term upon application, identifying the applicant, his employer, firm or organization, and the nature of applicant's business and experience, and signed by a registered voter of the city attesting to the applicant's good character. The license to be issued upon application as aforesaid, shall be subject to cancellation by the city, on prior written notice to the license holder and an opportunity to be heard, should it be determined by the city that such license holder has violated any provision of this section.
A license fee of $5.00 per day or $50.00 per year shall be paid to obtain such license.
 

(c)
 

Violation of this section shall result in the following penalties:
 

(1)

(2)
 

For the first offense, a warning.

For the second offense, a fine of at least $50.00, up to $500.00.
 

(Code 1972, § 305.37; Code 1982, § 18-3; Ord. No. 4100, § 1, 7-14-1981; Ord. No. 4122, §§ 1—3, 9-14-1982)


Secs. 14-603—14-622. - Reserved.


ARTICLE XI. - SOLID WASTE


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Secs. 14-623—14-647. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - REFUSE HAULERS



Sec. 14-648. - Permits and stickers.

 
(a)





(b)



(c)





(d)










(e)
 
Required. No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the city, without first obtaining an annual waste collection permit and vehicle sticker therefor from the city. The existence of a valid collection and transportation contract between the city and a contractor shall constitute a valid waste collection permit, and shall be valid for the life of the contract, and vehicle stickers will be issued subject only to the annual inspections required in subsections (e)(6) and (7) and of this section.
Permit fee; expiration date. The fee for the permit required in subsection (a) of this section is to be paid annually and shall be due on July 1 of each year, and is nontransferable, nonassignable, and nonrefundable. The fee for the first full year shall be $75.00, and permits issued after July 1 shall be prorated according to the schedule in s e c t i o n 1 4 - 2 2 .
Vehicle stickers. In addition to the permit required by subsection (a) of this section, each vehicle regularly operated under such permit shall be required to display on the lower right corner of the windshield of such vehicle an official license sticker containing the words "City of Maplewood, Mo." and including the words "License to Remove Rubbish" and the license number. The sticker shall be purchased annually from the city clerk upon issuance or renewal of the permit, at the cost of $75.00 for each vehicle.
Insurance. No permit required by subsection (a) of this section shall be issued until and unless the applicant therefor, in addition to all other requirements set forth, shall file and maintain with the city clerk, evidence of a satisfactory public liability insurance policy, covering all operation of such applicant pertaining to such business and all vehicles to be operated in the conduct thereof, in the amount of not less than $100,000.00 for each person injured or killed, and in the amount of not less than $300,000.00 in the event of injury or death of two or more persons in any single accident, and in the amount of not less than $50,000.00 for damage to property. Should any such policy be cancelled, the city clerk shall be notified of such cancellation by the insurance carrier in writing not less than 30 days prior to the effective date of such cancellation, and provisions to that effect shall be incorporated in such policy, which shall also place upon the company writing such policy the duty to give such notice.
Application contents. Each applicant for any such permit shall in his application therefor:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)
 

The nature of the permit desired, as to collect, transport, process, or dispose of solid waste of any combination thereof; The characteristics of solid waste to be collected, transported, processed, disposed;
The number of solid waste transportation vehicles to be operated thereunder;

The precise location or locations of solid waste processing or disposal facilities to be used; Boundaries of the collection area;
Evidence of a current state vehicle safety inspection;

Evidence of a current sanitation inspection by the county department of community health and medical care; and

Such other information as required by the city clerk including evidence of compliance with the workmen's compensation laws of the state.
 

(f)



(g)





(h)







(i)



(j)



(k)


(l)
 

Issuance. If the application shows that the applicant will collect, transport, process or dispose of solid wastes without hazard to the public health or the environment and in conformity with the laws of the state and this section, the city clerk shall issue the permit authorized by this section. The per be issued for a period of one year.
Renewal. The annual collection permit may be renewed upon payment of the fee as designated herein if the business has not been modified and if the inspections required in subsection (e) of this section are current and if the insurance required in subsection (d) of this section remains in force. If modifications have been made, the applicant shall reapply for a permit as set forth in this section. No permits authorized by this section shall be transferable from person to person.
Inspections. In order to ensure compliance with this section and the rules and regulations authorized herein, the city clerk is authorized to inspect all phases of solid waste management within the city. No inspection shall be made within any residential unit unless authorized by the occupant or by due process of law. In all instances where such inspections reveal violation of this section, the rules and regulations authorized herein for the storage, collection, transportation, processing or disposal of solid waste or the laws of the state, the director shall issue notice for each such violation stating therein the violation or violations found, the time and date and the corrective measure to be taken, together with the time in which such corrections shall be made.
Suspension or revocation. In all cases, when the corrective measures have not been taken within the time specified, the city clerk shall suspended or revoke the permit or permits involved in the violation; however, in those cases where an extension of time will permit correction and there is no public health hazard treated by the delay, one extension of time not to exceed the original time period may be given.
Appeals. Any person who feels aggrieved by any notice of violation or order issued pursuant thereto of the city clerk may within ten days of the act for which redress is sought appeal directly to the mayor and city council in writing, setting forth in a concise statement the act being appealed and the grounds for its reversal.
Vehicles to display stickers. All collection vehicles operating under any permit required by this section shall display the required license sticker on the windshield.
Temporary use of vehicles lacking stickers. Temporary use of vehicles lacking a license sticker shall have prior approval of the city clerk.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-268; Ord. No. 4491, § 10, 4-23-1991)


Secs. 14-649—14-669. - Reserved.


ARTICLE XII. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 14-670. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Taxicab means a motor vehicle offered to the public by a taxicab business, performing a bona fide for hire taxicab service, having a capacity of not more than five passengers, exclusive of the driver, and not operated on a regular route or between fixed termini.

Taxicab business means the business of offering to the public motor vehicular transportation for a charge on other than fixed routes. (Code 1982, § 18-255; Ord. No. 4491, § 9, 4-23-1991)

Sec. 14-671. - Business license—Required.

No person shall engage in or operate a taxicab business in the city unless he has a valid license. (Code 1982, § 18-256; Ord. No. 4491, § 9, 4-23-1991)

Sec. 14-672. - Same—Application; contents.

Application for the license required by s e c t i o n 1 4 - 6 7 1 shall be made to the city clerk in writing and shall state:

 
(1)


(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
 
The applicant's full name and home address; if a partnership, the full name and home address of each partner; if a corporation, the full name and home address of each officer and director;
The trade name under which the applicant is to do business; The address of the applicant's principal place of business; The number of taxicabs actually owned by the applicant;
The number of taxicabs held under lease by the applicant;
 

(6)

(7)

(8)
 

The make, model, motor number and serial number and registered owner of each taxicab; The applicant's experience in the taxicab business;
The schedule of rates to be charged.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-257; Ord. No. 4491, § 9, 4-23-1991)


Secs. 14-673—14-702. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - TAXICABS



Sec. 14-703. - Metropolitan taxicab commission—Authority to license and regulate vehicles for hire.

The regional taxicab commission, also known as the metropolitan taxicab commission, as established by RSMo 67.1804, is empowered to regulate vehicles for hire in the county. The metropolitan taxicab commission has adopted a vehicles for hire code and regulates such vehicles through administration of its code.

(Code 1982, § 18-258; Ord. No. 5393, § I, 3-13-2007)


Sec. 14-704. - Code adopted.

The vehicles for hire code of the metropolitan taxicab commission is hereby adopted as the vehicles for hire code of the city and incorporated herein by reference.

(Code 1982, § 18-259; Ord. No. 5393, § I, 3-13-2007)


Sec. 14-705. - City clerk to maintain copy of vehicles for hire code.

The city clerk shall maintain a current copy of the vehicles for hire code on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1982, § 18-260; Ord. No. 5393, § I, 3-13-2007)

Sec. 14-706. - Duty to comply.

Any person owning or operating a vehicle regulated by the vehicles for hire code, and other persons subject to the regulations of the code, shall comply with the regulations of the metropolitan taxicab commission and the lawful direction of its agents.

(Code 1982, § 18-261; Ord. No. 5393, § I, 3-13-2007)


Sec. 14-707. - Police authorized to enforce regulations of the metropolitan taxicab commission.

The police department is authorized to enforce the regulations of the Metropolitan Taxicab Commission Vehicles for Hire Code. The police department shall assist agents of the metropolitan taxicab commission in enforcement of the provisions of the code within the city.

(Code 1982, § 18-262; Ord. No. 5393, § I, 3-13-2007)


Sec. 14-708. - Business license issuance.

As a condition precedent to the receipt of the license required by s e c t i o n 1 4 - 6 7 1 , the applicant shall:

 
(1)

(2)
 
Provide proof of a valid current operating license issued by the metropolitan taxicab commission; and Pay the license fee of $75.00 for each taxicab.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-263; Ord. No. 5393, § I, 3-13-2007)


Sec. 14-709. - Commission's enforcement action afects city license.

Any administrative action or judgment by the metropolitan taxicab commission for violation of the Metropolitan Taxicab Commission Vehicles for Hire Code which suspends or revokes an operating license shall simultaneously suspend or revoke the license issued by the city.

(Code 1982, § 18-264; Ord. No. 5393, § I, 3-13-2007)


Sec. 14-710. - License revocation.

The license issued by the city clerk shall be subject to revocation in accordance with the regulations set forth in article II, division 2 of this chapter.
 

(Code 1982, § 18-265; Ord. No. 5393, § I, 3-13-2007)


Secs. 14-711—14-799. - Reserved.


ARTICLE - XIII.

SHORT TERM VACATION



Sec. 14-800. - Purpose.

 
(a)



(b)
 
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations for short term vacation rentals in order to safeguard the peace, safety and general welfare of neighborhoods within the City of Maplewood by minimizing negative secondary affects related to short term vacation rentals including excessive noise, disorderly conduct, illegal parking, overcrowding, and excessive accumulation of refuse.
This article is not intended to provide any owner of residential property with the right or privilege to violate any deed restriction or private conditions, governance or restrictions applicable to the property's owner that may prohibit the use of such owner's residential property for short term vacation rentals as defined in this article. Short term vacation rentals are not permitted in dwelling units that have deed restrictions for affordable housing purposes or other city imposed conditions of approval or restrictions would prohibit the use of such dwelling as a short term vacation rental as defined herein.
 
(Ord. No. 5785, § I, 10-13-2015)


Sec. 14-801. - Deinitions.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)



(d)

(e)
 
Owner means the person or entity that holds legal and equitable title to a short term vacation rental property and who resides there as the legal residence of such person.
Owner occupied means the owner (or person controlling any entity that is the owner) resides in said short term vacation rental property as the owner's (or such controlling person's) legal residence.
Short term vacation rental means a rental of any legally permitted dwelling unit, or a portion of such a legally permitted dwelling unit, located in a single family zoning district as defined by sections 5 6 - 7 1 to 5 6 - 7 3 of this Code for a period of less than 30 consecutive calendar days, in compliance with the terms of this article sections 1 4 - 8 0 0 to 1 4 - 8 0 4 .
Short term vacation rental property means the property in which a short term vacation rental is located.

Transient means any person who occupies any rooms or accommodations within a short term vacation rental property for a period of less than 30 continuous days.
 
(Ord. No. 5785, § I, 10-13-2015)


Sec. 14-802. - Short term vacation rentals.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)


(d)

(e)


(f)

(g)
 
Short term vacation rentals shall be permitted only in owner occupied single family residences within the SR Single-family Residential Zoning District and as permitted as provided in the zoning ordinance.
Short term vacation rentals shall be subject to and shall comply with all requirements of the city and state building, fire, safety and occupancy codes and limits.
The owner of the short term vacation rental shall spend the night on-site at the short term vacation rental property at all times during the term of any short term vacation rental.
Not more than two rooms in any dwelling unit may be rented at the same time as a short term vacation rental.

The owner of any short term vacation rental shall be required to apply for and obtain a short term vacation rental permit and business license from the city before renting or advertising the availability of the short term vacation rental.
A short term vacation rental permit shall be valid from July 1 and shall expire on the following June 30.

Obtaining and renewing a short term vacation rental permit. The owner of the short term vacation rental property shall adhere to the following conditions and shall submit the following information on a short term vacation rental permit application form provided by the city, which shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
 
(1)

(2)
 
The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the short term vacation rental property.

Such other information as the city manager or designee deems reasonably necessary to administer this article.
 

(h)


(i)
 

Any false statements or false information provided in the application for a short term vacation rental permit shall be grounds for denial of permit, permit revocation or imposition of penalties as outlined in this Code of Ordinances.
A short term vacation rental permit application shall be denied if the owner has had a short term vacation rental permit revoked within the past 12 months for the same or other short term vacation rental property. If a short term vacation rental permit is revoked twice, no short term
 

vacation rental permit shall subsequently be issued for such owner or such short term vacation rental property.
 

(j)



(k)



(l)





(m)







(n)



(o)


(p)
 

Operational requirement. The owner shall use reasonable, prudent business practices to insure that the short term vacation rental property is used in a manner that complies with all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy of the short term vacation rental property.
The name, address and telephone number of a local contact person who shall be available 24 hours per day, seven days per week, for the purpose of responding within 45 minutes to complaints regarding the condition, operation or conduct of occupants of the short term vacation rental unit or their guests, shall at all times be kept on file with the city.
The owner shall post the short term vacation rental permit on the exterior of the short term vacation rental property within plain view for the general public with a 24 hours a day, seven days a week local contact phone number for complaints. The permit shall be between eight and one- half inches by 11 inches and four inches by five inches in size and shall be displayed at all times that the short term vacation rental property is being used for a short term vacation rental.
The owner or local contact shall upon notification that any transient, occupant or guest of the short term vacation rental property has created unreasonable noise or disturbances, engaged in disorderly conduct or committed violation of any applicable law, rule or regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy of the short term vacation rental property, respond in a timely and appropriate manner to immediately halt or prevent reoccurrence of such conduct. Failure of the owner or local contact to respond to such calls or complaints regarding the condition, operation or conduct of the occupants and/or guests of a short term vacation rental in a timely and appropriate manner shall be grounds for revocation of the short term vacation rental permit and shall subject the owner to all administrative, legal and equitable remedies available to the city.
The owner or local contact shall use reasonably prudent business practices to insure that the occupants and/or guests of the short term rental unit do not create unreasonable noise or disturbances, engage in disorderly conduct or violate any applicable law, rule or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy of the subject short term vacation rental property.
No amplified or reproduced sound shall be used outside or audible from the property line of any short term vacation rental property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
Prior to rental of a short term vacation rental property, the owner shall:
 

(1)


(2)



(3)



(4)

(5)


(6)
 

Obtain the contact information of all transients, including the name, permanent address, telephone number and emergency contract for each person to occupy the short term rental vacation property.
Require the transient to execute a formal acknowledgement that he or she is legally responsible for compliance by all occupants or guests of the short term vacation rental unit with all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy of the short term vacation rental unit.
Information required in items (1) and (2) above shall be maintained by the owner for a period of three years and shall be made available upon request to any officer of the city responsible for the enforcement of any provision of the municipal code or any applicable law, rule or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy of the short term vacation rental property.
On-site parking shall be allowed on approved driveway, garage and/or carport areas only.

The number of occupants allowed to occupy any short term vacation rental property shall be limited to two people per bedroom and no more than two bedrooms within any short term vacation rental property shall be rented at the same time.
The city manager or designee shall have the authority to impose additional conditions on the use of any short term vacation rental property to insure that any potential secondary affects unique to the subject short term vacation rental unit are avoided or adequately mitigated.
 
(q)
 
The owner shall post the current short term vacation rental permit number on or in any advertisement appearing in any written publication or any website that promotes the availability or existence of a short term vacation rental property.
 
(Ord. No. 5785, § I, 10-13-2015)


Sec. 14-803. - Permit procedure.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Upon receiving an application for a permit for a short term vacation rental property that complies with the provisions of this article, the residents within 200 feet of the property lines of the subject property shall be notified of the application for short term vacation rental permit.
The fee for a short term vacation rental permit shall be $75.00 annually.
 

(Ord. No. 5785, § I, 10-13-2015)


Sec. 14-804. - Penalties and enforcement.

 
(a)



(b)


(c)
 
Upon request by the city manager or designee, owners shall provide access to the short term vacation rental property and to any records related to the use and occupancy of the short term vacation rental property during normal business hours for the purpose of determining compliance with this article.
Any person violating any of the provisions in this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 , general penalty; continuing violations.
In addition to any penalty imposed pursuant to s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 of this Code, the city manager or his designee may impose additional conditions on
 

the use of any short term vacation rental permit pursuant to s e c t i o n 1 4 - 8 0 2 (p)(6), permits.
 

(d)



(e)
 

Except as otherwise expressly provided in sections 1 4 - 8 0 0 to 1 4 - 8 0 4 , enforcement of sections 1 4 - 8 0 0 to 1 4 - 8 0 4 is at the sole discretion of the city. Nothing in this article shall create a right of action on any person against the city or its agents for damages or to compel public enforcement of the provisions of sections 1 4 - 8 0 0 and 1 4 - 8 0 4 against private parties.
Pursuant to s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 (c) of this Code, each and every day during any portion of which a violation of this Code or any other ordinance of this city is committed, continued or permitted, shall be a separate offense.
 
(Ord. No. 5785, § I, 10-13-2015)


Chapter 16 - COURTS



Sec. 16-1. - Established.

There is hereby established in this city a municipal court, to be known as the "Maplewood Municipal Court, a division of the Twenty-First Judicial Circuit of the State of Missouri." This court is a continuation of the municipal court of the city as previously established, and is termed herein "the municipal court."

(Code 1972, § 205.01; Code 1982, § 20-1; Ord. No. 3965, § 1, 12-11-1978)


Sec. 16-2. - Proceedings; trial by jury.

 
(a)

(b)



(c)



(d)
 
All cases brought before the municipal court shall be entitled "City of Maplewood against (name of person charged)."

The docket shall show the name of the complainant, the nature of the offense, the date of trial, the names of the witnesses sworn and examined, the finding of the court or jury, the judgment and penalties, if any, the date of payment or commitment, and such other information as will show the full proceedings in the case.
The charges shall be in writing and shall set forth the violations complained of and the section of the Charter or ordinance that was violated. It shall conclude with the phrase "against the peace and dignity of the city." There may be two or more counts. The charges shall be sworn to by the city attorney or any other person verifying or making the complaint before a warrant shall issue.
Any person charged with a violation of the Charter or ordinances shall be entitled to a trial by jury to the extent jury trial are permitted or required in prosecutions for misdemeanors before an associate circuit judge.
 
(Code 1972, § 205.02; Code 1982, § 20-2; Ord. No. 3965, § 2, 12-11-1978)


Sec. 16-3. - Court costs; fling fees.

 
(a)
 
In addition to any fine that may be imposed by the municipal judge there shall be assessed as costs in all cases the following:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)



(4)





(5)
 

General costs, in the amount of $12.00.

In all cases, costs for the training of police officers, in the amount of $2.00 to be transmitted to the city treasurer.

In all cases, costs in the amount of $1.00 to be deposited with the treasurer of the state in the Peace Officers Standards and Training Commission Fund, to be used statewide for training of peace officers. The $1.00 surcharge assessed pursuant to this subsection shall be in addition to the $2.00 surcharge assessed pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section.
A surcharge of $2.00 pursuant to the provisions of RSMo 488.5026 shall be collected in all cases, except where the proceeding is dismissed by the court or where the costs are to be paid by the city. All funds collected pursuant to this subsection shall be used only to develop and maintain a biometric verification system to ensure that inmates are properly identified and tracked within a local jail system and to pay for any expenses related to custody, housing and other expenses for inmates.
In addition to any other costs or fees provided in this Code pertaining to cases filed in the Maplewood Municipal Division, an additional sum of $5.00 shall be assessed as costs in each proceeding filed in the Maplewood Municipal Division for violation of ordinances of the city, provided that no such fee shall be collected for nonmoving traffic violations or in any proceedings when the proceeding or the defendant has been dismissed by the court. All sums collected pursuant to this section shall be distributed as follows:
 
a.	Ninety-five percent of such fees shall be paid to the director of revenue of the state for deposit to the Crime Victim's Compensation Fund and the services to the victim's fund as provided in RSMo 595.045.
b.	Five percent shall be paid to the city treasury.
 

(6)





(7)
 

In addition to any other costs or fees provided in this Code pertaining to cases filed in Maplewood Municipal Division, an additional sum of
$1.00 shall be assessed as costs in each proceeding filed in the Maplewood Municipal Division for the violation of the ordinances of this city. All sums collected pursuant to this subsection shall be distributed on a monthly basis to the county to be used only for the purposes of providing operating expenses for shelters for battered persons as provided in RSMo 488.607.
Other costs, such as service costs and witness fees, in the same amounts as provided before the associate circuit judge in criminal prosecutions.
 

(8)

(9)
 

Actual costs assessed against the city by the county sheriff for apprehension or confinement in the county jail.

Mileage, in tile same amount as provided to the sheriff in criminal violations, for each mile and fraction thereof the officer must travel (both directions) in order to serve any warrant or commitment or order of this court.
 
(b)
 
The costs of any action may be assessed against the prosecuting witness and judgment be rendered against him that he pay the same and stand committed until paid in any case where it appears to the satisfaction of the municipal judge that the prosecution was commenced without probable cause and from malicious motives.
 
(Code 1972, § 205.04; Code 1982, § 20-3; Ord. No. 3965, § 3, 12-11-1978; Ord. No. 4063, § 1, 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4693, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 4761, § 1, 12-10-
1996; Ord. No. 5476, § 6-10-2008)


Sec. 16-4. - Selection of judges.

The judge of the city's municipal court shall be known as a municipal judge of the Twenty-First Judicial Circuit, and shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the majority of the council. When necessary, a provisional judge may be appointed in the same manner as the municipal judge.

(Code 1972, § 205.05; Code 1982, § 20-4; Ord. No. 3965, § 4, 12-11-1978)


Sec. 16-5. - Public defender.

There is hereby established the office of public defender of the municipal court. The public defender shall be a lawyer licensed to practice by the state, a resident of the county, and shall be appointed by the municipal judge. His compensation for his duties shall be set by the municipal judge and approved by the council. The duties of the public defender shall be to serve as counsel when appointed by the municipal judge or the special judge of the city to represent persons appearing before the municipal court and accused of a violation of this Code of which subjects them to the possibility of imprisonment, and which parties demonstrate to the satisfaction of the municipal judge, or the special judge, that they are unable to employ counsel on their own behalf and desire to have counsel appointed to represent them.

(Code 1972, § 203.04A; Code 1982, § 20-5; Ord. No. 3716, § 1, 11-27-1972)


Sec. 16-6. - Search warrants.

 
(a)





(b)


(c)
 
The municipal judge shall have the authority to issue search warrants, to the fullest extent permitted by the laws of the state, for searches or inspections to determine the existence, evidence or fruits of violations of any of the ordinances of the city, and to seize, photograph, copy or record property, articles, materials and substances, and to search for and seize persons, of the kinds authorized to be searched for and seized pursuant to the laws of this state, including, but not limited to, RSMo 542.271.
All warrants issued by the municipal judge shall be directed to the chief of police or any other police officer of the city. The warrants shall be executed by the chief of police or any other police officer of the city at any place within the limits of the city.
Warrants and searches or inspections and seizures made pursuant thereto shall conform to and be governed by the following provisions:
 

(1)

(2)
 

The chief of police, any police officer, or the prosecuting attorney of the city may make application for the issuance of a search warrants. The application shall:
 
a.	Be in writing;

b.	State the time and date of the making of the application;

c.	Identify the property or places to be searched in sufficient detail and particularity that the officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it;
d.	State facts sufficient to show probable cause for the issuance of a search warrant to search for violations of any chapter, provision or provisions of this Code specified in the application;
e.	Be verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant; and

f.	Be filed with the clerk of the municipal court.
 

(3)



(4)





(5)

(6)
 

The application shall be supplemented by written affidavits verified by oath or affirmation. Such affidavits shall be considered in determining whether there is probable cause for the issuance of a search warrant and in filling out any deficiencies in the description of the property or place to be searched. Oral testimony shall not be considered.
The judge shall hold a nonadversary hearing to determine whether sufficient facts have been stated to justify the issuance of a search warrant. If it appears from the application and any supporting affidavits that there is probable cause to inspect or search for violations of any specified chapter, provision or provisions of this Code, a search warrant shall be issued immediately to search for such violations. The warrant shall be issued in the form of an original and two copies.
The application and any supporting affidavits and a copy of the warrants shall be retained in the records of the municipal court. The search warrant shall:
 
a.	Be in writing and in the name of the issuing authority;
 

b.	Be directed to the chief of police or any other police officer of the city;

c.	State the time and date the warrant is issued;

d.	Identify the property or places to be searched in sufficient detail and particularity that the officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it;
e.	Command that the described property, articles, materials, substances, or persons found thereon or therein be seized or photographed or copied and returned, or the photograph or copy be brought, within ten days after filing of the application, to the judge who issued the warrant, to be dealt with according to law; and
f.	Be signed by the municipal judge, with his title of office indicated.
 

(7)


(8)


(9)






(10)
 

A search warrant issued under this section may be executed only by the chief of police or a police officer of the city. The warrant shall be executed by conducting the search commanded.
A search warrant shall be executed as soon as practicable and shall expire if it is not executed and the return made within ten days after the making of such application.
After execution of the search warrant, the warrant, with a return thereon signed by the officer making the search, shall be delivered to the judge who issued the warrant. The return shall show the date and manner of execution, what if anything was seized, and the name of the possessor and of the owner of the property or place searched and of any property, articles, materials or substances seized, when not the same person, if known. The return shall be accompanied by a copy of the itemized receipt required by section RSMo 542.291 and subsection (c)(14) of this section, pertaining to any property, articles, materials or substances seized.
A search warrant shall be deemed invalid if:
 

a.	It was not issued by a judge of the municipal court;

b.	It was issued without a written application having been filed and verified;

c.	It was issued without probable cause;

d.	It was not issued with respect to property or places within the city;

e.	It does not describe the property or places to be searched with sufficient certainty;

f.	It was not signed by the judge who issued it; or

g.	It was not executed within the time prescribed by subsection (c)(8) of this section.
 

(11)

(12)


(13)


(14)


(15)
 

The search shall be conducted in a reasonable manner. The search may be made at night if making it during the daytime is not practicable. The chief of police or police officer making a search pursuant to an invalid warrant, the invalidity of which is not apparent on its face, may
use such force as he would be justified in using if the warrant were valid.

The chief of police or police officer making a search may summon as many persons as he deems necessary to assist him in executing the warrant. Such persons shall not be held liable as a result of the illegality of the search and seizure.
If any property is seized, the officer shall give to the person from whose possession it is taken, if he is present, a copy of the warrant and an itemized receipt of the property taken. If no such person is present, the officer shall leave the copy and the receipt at the site of the search.
A copy of the itemized receipt of any property taken shall be delivered to the office of the prosecuting attorney of the city within two working days of the search.
 
(d)
 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entry or access to any unit, dwelling or structure to any person to whom a search warrant has been issued authorizing search or inspection of said unit, dwelling or structure pursuant to the provisions of this section. Violation of this subsection
(d)	shall be punished as provided in s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 .
 

(Code 1982, § 20-6; Ord. No. 4743, § 1, 8-13-1996)


Chapter 18 - ELECTIONS



Sec. 18-1. - Nomination of candidates.

 
(a)
 
Any person desiring to become a candidate for mayor or councilman shall file with the city clerk a statement of his candidacy in the following form:
State of Missouri,
)


)   ss

County of St. Louis
)
 

I,	, herewith state and declare that I reside at Number	Street, City of Maplewood, County of St. Louis, State of Missouri; that I am a qualified voter therein; that I am a candidate for nomination to the office of	of Maplewood to be voted upon at the  primary election to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in February, 20	; and I hereby request that my name be printed upon the official primary ballot for the nomination by such election for such office.
 

(b)








































(c)



(d)


(e)
 

In addition to the statement of candidacy, a person filing for a ward councilman seat shall file therewith the petition of at least 50 voters qualified to vote for the candidate so nominated requesting such candidacy; petitions for the office of mayor shall be signed by at least 150 qualified voters of the city. Each petition shall be verified by one or more persons as to the qualifications and residence, with the street number of each of the persons so signing the petition, and the petition shall be substantially in the following form:
The undersigned, duly qualified electors of the City of Maplewood and residing at the places set opposite our respective names hereto, do hereby request that the name of	be placed on the ballot as a candidate for nomination for	at the primary election to be held in the city on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in February, 20	. We further state that we know him to be a qualified elector of the city, and a man of good moral character and qualified, in our judgment, for the duties of such office.































Immediately upon the expiration of the time of filing the statements and petitions for candidacies, the city clerk shall cause to be published, for two successive issues of all or any weekly newspaper that may be in general circulation in the city, in proper form, the names as they are to appear upon the primary ballot. The city clerk shall thereupon cause such ballots to be printed.
On the day following the primary election, the city clerk shall canvass the returns so received from all the polling precincts, and make and publish in two newspapers in the city, if there be two, at least once, the result thereof. The canvass by the city clerk shall be publicly made.
The two candidates having the highest number of votes for mayor shall be the candidates whose names shall be placed upon the ballot for
mayor at the next succeeding general municipal election, and the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes for each council seat shall be placed upon the ballot for councilman at such municipal election.
 
(Code 1972, § 204.02; Code 1982, § 9-1; Ord. No. 4853, § III, 10-27-1998)


Sec. 18-2. - Filing times.

 
(a)

(b)


(c)
 
The normal filing time for elective office in the city shall be from 8:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. during the filing dates established for any given election. When a filing date is established, the city clerk shall provide a sign-in sheet at the close of business the preceding day in order for those who
arrive for filing to be indicated, with the time as to when they arrived in line, to effectuate an orderly manner for filing when the time arrives.

The city clerk designated as the city's election official for city elections has the authority to change the procedure set out in subsections (a) and (b) of this section in unusual circumstances provided the entire council is adequately informed.
 
(Code 1982, § 9-2; Ord. No. 4079, §§ 1—3, 2-24-1981)


Sec. 18-3. - Conduct of elections.
 

At the general municipal election on the first Tuesday in April, the clerk shall furnish ballots as prepared in the preceding section, and the general election shall be held in like manner as the primary election and in conformity with the election laws of the state.

(Code 1972, § 204.03; Code 1982, § 9-3)


Sec. 18-4. - Ward boundaries.

The city is hereby divided into three wards, the boundaries of which are as follows:

 
(1)





(2)






(3)
 
First Ward. The first ward shall consist of the western portion of the city situated within the following area: Beginning at the centerline of the intersection of Bredell Avenue and the northern corporate limit of the city, then southwardly along the centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Rannells Avenue, then eastwardly along that centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Big Bend Boulevard, then southwardly along that centerline to its intersection with the southern corporate limit of the city.
Second Ward. The second ward shall consist of the northeastern portion of the city situated within the following area: Beginning at the centerline of the intersection of Bredell Avenue and the northern corporate limits of the city, then southwardly along that centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Rannells Avenue, then eastwardly along that centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Big Bend Boulevard, then southwardly along that centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Manchester Boulevard, then eastwardly along that centerline to its intersection with the eastern corporate limits of the city.
Third Ward. The third ward shall consist of the southeastern portion of the city situated within the following area: Beginning at the centerline of the intersection of Big Bend Boulevard and the southern corporate limits of the city, then northwardly along that centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Manchester Boulevard, then eastwardly along that centerline to its intersection with the eastern corporate limit of the city.
 

(Code 1972, § 204.06; Code 1982, § 9-4; Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 9-12-1978)


Chapter 20 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Sec. 20-1. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Chief executive officer means the city manager or other official appointed by the city council. (Code 1982, § 8-1)

Secs. 20-2—20-20. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - MAPLEWOOD EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY



Sec. 20-21. - Local organization—Establishment; purpose.

There is hereby created a local municipal organization for emergency management and disaster planning for the preparation and the carrying out of all the emergency functions other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy attack in accordance with RSMo 44.080.

(Code 1982, § 8-2)


Sec. 20-22. - Composition.

The organization established by s e c t i o n 2 0 - 2 1 shall consist of a coordinator and other additional members to be selected by the director in order to conform to the state organization and procedures for the conduct of emergency operations as outlined in the state survival plan.

(Code 1982, § 8-3)


Sec. 20-23. - Coordinator appointed; responsibilities.

 
(a)
 
A coordinator of the municipal emergency management agency for the conduct of emergency operations shall be appointed by the manager, by
 

and with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall serve until removed by the same.
 

(b)
 

The coordinator shall have such responsibilities for the organization, administration and operation of this organization as is delegated by the chief executive officer subject to the direction and control of the city council, as provided by statute.
 
(Code 1982, § 8-4)


Sec. 20-24. - Functions of agency.

The municipal emergency management agency created by this chapter shall perform such emergency management and disaster planning functions within the municipality as shall be prescribed in and by the state emergency management plan and program prepared by the governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor, and, in addition, shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual-aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by the RSMo c h . 4 4 or the state survival plan.

(Code 1982, § 8-5)


Sec. 20-25. - Appointment, etc., of personnel; mobile support units.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)
 
The coordinator of the municipal emergency management agency shall appoint, provide, without compensation, or remove any personnel needed by the organization for the proper function of its duties.
The coordinator shall form mobile support units as provided for in the RSMo c h . 4 4 and the state survival plan and shall designate the leaders thereof.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a municipal employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the governor, or the state director of civil defense, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or office.
 
(Code 1982, § 8-6)


Sec. 20-26. - Oath of personnel.

Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the municipal civil defense organization shall, before entering upon his duties, take an oath, in writing, before a person authorized to administer oaths in the state, which shall be filed with the director, which oath shall be substantially as follows:

I,	, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Missouri, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservations or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter.
And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been, a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or this state by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the municipal emergency management agency, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence.

(Code 1982, § 8-7)


Sec. 20-27. - Ofce space.

The city manager or city council is authorized to designate space in any municipally owned or leased building for the municipal emergency management agency as its office.

(Code 1982, § 8-8)


Sec. 20-28. - Mutual-aid agreements.

 
(a)





(b)
 
The chief executive officer of the city, with the approval of the governor, may enter into mutual-aid arrangements or agreements with other public and private agencies within and without the state for reciprocal emergency management and disaster planning. Such arrangements or
agreements shall be consistent with the state survival plan, and in time of emergency it shall be the duty of each local organization for emergency management and disaster planning to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual-aid arrangements or agreements.
The coordinator of the local organization for emergency management and disaster planning may assist in negotiation or reciprocal mutual-aid agreements between his organization and other public and private agencies and between the governor and the adjoining states or political subdivisions thereof, and shall carry out arrangements or agreements relating to the local unit.
 
(Code 1982, § 8-9)


Sec. 20-29. - Use of services, facilities, etc., of state ofces, agencies, etc.
 

In carrying out the emergency powers under the provisions of this chapter, the chief executive officer is directed to use the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of the state and of the political subdivisions thereof, and the officers and personnel of all such departments, offices and agencies are directed to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the governor and the state emergency management agency upon request.

(Code 1982, § 8-10)


Sec. 20-30. - Gifts, grants and loans.

Whenever the federal government or the state government, or any officer or agency thereof, shall offer to the state, or through the state to any political subdivision thereof, services, equipment, supplies, material or funds by way of gift, grant or loan, for the purpose of emergency management or disaster planning, the state acting through the governor, or the political subdivision, acting with the consent of the governor and through its executive officer, may accept such offer and upon acceptance the governor or executive officer of the political subdivision, as the case may be, to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the state or the political subdivisions subject to the terms of the offer.

(Code 1982, § 8-11)


Sec. 20-31. - Procurement of services, supplies, etc., in emergency.

In the event of an emergency as defined in the RSMo c h . 4 4 , the coordinator of the municipal emergency management agency is authorized, on behalf of the municipality, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to
the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or obligations, as authorized by RSMo c h . 4 4 , provided that, if the city council meets at such time, he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.

(Code 1982, § 8-12)


Sec. 20-32. - Certain statutory requirements may be waived in event of enemy attack.

In the event of enemy attack, the city manager or city council may waive any time consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by statute pertaining to the advertisement for bids for the performance of public work or entering into contracts.

(Code 1982, § 8-13)


Secs. 20-33—20-52. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - AMBULANCES


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Secs. 20-53—20-77. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - MUTUAL ASSISTANCE AGREEMENT



Sec. 20-78. - Contract with neighboring municipalities and districts.

The city hereby contracts respectively and separately with the cities of Brentwood, Clayton, Ladue, Richmond Heights, University City, and Shrewsbury, effective upon the passage and approval of a like ordinance by the legislative body of any of such cities or fire districts for the interchange of ambulance service of the fire departments of such cities, or fire districts, upon the conditions and provisions contained in this division.

(Code 1982, § 5-16; Ord. No. 3817, § 1, 5-12-1975)


Sec. 20-79. - Duty to respond to alarms.

The ambulance service of the city shall respond to emergency alarms on call from any part of the cities and fire districts referred to in s e c t i o n 2 0 - 7 8 , and the ambulance service of such cities and fire districts shall respond to emergency ambulance alarms on call in any part of the city, commencing upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived and continuing indefinitely.

(Code 1982, § 5-17; Ord. No. 3817, § 2, 5-12-1975)
 

Sec. 20-80. - Termination of contract.

The contract set out in this division may be terminated at any time during its term by either party thereto upon passage of an ordinance to that effect by the legislative body thereof and upon serving on the city clerk of the other municipalities or fire districts a certified copy of such termination ordinance. The termination thereof shall take effect 60 days from the date of the service of such written notice.

(Code 1982, § 5-18; Ord. No. 3817, § 3, 5-12-1975)


Sec. 20-81. - Consideration.

The consideration for the service of the fire departments of each municipality and fire district, shall be the service given for the protection of the lives in the other municipalities and fire districts by the service of the other cities or fire districts hereto, and no compensation shall accrue or be paid to any of such cities or fire districts for the service of the ambulance service of the other cities or fire districts.

(Code 1982, § 5-19; Ord. No. 3817, § 4, 5-12-1975)


Sec. 20-82. - Liability to other participants.

No municipality or fire district through the contract set out in this division shall be liable to the other for failure to respond to any call by the other, or for delay or negligence or mistake in receiving and responding to any call, nor shall this contract be interpreted as being an agreement for the benefit for any third person.

(Code 1982, § 5-20; Ord. No. 3817, § 5, 5-12-1975)


Sec. 20-83. - Liability to employees.

Neither the city nor any other of the municipalities or fire districts referred to in s e c t i o n 2 0 - 7 8 shall be liable by reason of the contract set out in this division to any ambulance personnel, firefighter, official or employee of the other, nor shall any ambulance personnel, firefighter, official or employee of any of the parties to the contract set out in this division be considered for any purpose an ambulance personnel, firefighter, official or employee of any municipality or fire district other than the one by which he is regularly employed.

(Code 1982, § 5-21; Ord. No. 3817, § 6, 5-12-1975)


Sec. 20-84. - Damage to equipment or property to be borne by owner.

In case of loss or damage to the equipment or property of any of the municipalities or fire districts referred to in s e c t i o n 2 0 - 7 8 while responding to emergency ambulance alarms or at an emergency alarm or returning therefrom, such loss or damage shall be borne by the city or fire district owning such equipment or property.

(Code 1982, § 5-22; Ord. No. 3817, § 7, 5-12-1975)


Sec. 20-85. - Status of department while in another municipality or district.

Except as otherwise provided for in this division, when the fire department of a municipality or fire district referred to in s e c t i o n 2 0 - 7 8 responds to an emergency ambulance alarm in other municipalities or fire protection districts, it shall, during the time that its equipment and personnel are in such municipalities or fire protection districts, have the same status and be subject to and protected by all of the laws and ordinances of such municipalities and fire protection districts that have application to such municipalities and fire protection districts.

(Code 1982, § 5-23; Ord. No. 3817, § 8, 5-12-1975)


Sec. 20-86. - Minimum personnel and standards.

Each municipality and fire protection district referred to in s e c t i o n 2 0 - 7 8 shall maintain at least two qualified personnel on the ambulance unit when responding on an assist call. The driver/attendant and unit shall comply with all state laws that pertain to emergency ambulance services.

(Code 1982, § 5-24; Ord. No. 3817, § 10, 5-12-1975)


Sec. 20-87. - Determination of hospital to be used.

Hospitals to which patients are to be conveyed shall be at the discretion of the responding municipality or fire protection district and their policy shall be enforced.

(Code 1982, § 5-25; Ord. No. 3817, § 11, 5-12-1975)
 

Sec. 20-88. - Efect of contracting with other municipalities or districts.

In the event the cities of Brentwood, Clayton, Ladue, Richmond Heights, University City, or Shrewsbury should hereafter make a contract with any city or fire district other than the above enumerated cities and fire districts to furnish ambulance service for such cities and fire districts in exchange for compensation, such agreement shall automatically terminate the provisions of this division as to such membership city or fire district which shall hereafter so contract some third party or unincorporated area unless this member city shall have first received the approval of all the cities hereinabove enumerated in writing prior to executing such contractual agreement for the furnishing of services of the fire department.

(Code 1982, § 5-26; Ord. No. 3817, § 12, 5-12-1975)


Sec. 20-89. - City to furnish aid in event of disaster in county.

In the event of a natural or manmade disaster in any city or fire district within the county, the city further agrees to furnish ambulance service to the disaster without regard to all prior contractual agreements.

(Code 1982, § 5-27; Ord. No. 3817, § 13, 5-12-1975)


Chapter 22 - ENVIRONMENT


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - AIR POLLUTION



Sec. 22-19. - Application of state law and county ordinances.

Pursuant to the provisions of RSMo 643.140, the provisions of law relative to air pollution control in force in the state and the county shall apply in this city and all ordinances enacted by the city council shall be construed in such a way as to make them consistent with the ordinances of the county and the laws of the state relative to air pollution control.

(Code 1972, § 302C.01; Code 1982, § 15-16)


Secs. 22-20—22-41. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE



Sec. 22-42. - Statutory authorization, fndings of fact, and purposes.

 
(a)



(b)
 
Statutory authorization. The legislature of the State of Missouri has in RSMo 89.020 delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations designed to protect the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the city council of the City of Maplewood, Missouri ordains as follows:
Findings of fact.
 

(1)





(2)



(3)
 

Flood losses resulting from periodic inundation. The special flood hazard areas of the City of Maplewood, Missouri are subject to inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base; all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
General causes of the flood losses. These flood losses are caused by (1) the cumulative effect of development in any delineated floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities; and (2) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods, hazardous to others, inadequately elevated, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
Methods used to analyze flood hazards. The flood insurance study (FIS) that is the basis of this article uses a standard engineering method of analyzing flood hazards which consist of a series of interrelated steps.
 
a.	Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this article is representative of large floods which are characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this article. It is in the
 

general order of a flood which could be expected to have a one percent chance of occurrence in any one year as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administrator's FIS, and illustrative materials for St. Louis County dated February 4, 2015, as amended, and any future revisions thereto.
b.	Calculation of water surface profiles are based on a standard hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood.
c.	Computation of a floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than one foot at any point.

d.	Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no development is permitted that would cause any increase in flood height.

e.	Delineation of flood fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the base flood.
 

(c)
 

Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; to minimize those losses described in subsection (b)(1) of this section; to establish or maintain the community's eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) as defined in 4 4 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 59.22(a) (3); and to meet the requirements of 4 4 CFR 60.3(d) by applying the provisions of this article to:
 
(1)


(2)


(3)
 
Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities;
Require uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction; and
Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the intended development purposes due to the flood hazard.
 

(Ord. No. 5759, § I, 1-13-2015)


Sec. 22-43. - General provisions.

 
(a)







(b)


(c)


(d)



(e)


(f)







(g)
 
Lands to which ordinance applies. This article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Maplewood, Missouri identified as numbered and unnumbered A zones and AE zones, on the flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) for St. Louis County on map panels, 29189C0327K and 29189C0331K dated February 4, 2015, as amended, and any future revisions thereto. In all areas covered by this article, no development shall be permitted except through the issuance of a floodplain development permit, granted by the city council or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the city council or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community, and as specifically noted in.
Floodplain administrator. The director of public works or his designated representative is hereby designated as the floodplain administrator under this article.
Compliance. No development located within the special flood hazard areas of this community shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
Interpretation . In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood heights may be increased by man- made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This ordinance does not imply that areas outside the floodway and flood fringe or land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This ordinance shall not create a liability on the part of the City of Maplewood, any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby.
 
(Ord. No. 5759, § I, 1-13-2015)


Sec. 22-44. - Administration.

 
(a)





(b)


(c)
 
Floodplain development permit required. A floodplain development permit shall be required for all proposed construction or other development, including the placement of manufactured homes, in the areas described in s e c t i o n 2 2 - 4 5 . No person, firm, corporation, or unit of government shall initiate any development or substantial-improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate floodplain development permit for each structure or other development.
Designation of floodplain administrator. The director of public works or his designated representative is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article.
Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator. duties of the director of public works or his designated representative shall include, but
 

not be limited to:
 

(1)


(2)


(3)


(4)

(5)


(6)

(7)


(8)


(9)
 

Review of all applications for floodplain development permits to assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the floodplain development permit requirements of this article have been satisfied;
Review of all applications for floodplain development permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required by federal, state, or local law;
Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding;
Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications;

Notify adjacent communities and the Missouri State Emergency Management Agency (Mo SEMA) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);
Assure that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished and shall be maintained within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse. Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or
substantially improved structures;

Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) that the new or substantially improved non-residential structures have been floodproofed;
When floodproofing techniques are utilized for a particular non-residential structure, the director of public works or his designated representative shall require certification from a registered professional engineer or architect.
 
(d)
 
Application for floodplain development permit. To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every floodplain development permit application shall:
 
(1)


(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)
 
Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block and tract, house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed structure or work;
Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain development permit; Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended;
Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market value of the improvement; Specify whether development is located in designated flood fringe or floodway;
Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed development; Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the building official;
Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction; and

Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
 

(Ord. No. 5759, § I, 1-13-2015)


Sec. 22-45. - Provisions for lood hazard reduction.

 
(a)
 
General standards.
 

(1)



(2)





(3)





(4)
 

No permit for floodplain development shall be granted for new construction, substantial-improvements, and other improvements, including the placement of manufactured homes, within any numbered or unnumbered A zones and AE zones, unless the conditions of this section are satisfied.
All areas identified as unnumbered A zones on the FIRM are subject to inundation of the 100-year flood; however, the base flood elevation is not provided. Development within unnumbered A zones is subject to all provisions of this article. If flood insurance study data is not available, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from federal, state, or other sources.
Until a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within any numbered A zone or AE zone on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantial-improvements, prefabricated structures, placement of manufactured homes, and other developments shall require:
 
a.	Design or adequate anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
b.	Construction with materials resistant to flood damage;

c.	Utilization of methods and practices that minimize flood damages;

d.	All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment, and other service facilities be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
 

e.	New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood wat and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamin
f.	Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, located within special flood hazard areas are required to assure that:
1.	All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

2.	All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
3.	Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and

4.	All proposals for development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, of five acres or 50 lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data.
 
(5)
 
Storage, material, and equipment.
 

a.	The storage or processing of materials within the special flood hazard area that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.
b.	Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning.
 
(6)
 
Accessory structures. Structures used solely for parking and limited storage purposes, not attached to any other structure on the site, of limited investment value, and not larger than 400 square feet, may be constructed at-grade and wet floodproofed provided there is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; a variance has been granted from the standard floodplain management requirements of this article; and a floodplain development permit has been issued.
 
(b)
 
Specific standards. In all areas identified as numbered and unnumbered A zones and AE zones, where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in subsection (a)(2), the following provisions are required:
 
(1)
 
Residential construction. New construction or substantial-improvement of any residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above base flood elevation.
 
(*In all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones, the FEMA, Region VII office recommends elevating to one foot above the base flood elevation to accommodate floodway conditions when the floodplain is fully developed.)
 

(2)
 

Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial-improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in s e c t i o n 2 2 - 4 4 (c)(9).
 

(*The FEMA, Region VII office recommends elevating to one foot above the base flood elevation to qualify for flood insurance rates based upon floodproofing.)
 

(3)
 

Require, for all new construction and substantial-improvements that fully enclosed areas below lowest floor used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
 
a.	A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; and
b.	The bottom of all opening shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
 

(c)
 

Manufactured homes.
 

(1)





(2)
 

All manufactured homes to be placed within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones, on the community's FIRM shall be required to be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
Require manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within unnumbered or numbered A zones and AE zones, on the community's FIRM on sites:
 
a.	Outside of manufactured home park or subdivision;

b.	In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

c.	In an expansion to and existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
 

d.	In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial-damage as the result of a a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation and to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
 
(3)
 
Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones, on the community's FIRM, that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (c)(2) of this section, be elevated so that either:
 
a.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at one foot above the base flood level; or

b.	The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(*In all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones, the FEMA, Region VII office recommends elevating to one foot above the base flood elevation to accommodate floodway conditions when the floodplain is fully developed.)
 

(d)
 

Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in s e c t i o n 2 2 - 4 3 (a) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters that carry debris and potential projectiles, the following provisions shall apply:
 
(1)



(2)





(3)


(4)
 
The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point.
The community shall prohibit any encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial- improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
If subsection(d)(2) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial-improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section.
In unnumbered A zones, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from Federal, State, or other sources as set forth in subsection (a)(2).
 
(e)
 
Recreational vehicles.
 

(1)
 

Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones on the community's FIRM either:
 
a.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,

b.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use*; or

c.	Meet the permitting, elevation, and the anchoring requirements for manufactured homes of this article.

(*A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.)

(Ord. No. 5759, § I, 1-13-2015)


Sec. 22-46. - Floodplain management variance procedures.

 
(a)


(b)






(c)


(d)
 
Establishment of appeal board. The board of adjustment as established by the City of Maplewood shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the floodplain management requirements of this article.
Responsibility of appeal board. Where an application for a floodplain development permit or request for a variance from the floodplain management regulations is denied by the director of public works or his designated representative, the applicant may apply for such floodplain development permit or variance directly to the board of adjustment, as defined in subsection (a) of this section. The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the director of public works or his designated representative in the enforcement or administration of this article.
Further appeals. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the St. Louis County circuit court as provided in RSMo 89.110.
Floodplain management variance criteria. In passing upon such applications for variances, the board of adjustment shall consider all technical data and evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article, and the following criteria:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
 
The danger to life and property due to flood damage;

The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
 

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)
 

The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flood damage, for the proposed use; The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters, if applicable, expected at the site; and, The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems; streets; and bridges.
 

(e)
 

Conditions for approving floodplain management variances.
 

(1)





(2)



(3)

(4)


(5)





(6)
 

Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial-improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (2) through (6) below have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the state inventory of historic places, or local inventory of historic places upon determination provided the proposed activity will not preclude the structure's continued historic designation.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.

Variances shall only be issued upon (a) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (b) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (c) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this article.
 
(f)
 
Conditions for approving variances for accessory structures. Any variance granted for an accessory structure shall be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in subsections (d) and (e) of this article. In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance issued for accessory structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed.
 
(1)

(2)



(3)



(4)



(5)



(6)

(7)


(8)





(9)
 
Use of the accessory structures must be solely for parking and limited storage purposes in flood-prone areas only.

For any new or substantially damaged accessory structures, the exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below highest adjacent grade, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with s e c t i o n 2 2 - 4 5 (a)(4)b. of this article.
The accessory structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure in accordance with s e c t i o n 2 2 - 4 5 (a)(4)a. of this article. All of the building's structural components must be capable of resisting specific  flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above highest adjacent grade or floodproofed so that they are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with s e c t i o n 
 2 2 - 4 5 (a)(4)d. of this article.

The accessory structures must meet all National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in accordance with the NFIP regulations.
Equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from any flood damage.

No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs of the accessory structures.
A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below highest adjacent grade will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for
$100.00 of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below highest adjacent grade increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this article.
Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and approved by the community and registered professional engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for construction.
 

(Ord. No. 5759, § I, 1-13-2015)


Sec. 22-47. - Penalties for violation.

Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Maplewood or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

(Ord. No. 5759, § I, 1-13-2015)


Sec. 22-48. - Amendments.

The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this article may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Maplewood least 20 days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be provided to the Region VII office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The regulations of this article are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations.

(Ord. No. 5759, § I, 1-13-2015)


Sec. 22-49. - Defnitions.

Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.

100-year flood see "base flood."

Accessory structure means the same as "appurtenant structure."

Actuarial rates see "risk premium rates."

Administrator means the Federal Insurance Administrator.

Agency means the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).

Agricultural commodities means agricultural products and livestock.

Agricultural structure means any structure used exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities.

Appeal means a request for review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance.

Appurtenant structure means a structure that is on the same parcel of property as the principle structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.

Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Basement means any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

Building sees "structure."

Chief executive officer or chief elected official means the official of the community who is charged with the authority to implement and administer laws, ordinances, and regulations for that community.

Community means any state or area or political subdivision thereof, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction.

Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, levees, levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.

Elevated building means for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
 

Eligible community or participating community means a community for which the administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under the national flood insurance program (NFIP).

Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures."

Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of inland and/or (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means an official map of a community on which the Administrator has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the designated regulatory floodway.

Flood elevation determination means a determination by the administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.

Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards.

Flood fringe means the area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the regulatory flood.

Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the administrator, where the boundaries of the flood areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered or numbered) A zones.

Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

Flood insurance study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.

Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see "flooding").

Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.

Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof
that provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.

Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents.

Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

Floodway encroachment lines means the lines marking the limits of floodways on Federal, State and local floodplain maps.

Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.

Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This term includes only docking facilities and facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

Historic structure means any structure that is (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily
 

determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable floodproofing design requirements of this article.

Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."

Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

Map means the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM), flood insurance rate map (FIRM), or the flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).

Market value or fair market value means an estimate of what is fair, economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions.

Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced.

New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.

(NFIP) means the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).

Participating community also known as an "eligible community," means a community in which the administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance.

Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including Federal, State, and local governments and agencies.

Principally above ground means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground.

Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light- duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with Federal, State, or local floodplain management regulations; or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance.

Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Risk premium rates means those rates established by the Administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307 of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted actuarial principles. "Risk premium rates" include provisions for operating costs and allowances.

Special flood hazard area see "area of special flood hazard."

Special hazard area means an area having special flood hazards and shown on an FHBM, FIRM or FBFM as zones (unnumbered or numbered) A and AE.

Start of construction includes substantial-improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvements were within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, the erection of
 

temporary forms, nor installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

State coordinating agency means that agency of the state government, or other office designated by the governor of the state or by state statute at the request of the Administrator to assist in the implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in that state.

Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure" for insurance purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises.

Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The term includes repetitive loss buildings (see definition).

For the purposes of this definition, "repair" is considered to occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences.

The term does not apply to:

 
(1)


(2)


(3)
 
Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the Building Official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure", or
Any improvement to a building.
 

Substantial improvement means any combination of reconstruction, alteration, or improvement to a building, taking place during a 10-year period, in which the cumulative percentage of improvement equals or exceeds 50 percent of the current market value of the building. For the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. This term includes structures, which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work done.
 

The
 

term does not apply to:
 

(1)	Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the building official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or

(2)	Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." Or

(3)	Any building that has been damaged from any source or is categorized as repetitive loss. (** Recommend development of written and adopted policy and procedure.)
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets,
utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.

Variance means a grant of relief by the community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the community.

Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequent frequencies in the floodplain.

(Ord. No. 5759, § I, 1-13-2015)


Secs. 22-50—22-71. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IV. - NOISE REGULATIONS
 

Sec. 22-72. - Scope.

The standards of this article shall apply to all present and future uses and developments located in the city. (Code 1982, § 15-66; Ord. No. 4660, § 1, 8-9-1994)

Sec. 22-73. - Defnitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A-	weighted sound pressure level means a weighted sound pressure level as measured with the A-weighting network of a sound level meter. The unit of measurement is dB(A).

Ambient noise level means the A-weighted sound pressure level of all the encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources.

ANSI means the American National Standards Institute or its successor bodies.

Board means the board of adjustment established by  c h a p t e r  5 6 , article IV, division 7, subdivision I.

Boundary means the line of demarcation which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person.

Commercial land use category means any activity which exists on or is applied to land or structures on the land wherein goods, services or commodities are provided, exchanged or purchased and sold at wholesale or retail. The commercial land use category shall include facilities for the repair or servicing of new and used automobiles, trucks, trailers, construction equipment, agricultural equipment and boats, and public or private utility facilities.

Construction activity means any or all activity necessary or incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, repairing, altering, installing or equipping of public or private buildings, private or public parks, premises, utility lines, and private or public highways, roads or streets, including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling.

Construction device means any device used in construction including, but not limited to, any air compressor, pile driver, manual tool, bulldozer, pneumatic hammer, steam shovel, derrick, crane, steam or electric hoist.

Daytime hours means 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., prevailing local time.

Director means the director of public works or his duly authorized agents.

Discrete tone means a noise measured on a one-third octave band analyzer that is ten decibels greater than each of the adjacent one-third octave bands.

Emergency signal device means any gong, siren, whistle or any air horn or similar device when used on any vehicle designated as an emergency vehicle by ordinance or by state statute, or used in connection with an emergency warning system intended to produce a sound signal upon unauthorized entrance by a person into a building or motor vehicle.

Emergency work means work necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect person or property from an exposure to danger.

Heavy industrial land use category means any activity which exists on or is applied to land or structures on the land which pertains to: the mining or extraction of raw materials from the earth and the processing thereof, salvage yards, junkyards, steel mills, foundries, smelters, automobile, truck, construction equipment or agricultural equipment assembly plants, sulphur plants, rubber reclamation plants, cement plants, sanitary landfills, railroad switching yards, metal fabrication plants and chemical processing plant.

Impulsive noise means a noise, containing excursions of no more than one second, the A-weighted sound pressure level of which exceeds the ambient noise level by more than 20 dB(A), when measured by the fast meter characteristic of a sound level meter.

Light industrial land use category means any activity that exists on or is applied to land or structures on the land wherein the activities of manufacturing, fabrication, processing or assembly are utilized to produce a semi-finished or finished product. The light industrial land use category shall include the warehousing, storing and distributing of semifinished or finished products.

Motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively on rails.

Nighttime hours means 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., prevailing local time.

Period of measurement means any continuous 60-minute period during which observations of stationary noise sources are made and measurements of noise levels are taken.
 

Person means any human being, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier, installer, user, owner, or operator and shall include any municipal corporation or its officers or employees.

Residential land use category means any activity which exists on or is applied to land or structures on the land wherein persons occupy single-family or multiple-family dwellings, or other structures containing units with facilities which are used or are intended to be used for living or sleeping and which may include facilities for cooking and eating. The residential land use category shall include schools, churches, hospitals, libraries, public or private parks and other similar land uses.

Sound means an audible oscillation of pressure in air.

Sound level meter means any instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound pressure levels in a specified manner which complies with type 2 or better standards established in the ANSI S1.4-1971 Specification for Sound Level Meters.

Sound pressure level means 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the root mean square pressure of a sound to the standard reference pressure that is 20 micro Pascals. The unit measurement is the decibel (dB).

Stationary noise source means any equipment, motor vehicle, aircraft, or facility, fixed or movable, capable of emitting audible sound.

Vehicular way means a paved or unpaved area used by motor vehicles including, but not limited to, roads, streets, highways, alleys and parking lots. (Code 1982, § 15-67; Ord. No. 4660, § 1, 8-9-1994)

Sec. 22-74. - Applicability of standards established by ANSI.

Unless otherwise specified herein, or specified in regulations promulgated by the director under this article, the acoustical terminology, the references pressure, instrument specifications, and calibrations and methods for measurement of sound pressure levels shall be in conformance with the definitions and provisions contained in the documents designated as ANSI S1.1-1971, S1.4-1971, S1.11-1966 (R 1971) and S1.13-1971.

(Code 1982, § 15-68; Ord. No. 4660, § 1, 8-9-1994)


Sec. 22-75. - Permissible noise levels; standards.

 
(a)










(b)


(c)





(d)


(e)





(f)
 
No person shall operate or permit to be operated any stationary noise source which emits noise in such a manner that the level of the noise emitted, when measured at any point outside the boundary of the property upon which the stationary noise source is located using the slow meter characteristic and the A-weighting network of the sound level meter, exceeds the levels set forth in Table 1 below or exceeds the limit set forth in subsection (f) of this section. When the noise emitted is measured upon property that is located in a different land use category than the property upon which the stationary noise source is located, the levels applicable to the property where the noise emitted is measured shall be used to determine if a violation exists. If more than one use exists on the property where the noise emitted is measured such that more than one land use category would be applicable to the property, then the levels set forth in the least restrictive applicable land use category of Table I shall be used to determine if a violation exists.
If the stationary noise source emits noise containing discrete tone, the permissible levels shall be five dB lower than the applicable levels of Table I.
If the stationary noise source emits impulsive noise the levels of Table I shall be lowered by five dB. A violation of this article shall exist if the level of the impulsive noise emitted exceeds the applicable levels of Table I, as modified by this subsection, when the measurement is made using the fast meter characteristics and the A-weighting network of the sound level meter or if the level of the impulsive noise emitted exceeds the limit set forth in subsection (f) of this section.
In the event the stationary noise source emits impulsive noise containing a discrete tone, the modifications of Table I set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be cumulative.
If the ambient noise level exceeds the level of the noise emitted from the stationary noise source for one or more periods of time during the period measurement, then for any such period of time the level of the noise emitted from the stationary noise source shall be deemed to be lower than the level which is permitted for 60 minutes during the period of measurement in the applicable land use category and for the applicable time of day.
If, during the period of measurement, noise shall be emitted from a stationary noise source for periods of time at two or more different levels, a violation of this shall exist if the sum of the following fractions C1/T1 + C2/T2 + — + Cn/Tn exceeds the unit number 1. For purposes of this calculation Cn shall equal the actual time period that noise is emitted at each measured noise level and Tn shall equal the period of time that is permitted under Table I to be emitted at each measured noise level. Provided, however, if:
 
(1)


(2)
 
The ambient noise level exceeds the level of noise emitted from the stationary noise source for one or more periods of time during the period of measurement; or
The level of the noise emitted from the stationary noise source is lower than the level of noise which is permitted in Table I for 60 minutes
 

during the period of measurement in the applicable land use category and for the applicable time of day for one or more periods of time during the period of measurement;
then, for the purpose of the calculation set forth in this subsection, for each such period of time, the term Cn shall be deemed to be zero (0) and the fraction Cn/Tn shall be zero (0).


TABLE I

	
Total Duration of Time Noise Permitted to Be Emitted From Noise Source During Period of Measurement
(minutes)	
A-Weighted Sound Pressure Level
(dB(A))
	
Residential Land Use Category	
	
Daytime Hours	

Tn -	
60	
55 or less
	
30	
 56 —48
	
15	
59—61
	
8	
62—64
	
4	
65—67
	
2	
68—70
	
0	
71 or greater
	
Nighttime Hours	

Tn -	
60	
50 or less
	
30	
51—53
	
15	
54—56
	
8	
57—59
	
4	
60—62
	
2	
63—65
	
0	
66 or greater

	
Commercial Land Use Category	
	
Daytime Hours	

Tn -	
60	
65 or less
	
30	
66—68
	
15	
69—71
 

	
8	
72—74
	
4	
75—77
	
2	
78—80
	
0	
81 or greater
	
Nighttime Hours	

Tn -	
60	
60 or less
	
30	
61—63
	
15	
64—66
	
8	
67—69
	
4	
70—72
	
2	
73—75
	
0	
76 or greater

	
Light Industrial Land Use Category	
	
All Hours	

Tn -	
60	
70 or less
	
30	
71—73
	
15	
74—76
	
8	
77—79
	
4	
|80—82
	
2	
83—85
	
0	
86 or greater

	
Heavy Industrial Land Use Category	
	
All Hours	

Tn -	
60	
80 or less
	
30	
81—83
	
15	
84—86
	
8	
87—89
 

	
4	
90—92
	
2	
93—95
	
0	
96 or greater



(Code 1982, § 15-69; Ord. No. 4660, § 1, 8-9-1994)


Sec. 22-76. - Exceptions.

To the extent provided in this section, the provisions of this article shall not apply to:

 
(1)


(2)


(3)

(4)


(5)

(6)

(7)



(8)

(9)


(10)
 
The operation of construction devices, with sound control devices equivalent to or better than the original equipment, used in construction activities during daytime hours;
The repair, maintenance or construction of public facilities of the state, county or municipal governments, or such public or quasi-public municipal corporations as may be established under the constitution or laws of the state;
Emergency work to repair or maintain private utility facilities;

Emergency work to repair equipment or facilities damaged or rendered inoperable as a direct result of unavoidable upset conditions providing such occurrence is reported to the director within 24 hours after the occurrence;
The operation of motor vehicles on a vehicular way with sound control devices equivalent to or better than the original equipment; The operation of railway equipment and vehicles operated exclusive on rails;
The in-flight operation of aircraft including the pre-takeoff; run-up of aircraft engines; provided, however, with the exception of the pre- takeoff run-up of aircraft engines, the provisions of this article shall apply to the run-up of aircraft engines, mounted or unmounted, for maintenance or test purposes during nighttime hours;
The necessary operation of emergency signal devices;

Electric power distribution transformers within a distance of 50 feet from the base of the support pole or from the fence line. In addition, electric power distribution transformers shall not be subject to the provisions of s e c t i o n 2 2 - 7 5 (b);
The operation of lawn care maintenance equipment with sound control devices equivalent to or better than original equipment from 7:00 a.m., prevailing local time to sunset.
 

(Code 1982, § 15-70; Ord. No. 4660, § 1, 8-9-1994)


Sec. 22-77. - Notice of violation.

Whenever the director determines that a violation of any provision of this article exists, he shall issue a written notification to the person responsible for the alleged violation. The notification shall set forth the nature of the violation and shall direct that the violation must be abated within the time period specified by the director, which time period shall not exceed 60 days from the date the notice is sent; provided, however, if the violation cannot be abated within the time period specified by the director, the director may extend the time period for compliance for a reasonable period of time upon submission of an acceptable abatement plan by the person responsible for the violation. In determining whether the abatement plan is acceptable, the director's consideration shall include, but not be limited to:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

The sufficiency of all construction plans to reduce noise levels;

The sufficiency of the design criteria for any equipment changes to reduce noise levels; and The length of time necessary to perform all work to abate the violation.
 

(Code 1982, § 15-71; Ord. No. 4660, § 1, 8-9-1994)


Sec. 22-78. - Duties of the board.

In addition to any other duties imposed by law or ordinance, the duties of the board shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

 
(1)


(2)

(3)
 
Review appeals from orders of the director or from other actions or determinations of the director hereunder for which provision is made for appeal.
Grant, deny or revoke applications for variance from the requirements of this article.

At the request of the city council or city manager, or on the board's own initiative, file a report with the city council reviewing the activities of
 

the board together with recommendations concerning fees, variance applications, enforcement or procedures. (Code 1982, § 15-72; Ord. No. 4660, § 1, 8-9-1994)
Sec. 22-79. - Board to consider appeal.

 
(a)








(b)


(c)


(d)



(e)


(f)


(g)





(h)


(i)


(j)
 
Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling or order of the director may appeal to the board. Appeals shall be taken within ten days of the time the parties have been notified in writing of the director's decision and the appeal shall act as a stay of the decision. Such notice of appeal shall be filed in writing with the director and directed to the board specifying the grounds therefor and the relief prayed for. The director shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the decision, ruling or order appealed from is taken. The board, upon hearing such appeal, shall either affirm, modify or set aside the decision, ruling, or order, but no action of the board may be at variance with any of the provisions of this article or any other ordinance of the city. Any final decision of the board may be appealed by either party to the circuit court under provisions of the Missouri Administrative Procedure Act, RSMo 536.010 et seq.
One hundred dollars shall accompany each notice of appeal for commercial property, which shall be paid to the director for deposit with the city treasurer.
Notice of hearing held under this section shall be given by the director to the petitioner in writing at least seven days prior to the date the hearing is set. Service of the notice shall be in accordance with  s e c t i o n  2 2 - 8 1 .
When the board schedules a matter of hearing under this section, each party to the proceeding may file written arguments and may appear at the hearing in person or by representative with or without counsel, and may make oral arguments, offer testimony or cross examine witnesses, or take any combination of such actions.
The city council may subpoena and compel the attendance of such witnesses as the director of the party filing the appeal may designate and may require for examination the production of any books, papers, or records relating to the matter under investigation at the hearing.
All hearings held under this section shall be held before a majority of all members of the board and any final order or decision or other final action by the board shall be approved by at least a majority of the board's members hearing the matter.
The decision of the board shall be in writing served and filed within 30 days after the hearing and shall contain a brief statement of facts found to be true, the determination of the issues presented, and the order of the board. A copy of the decision shall be served by the director on the petitioner and to every person who has appeared as a party in person or by counsel at the hearing. Service shall be in accordance with s e c t i o n 
 2 2 - 8 1 .

Upon application by the petitioner, at least five days prior to the date of the hearing held under this section, the chairperson or any two members of the board may grant a continuance of the hearing. A continuance may be granted without a meeting of the board and without prior notice.
A summary record of the hearing held under this section shall be kept by the director and shall be made available to any party to the proceeding. Any party to the hearing may at his expense take and record a verbatim record of the proceedings.
The decision of the board shall be effective ten days after service on the petitioner unless otherwise provided by the board.
 

(Code 1982, § 15-73; Ord. No. 4660, § 1, 8-9-1994)


Sec. 22-80. - Variances.

 
(a)





(b)



(c)


(d)



(e)
 
The board may grant individual variances beyond the sound pressure levels prescribed in this article whenever it finds, upon presentation of adequate proof, that compliance with any provision of this article will result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property or in the practical closing and elimination of any lawful business, occupation or activity, in either case without sufficient corresponding or advantage to the people; except that no variance shall be granted where the effect of the variance will permit the continuation of a health hazard.
In determining under what conditions and to what extent a variance may be granted, the board shall exercise a wide discretion in weighing the equities involved and the advantages and disadvantages to the applicant and to those affected by the noise and vibrations emitted by the applicant.
Variances shall be granted for such periods of time and under such terms and conditions as shall be specified by the board in its order. The variance may be extended by affirmative action of the board.
Any person seeking a variance shall do so by filing a petition for variance with the director. The director shall promptly investigate the petition and make a written recommendation to the board as to the disposition thereof. Upon receiving the recommendation of the director, the board shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.
Notice of public hearing.
 

(1)


(2)
 

Notice of public hearing shall be given by the director to the petitioner in writing at least 30 days prior to the date hearing is set. Service of the notice shall be made in accordance with  s e c t i o n  2 2 - 8 1 .
Notice of public hearing shall also be given by public advertisements setting forth date, time and place of hearing. The director shall include in such notice the name of the petitioner for the variance, the location of the premises for which the variance is sought, a brief description of the variance requested and the recommendation of the director. The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
 

the county. Such publication shall take place for two days within a four-day period and the second day of publication shall be at least 30
days prior to the date hearing is set. The cost of publication shall be borne by the petitioner, and shall be in addition to any charges imposed upon the petitioner under subsection (o) of this section.
 
(f)

(g)


(h)


(i)



(j)



(k)





(l)






(m)



(n)



(o)
 
The director shall maintain a copy of the recommendation and said recommendation shall be available for public inspection.

The city council may subpoena and compel the attendance of such witnesses as the director or the party requesting the variance may designate and may require for examination the production of any books, papers, or records relating to the matter under investigation at the hearing.
All hearings shall be held before a majority of all the members of the board and any final order or decision or other final action by the board shall be approved by at least a majority of the members of the board hearing the matter.
At any public hearing, the board shall maintain a record of the name and address of each witness appearing and all testimony taken before the board shall be under oath and recorded stenographically. Copies of the transcript so recorded may be obtained by any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor.
Upon application by the petitioner, at least five days prior to the date of the hearing, the chairperson or any two members of the board may grant a continuance of the hearing. A continuance may be granted without a meeting of the board and without prior notice. Notice of a public hearing for which a continuance has been granted shall be given in accordance with the provisions of subsection (e) of this section.
At any public hearing held by the board, the burden of proof shall be on the person petitioning for the variance. Each party to the proceeding may appear at the hearing in person or by representative, with or without counsel, and may make oral arguments, offer testimony or cross examine witnesses, or take any combination of such actions. In addition, any party to the proceeding or any person who may be directly affected by the subject matter thereof may submit within seven days subsequent to the hearings, written arguments setting forth their views.
The decision of the board shall be in writing and filed within 30 days after hearing and shall contain a brief statement of facts found to be true, the determination of the issues presented and the order of the board. The decision of the board shall be effective ten days after service on the petitioner unless otherwise provided by the board. The decision shall include a certification that the public hearing was held in accordance with the notice requirements of subsection (e) of this section. Any final decision of the board may be appealed by either party to the circuit court under provisions of the Missouri Administrative Procedure Act, RSMo 536.010 et seq.
A copy of the decision shall be served by the director on the petitioner and to every person who has appeared as a party in person or by counsel at the hearing. Service shall be in accordance with  s e c t i o n  2 2 - 8 1 . In addition, any person making written request therefor shall be sent a copy of the decision of the board.
Upon failure to comply with the terms and conditions of any variances specified by the board, the variance may be revoked or modified by the board after a public hearing held in accordance with the provisions set forth in this section. Notice shall be served upon the person to whom the variance was granted and all persons who have filed with the director a written request for notification.
One hundred dollars shall accompany each request for variance for commercial property, which shall be paid to the director for deposit with the city treasurer.
 
(Code 1982, § 15-74; Ord. No. 4660, § 1, 8-9-1994)


Sec. 22-81. - Service of notice.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Service of any written notice required by s e c t i o n 2 2 - 7 9 or 2 2 - 8 0 shall be made by registered or certified mail directed to the petitioner, his agent or attorney of record at the last known address, such service to be effective upon the date of service shown on the postal return receipt.
Service of any written notice required by this article to be made on the board or director shall be by registered or certified mail addressed to same, care of City Hall, 7601 Manchester Avenue, Maplewood, Missouri 63143.
 
(Code 1982, § 15-75; Ord. No. 4660, § 1, 8-9-1994)


Sec. 22-82. - Regulations for measurement procedures.

The director may promulgate regulations pertaining to the manner in which the measurement of sound pressure levels or vibration levels shall be performed. In determining the procedures to be used for the measurement of sound pressure levels or vibration levels the director shall take into consideration the testing and measurement procedures of the ANSI.

(Code 1982, § 15-76; Ord. No. 4660, § 1, 8-9-1994)


Sec. 22-83. - Right of entry.

The director, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter at all reasonable times, upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating any condition or equipment he shall have cause to believe to be a source of noise exceeding the maximum levels permitted by the provisions of this article. If entry is refused, the director shall notify the city attorney of such fact and request that a warrant to search the premises believed to be in violation be obtained from the appropriate magistrate.

(Code 1982, § 15-77; Ord. No. 4660, § 1, 8-9-1994)
 

Chapter 24 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Sec. 24-1. - Fire code—Adopted.

The International Fire Code, 2006 edition, including its appendixes, published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the fire code of the city and incorporated herein by reference, as amended herein, subject only to the specific provisions of this article and other applicable section of the city code.

(Code 1972, § 302A.03; Code 1982, § 11-16; Ord. No. 3838, § 1, 10-27-1975; Ord. No. 4203, § 1, 3-26-1985; Ord. No. 4439, § 1, 2-27-1990; Ord. No. 4682, § 1, 3-14-
1995; Ord. No. 4958, § I, 9-26-2000; Ord. No. 5340, § I, 5-9-2006)


Sec. 24-2. - Same—Additions, deletions and amendments.

 
(a)

(b)
 
Appendix A, Board of Appeals, and appendix D, Fire Apparatus Access Roads, are hereby deleted from the fire code.

The housing board of appeals, as established in article XIII of  c h a p t e r  1 2 , is hereby authorized to serve as the fire code board of appeals.
 

(Code 1982, § 11-17; Ord. No. 5340, § I, 5-9-2006)


Secs. 24-3—24-22. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - EXPLOSIVES



Sec. 24-23. - County code adopted.

The St. Louis County Explosive Code, as amended, which was adopted by the county on November 6, 1997, is hereby adopted as the explosive code of the city, as if fully set out herein.

(Code 1982, § 11-51; Ord. No. 3907, § 1, 10-10-1977; Ord. No. 4094, § 1, 6-9-1981; Ord. No. 4682, § 2, 3-14-1995; Ord. No. 4884, § I, 3-9-1999)


Sec. 24-24. - Fireworks.

 
(a)


(b)



(c)
 
No person shall discharge any fireworks or any substances intended for pyrotechnic display, nor shall any person fire any hand gun or other appliance using blank cartridges or caps containing a chlorate of potash mixture.
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the city council may authorize and order the public display of fireworks by properly qualified persons under such conditions as, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department, are not hazardous to surrounding property nor dangerous to persons.
No person shall sell any fireworks in the city.
 

(Code 1972, § 302B.03; Code 1982, § 11-52)


Secs. 24-25—24-51. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT



Sec. 24-52. - Chief to have command.

The chief of the fire department shall have command of the firefighters of the city and shall be responsible for the efficiency and training of the members and employees of the fire department.

(Code 1972, § 203A.01(A); Code 1982, § 11-31)


Sec. 24-53. - Chief's powers and duties.

The chief of the fire department shall:

 
(1)
 
Make or cause to be made frequent inspections of all fire hydrants within the city and see that they are at all times in good working order and ready for use.
 

(2)


(3)

(4)

(5)


(6)
 

Inspect all engines, hoses, hose carriages, hook and ladder apparatus and trucks and all other equipment and property of or connected with th department, to see that it is properly cared for and ready for immediate use.
Have general custody of all property under the control of the fire department. Where possible, attend all fires and direct the work of the firefighters.
Have power to cause the removal of any building, fence or structure of any kind for the purpose of checking the progress of any fire and, in an emergency, he may use explosives to demolish buildings or other structures, in order to check the spread of fire.
Have authority to prescribe the limits in the vicinity of a fire within which no person other than residents therein, city councilmembers or persons admitted by order of an officer of the police department, is permitted.
 

(Code 1972, § 203A.01(B); Code 1982, § 11-32)


Sec. 24-54. - Promulgation of rules of conduct for department members.

The chief of the fire department shall promulgate, by written order, rules for the conduct of the members of the department and for the performance of their duties. Disobedience to such rules shall be grounds for dismissal from the department as provided in c h a p t e r 3 8 .

(Code 1972, § 203A.01(F); Code 1982, § 11-33)


Sec. 24-55. - Promulgation of regulations for ambulances.

The chief of the fire department shall promulgate, by written order, regulations governing the policy of fire department operations of the city ambulance. (Code 1972, § 203A.01(A)(1); Code 1982, § 11-34; Ord. No. 3844, § 1, 2-23-1976)

Sec. 24-56. - Fireighters to obey orders of oicers.

Every firefighter shall obey every order of the officers of the fire department, and upon every failure to do so, the firefighters may be dismissed as provided in c h a p t e r 3 8 .

(Code 1972, § 203A.01(D); Code 1982, § 11-35)


Sec. 24-57. - Fireighters to respond to alarms.

Whenever an alarm of fire shall have been received, the firefighters shall proceed with the fire fighting apparatus to the premises on fire and remain on duty there so long as necessary to extinguish the fire, or until they are relieved from duty by the chief of the fire department.

(Code 1972, § 203A.01(E); Code 1982, § 11-36)


Sec. 24-58. - Training and education program.

All regular firefighters are encouraged to participate in a training and education program in accordance with the following provisions:

 
(1)



(2)


(3)


(4)


(5)



(6)



(7)
 
Upon the approval of the chief of the fire department of the school to be attended and the course or curriculum to be studied, the cost of tuition and books shall be paid for any regular firefighter enrolling for such instruction which leads to an associate degree in fire protection, unless otherwise waived by the council.
Upon satisfactory completion of 11 semester hours of instruction in approved courses of fire protection or related courses at any accredited junior college, college or university by any regular firefighter, that firefighter shall receive a proficiency remuneration of $15.00 per month.
Upon satisfactory completion of 22 semester hours of instruction in approved courses of fire protection or related courses at any accredited junior college, college, or university by any regular firefighter, that firefighter shall receive a proficiency remuneration of $30.00 per month.
Upon satisfactory completion of 32 semester hours of instruction in approved courses of fire protection or related courses at any accredited junior college, college, or university by any regular firefighter, that firefighter shall receive a proficiency remuneration of $45.00 per month.
Upon satisfactory completion of courses resulting in an associate degree in fire protection from any accredited junior college, college, or university by a regular firefighter, that firefighter shall receive a proficiency remuneration of $100.00 per month; provided that firefighter shall have been continuously employed by the city as a firefighter for more than 42 months.
The chief of the fire department shall keep and maintain a record of the participation and achievement of all firefighters in the program pursuant to which the above proficiency remunerations are awarded, and this record shall be available to the civil service commission and the city council for use in valuating promotions.
Unless otherwise waived by the city council, any firefighter that voluntarily leaves the service of the city after having had paid for him, by the city, the cost of such education and training as provided in subsection (1) of this section, authorizes the city to deduct from any monies due such firefighter a sum to reimburse the city for such training and education according to the following schedule:
 

a.	Within one year from the beginning date of such education and training, 100 percent of the total cost of tuition and books paid by the city

b.	Within two years from the beginning date of such education and training, 80 percent of the total cost of tuition and books paid by the city for that firefighter.
c.	Within three years from the beginning date of such education and training, 60 percent of the total cost of tuition and books paid by the city for that firefighter.
d.	Within four years from the beginning date of such education and training, 40 percent of the total cost of tuition and books paid by the city for that firefighter.
e.	Within five years from the beginning date of such education and training, 20 percent of the total cost of tuition and books paid by the city for that firefighter.
 
(8)
 
The approval of any educational program under this section for any regular firefighter is conditioned upon the consent and approval by that firefighter to the reimbursement schedule above, which shall be acknowledged by his enrollment in any such program.
 

(Code 1972, § 203A.01(H); Code 1982, § 11-37; Ord. No. 3777, § 1, 8-12-1974; Ord. No. 4677, § 1, 2-28-1995)


Sec. 24-59. - Interference with duties of ireighters.

No person shall in any manner hinder, obstruct or otherwise interfere with any firefighter or other employee of the fire department in the discharge of his official duties.

(Code 1982, § 11-38; Ord. No. 3913, § 1, 11-14-1977)


Sec. 24-60. - Police to assist in enforcement of article.

The police department shall help in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. (Code 1972, § 203A.01(G); Code 1982, § 11-39)

Sec. 24-61. - Mutual aid and emergency aid.

Under the authority set forth in RSMo 70.873, and in addition to any mutual aid powers under other provisions of the city Charter or this Code, the city police, fire and public works departments are hereby authorized to respond and provide assistance as requested in any mutual aid or emergency aid request in the state or in any bordering state. Any officer or employee of any such city department providing assistance pursuant to this provision shall have the same powers, immunities and liabilities as if acting within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city and shall be considered on active duty as he would be when acting within the boundaries of the city. Any officer or employee of another jurisdiction providing such mutual aid or emergency assistance to the city shall have the same powers, immunities and liabilities as if acting within his own jurisdiction.

(Code 1982, § 28-6; Ord. No. 4574, § 1, 1-12-1993)


Secs. 24-62—24-80. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IV. - MUTUAL FIRE ASSISTANCE AGREEMENT



Sec. 24-81. - Contracts with neighboring municipalities, districts and the state.

 
(a)










(b)
 
The city hereby contracts with the cities of Berkeley, Brentwood, Clayton, Crestwood, Des Peres, Ferguson, Frontenac, Glendale, Hazelwood, Jennings, Kirkwood, Ladue, Olivette, Richmond Heights, Rock Hill, Shrewsbury, St. Charles, St. Louis, University City, and Webster Groves; and the fire protection districts of Affton, Antonia, Black Jack, Cedar Hill, Chesterfield, Community, Cottleville, Creve Coeur, Fenton, Florissant Valley, High Ridge, Lemay, Maryland Heights, Mehlville, Metro-West, Mid County, Moline, Normandy, O'Fallon, Pacific, Pattonville-Bridgeton, Riverview, Robertson, Rock Community, Shady Valley, Spanish Lake, Springdale, St. Charles County, St. Peters, Valley Park, West County EMS and Fire, West Overland and the State of Missouri. And upon the passage and approval of a like ordinance by legislative body of any such cities, districts, or the state, the contract set out in this article shall become effective between the city and such cities' districts or the state for interchange of services of their fire departments upon the conditions and provisions herein set forth.
The city manager is authorized to approve and sign renewal contracts as may be received from time to time from any city and district referred to in subsection (a) of this section.
 
(Code 1972, § 302A.03(A); Code 1982, § 11-66; Ord. No. 3769, § 1, 4-22-1974; Ord. No. 4298, § 1, 5-12-1987; Ord. No. 4793, § 1, 8-12-1997; Ord. No. 5120, § I, 9-9-
2003)


Sec. 24-82. - Duty to respond to ire alarms.
 

The fire department of the city shall respond to alarms on call in any part of the cities and districts referred to in s e c t i o n 2 4 - 8 1 ; and the fire departments of such cities and districts shall respond to alarms on call in any part of the city, except as otherwise provided in this article.

(Code 1972, § 302A.03(B); Code 1982, § 11-67; Ord. No. 3769, § 1, 4-22-1974; Ord. No. 4298, § 2, 5-12-1987)


Sec. 24-83. - Termination of agreement.

Any of the contracting cities referred to in s e c t i o n 2 4 - 8 1 may terminate the contract set out in this article as to such city at any time by the passage of an ordinance to that effect and giving written notice thereof to all other cities who are parties to such contract. Such termination shall take effect 60 days from the date of service of such written notice.

(Code 1972, § 302A.03(C); Code 1982, § 11-68; Ord. No. 3769, § 1, 4-22-1974)


Sec. 24-84. - Certain departments to serve certain cities.

It is understood and agreed that the fire departments of the cities of Crestwood, Glendale, Kirkwood and Olivette, and the Manchester Fire Protection District, respectively, serve as and shall be considered to be the fire departments for the cities of Oakland, Warson Woods, Meacham Park, Elmwood Park and Town and Country for all purposes of the agreement set out in this article.

(Code 1972, § 302A.03(D); Code 1982, § 11-69; Ord. No. 3769, § 1, 4-22-1974; Ord. No. 4298, § 3, 5-12-1987)


Sec. 24-85. - Consideration for service.

The consideration for the service of the fire departments of each municipality mentioned in s e c t i o n 2 4 - 8 1 shall be the service given for the protection of the lives and property in such municipality by the service of the fire departments of the other cities hereto, and no compensation shall accrue or be paid by any of such cities for the service of the fire department of any other of such cities.

(Code 1972, § 302A.03(E); Code 1982, § 11-70; Ord. No. 3769, § 1, 4-22-1974)


Sec. 24-86. - Liability of participants.

None of the municipalities referred to in s e c t i o n 2 4 - 8 1 shall be liable to any other of the municipalities for failure to respond to any call by the other of such municipalities, or for delay or negligence or mistake in receiving or responding to any call, nor shall this contract be interpreted as being an agreement for the benefit of any third person.

(Code 1972, § 302A.03(F); Code 1982, § 11-71; Ord. No. 3769, § 1, 4-22-1974)


Sec. 24-87. - Liability to employees.

None of the municipalities referred to in s e c t i o n 2 4 - 8 1 shall be liable by reason of the contract set out in this article to any firefighter, official or employee of the other, nor shall any firefighter, official or employee of any of such municipalities be considered for any purpose a firefighter, official or employee of any municipality other than the one by which he is regularly employed.

(Code 1972, § 302A.03(G); Code 1982, § 11-72; Ord. No. 3769, § 1, 4-22-74)


Sec. 24-88. - Damage to equipment or property to be borne by owner.

In case of loss or damage to the equipment or property of the municipalities referred to in s e c t i o n 2 4 - 8 1 while responding to fire alarms, such loss or damage shall be borne by the city owning such equipment or property.

(Code 1972, § 302A.03(H); Code 1982, § 11-73; Ord. No. 3769, § 1, 4-22-1974)


Sec. 24-89. - Telephone lines between stations.

In effectuating the purpose of the contract set out in this article, the parties hereto may maintain direct telephone lines between the fire stations of each of them to be used exclusively for fire calls. In such event, the expense of such lines shall be shared equally by the parties hereto.

(Code 1972, § 302A.03(I); Code 1982, § 11-74; Ord. No. 3769, § 1, 4-22-1974)


Chapter 26 - HEALTH AND SANITATION


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
 



Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - FOOD HANDLING REGULATIONS



Sec. 26-19. - Regulations concerning food and drink.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)





(d)

(e)

(f)
 
The issuance, suspension, revocation of permits and inspection of groceries, mobile food vendors, and temporary food service facilities within the city, and the enforcement of this section shall be performed by the county department of health upon behalf of the city.
The issuance, suspension and revocation of permits regulating the sanitary preparation of food and drink by restaurants within the city, and enforcement of this section shall be shall performed by the county department of health upon behalf of the city.
The sale, grading, inspection, production, distribution and wholesomeness of milk sold or consumed in the city, and other matters related to the sale or consumption of milk in the city, shall be governed by the county health department ordinances and regulations, as amended, and in the form as of the date of the adoption and enactment of this Code. Such provisions on the date of the adoption of this Code are incorporated by reference and are made a part hereof.
No person shall sell, expose or offer for sale any food or drink in any way in violation of the provisions of this section. No person shall place, leave, deposit or hang up any article of food or any edible upon or over any sidewalk in the city.
No person shall sell, expose or offer for sale any article of food which is unfit for consumption in the reasonable judgment of a physician or the county health department.
 
(Code 1972, § 302.18(A)—(E), (G); Code 1982, § 13-1; Ord. No. 5308, § I, 1-10-2006)


Chapter 28 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION



Sec. 28-1. - Purpose.

It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the protection and enhancement of buildings, structures or land improvements of special historic, aesthetic or architectural significance are required in the interest of promoting the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the city. The purpose of this chapter is to:
 

(1)


(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)
 

Protect, enhance and perpetuate such buildings, structures or land improvements and districts which represent or reflect elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history;
Safeguard the city's historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage as reflected in such buildings, structure or land improvements and district; Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past;
Strengthen the economy of the city;

Promote the use of historic districts and landmarks as educational and cultural resources of the city; and Promote the safety and general welfare of the residents of the city.
 

(Code 1982, § 15.5-1; Ord. No. 4978, § I, 2-27-2001)


Sec. 28-2. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Alteration means any act or process other than demolition that results in changes to one or more exterior features of a building, structure, or object in an historic district or landmark site.

Demolition means any act or process that destroys or removes, in whole or in part, any building or structure in the city. (Code 1982, § 15.5-2; Ord. No. 4978, § I, 2-27-2001)

Sec. 28-3. - Establishment of historic and preservation commission.

 
(a)

(b)
 
Creation. There is hereby created an historic and preservation commission (hereinafter referred to as the "commission").

Members. The commission shall be composed of five members. All members shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. All members shall serve three-year terms, unless appointed to an unexpired term, except that the initial appointees to the commission may be
 

staggered and appointed to terms of less than three years. (Code 1982, § 15.5-3; Ord. No. 4978, § I, 2-27-2001)

Sec. 28-4. - Designation of historic districts and landmarks.

 
(a)







(b)
 
Recommendations. The commission shall recommend to the city council the adoption of ordinances designating single structures or sites, portions of structures, groups of structures, landscape elements, works of art, or integrated combinations thereof having a special historical or architectural interest or value as landmarks or historic districts. Such recommendations shall be accompanied by written reports describing the character and significance of the proposed landmark or historic district, outlining its proposed boundaries, and recommending appropriate guidelines to preserve its significance. Recommendations should also consider any master plan, zoning requirements, projected public improvements and existing and proposed renewal and development plans applicable to the area to be affected by designation.
Designation.
 

(1)
 

Standards for designation. A structure or site, portion of a structure, group of structures, landscape element, work of art or integrated combination thereof may be designated for preservation if it:
 
a.	Has significant character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the city, state, or nation by reason of age or by reason of association with important figures or events;
b.	Exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, social, or historic heritage of the community;

c.	Portrays the environment in an era of history characterized by a distinct architectural style;

d.	Embodies those distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or engineering specimen;

e.	Is the work of a designer whose individual work has significantly influenced the development of the community;

f.	Contains elements of a design, detail, materials or craftsmanship which represent a significant innovation;

g.	By being part of or related to a square, park or other distinctive area, should be developed or preserved according to a plan based on a historic, cultural or architectural motif; or
h.	Owing to its unique location or singular physical characteristic, represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood, community or city.
 
(2)



(3)


(4)

(5)



(6)



(7)
 
Notification of property owners of proposed designation. Notice of a proposed designation shall be hand delivered or sent by first class mail to the owners, as listed in the property tax records of the county, of property proposed for landmark or historic district designation. The notice shall briefly describe the proposed designation and state the time and place of the public hearing.
Public hearing. The commission shall conduct a public hearing on each proposed designation of a landmark or historic district in order to obtain the viewpoints of affected property owners, residents, and other interested parties.
Commission recommendation. The commission shall make a recommendation with respect to the proposed designation to the city council.

City council approval. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the application. Following the public hearing, the council may approve or disapprove the commission's recommendations, which shall not be binding on the council. The council shall cause notice of the time and place of its public hearing to be published.
Notification of designation. After approval by the city council of the ordinance designating property as a landmark or historic district, the council shall send to the owner, as listed in the property tax records of the county, of each property so designated or each property within the designated district, by hand delivery or first class mail, a copy of the ordinance.
Support of listing of properties on the national register. The commission may support the nomination to the National Register of Historic Places of local historic landmarks and districts that the commission judges have contributed to the history, architecture, and culture of the city.
 
(Code 1982, § 15.5-4; Ord. No. 4978, § I, 2-27-2001)


Sec. 28-5. - Certiicate of appropriateness applications for alteration.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)



(d)
 
Approval of alterations in historic districts or involving landmarks. A certificate of appropriateness for alteration in an historic district or involving an historic landmark must be applied for and approved by the commission before any alteration is made.
Standards for alteration. The Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, 36 CFR 67, shall be the commission's general guide concerning landmarks and buildings in historic districts.
Submission of plans to commission. An applicant for a certificate of appropriateness must submit proposed plans to the commission in sufficient detail for the commission to have full knowledge of the requested alteration, particularly as to how the proposed actions will affect the appearance, materials and architectural design of the landmark, or the buildings, structure or land within a historic district.
Public hearings on applications for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall consider applications for certificates of appropriateness at meetings of the commission. Each applicant for a certificate of appropriateness shall be notified of the commission meeting at which his application will be considered at the time that the applicant files his application. At the commission hearing at which his application is considered,
 

an applicant shall have the opportunity to make a statement and shall have the opportunity to examine any witnesses who may testify at the hearing. In addition, the applicant shall have the opportunity to discuss the application with the members of the commission.
 
(e)



(f)


(g)
 
Acceptable commission reactions. The commission may approve, deny, or approve in amended form the proposed plans subject to the acceptance of the amendment by the applicant. If an applicant chooses not to accept a proposed amendment, the application is considered denied.
Report on determination. A written report of action taken or determination by the commission shall be forwarded to the applicant. The report shall state reasons why an application is denied or amended.
Conformance to certificate of appropriateness. All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the director of public works or his designated representative shall issue a stop work order and all work shall cease. No person, firm or corporation shall undertake any work on such project as long as such stop work order shall continue in effect.
 
(Code 1982, § 15.5-5; Ord. No. 4978, § I, 2-27-2001)


Sec. 28-6. - Certiicate of appropriateness applications for demolition.

 
(a)



(b)


(c)
 
Approval of demolition of any structure in the city. A certificate of appropriateness for demolition for any building or structure in the city, except single-story residential garages and residential storage sheds of less than 300 square feet of floor area, must be applied for pursuant to this section, prior to any demolition occurring.
Review standards. The commission shall review every application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition and shall recommend approval or disapproval to the director of public works.
Standards for demolition. The commission shall determine whether to recommend approval or disapproval for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition by considering:
 
(1)

(2)
 
The criteria listed in  s e c t i o n  2 8 - 4 (b)(1)a—h; and

The state of deterioration or disrepair or structural unsoundness of the building or structure, the practicability of rehabilitation, and whether the property can be rehabilitated or restored with a reasonable economic return to the owner.
 
(d)
 
Procedure for approval or disapproval. After receiving a recommendation to approve or disapprove the application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition, the director of public works shall then approve or disapprove the application. In making this decision, the same standards that guided the commission in subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section shall guide the director of public works.
 
(Code 1982, § 15.5-6; Ord. No. 4978, § I, 2-27-2001; Ord. No. 5108, § I, 5-27-2003)


Sec. 28-7. - Public safety exclusion.

This Code shall not be construed to prevent the demolition of any structure or any elements of such structure when the authorized municipal law officers certify that it is necessary to demolish the structure in the interests of public safety.

(Code 1982, § 15.5-7; Ord. No. 4978, § I, 2-27-2001)


Sec. 28-8. - Appeal provision.

Any person aggrieved by any decision pursuant to this Code may, within 30 days thereafter, apply to the city council for review of the decision. Written requests for review of said decision shall be filed with the city manager. The city council may, after a public hearing, reverse, modify, or affirm any decision pursuant to this code using the same respective standards of consideration stated in this Code.

(Code 1982, § 15.5-8; Ord. No. 4978, § I, 2-27-2001)


Chapter 30 - HUMAN RELATIONS


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - HUMAN RELATIONS



Sec. 30-19. - Deinitions.
 

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Chairperson means the chairperson of the city commission on human relations.

Commission means the city commission on human relations.

Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under s e c t i o n 3 0 - 2 0 .

Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof located within the city which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.

Familial status means one or more individuals, who have not attained the age of 18 years, being domiciled with:

 
(1)

(2)
 
A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or

The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person.
 

The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.

Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption occupying a dwelling unit as an individual housekeeping organization, including a group comprised of one or more individuals, who have not attained the age of 18 years, being domiciled with:
 

(1)

(2)
 

A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or

The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person.
 

The foregoing includes any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.

Gender identity means the gender-related identity, appearance, mannerisms or other gender-related characteristics of an individual, with or without regard to the individual's designated sex at birth.

Handicap.

 
(1)
 
The term "handicap" means, with respect to a person:
 

a.	A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities;

b.	A record of having such an impairment; or

c.	Being regarded as having such an impairment.
 

(2)
 

The term "handicap" does not mean or include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined by state or federal law.
 

Sexual orientation means an individual's real or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality.

To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.

(Code 1972, § 806.02; Code 1982, § 17-17; Ord. No. 4022, 12-11-1979; Ord. No. 4072, § 2, 12-9-1980; Ord. No. 4110, § 1, 2-23-1982; Ord. No. 4450, § I, 4-24-1990;
Ord. No. 4814, § I, 2-10-1998; Ord. No. 5679, § II, § 9-25-2012)


Sec. 30-20. - Prohibited discrimination in the sale or rental of housing.

Except as exempted by s e c t i o n 3 0 - 2 1 (2), it shall be unlawful for any person:

 
(1)



(2)



(3)



(4)
 
To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, handicap, or familial status.
To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, handicap, or familial status.
To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, handicap, or familial status or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, handicap, or familial
 

status that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
 

(5)
 

For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, handicap, or familial status.
 

(Code 1972, § 806.03; Code 1982, § 17-18; Ord. No. 4022, 12-11-1979; Ord. No. 4072, § 2, 12-9-1980; Ord. No. 4814, § II, 2-10-1998; Ord. No. 5679, § II, § 9-25-
2012)


Sec. 30-21. - Unlawful practices.

Subject to the provisions of subsection (2) of this section, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in s e c t i o n 3 0 - 2 0 shall apply:
 

(1)
 

As of December 11, 1979, to:
 

a.	Dwellings owned or operated by the federal government;

b.	Dwellings provided in whole or in part with the aid of loans, advances, grants or contributions made by the federal government under agreements entered into, after November 20, 1962, unless payment due thereof has been made in full prior to the date of the enactment of Public Law 90-284, 90th Congress, H.R. 2516;
c.	Dwellings provided in whole or in part by loans insured, guaranteed, or otherwise secured by the credit of the federal government, under agreements entered into after November 20, 1962, unless payment thereon has been made in full prior to the date of enactment of Public Law 90-284; provided that nothing contained in subsection (1)b. of this section and this subsection (1)c. shall be applicable to dwellings solely by virtue of the fact that they are subject to mortgage held by an FDIC or FSLIC institution; and
d.	Dwellings provided by the development or the redevelopment of real property purchased, rented or otherwise obtained from a state or local public agency receiving federal financial assistance for slum clearance or urban renewal with respect to such real property under loan or grant contracts entered into after November 20, 1962.
 
(2)
 
Nothing in  s e c t i o n  3 0 - 2 0  (other than subsection (3) thereof) shall apply to:
 

a.	Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided, further, that, in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection (2)a. shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided, further, that, such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided, further, that after December 31, 1979, the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this Code only if such house is sold or rented without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person and without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of s e c t i o n  3 0 - 
 2 0 (3); but nothing in this proviso shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or
b.	Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence.
 
(3)
 
For the purposes of subsection (2) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
 

a.	He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein;
b.	He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
c.	He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
 

(4)
 

Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status.
Nor shall anything in this article prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members, nor does any provision of this article regarding familial status apply with respect to housing for older persons, as defined by 42 USC 3607(b)(2).
 

(Code 1972, § 806.04; Code 1982, § 17-19; Ord. No. 4022, 12-11-1979; Ord. No. 4072, § 2, 12-9-1980; Ord. No. 4814, § III, 2-10-1998; Ord. No. 5679, § II, § 9-25-
2012)


Sec. 30-22. - Discrimination in the fnancing of housing.

It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, handicap, or familial status of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided that, nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in s e c t i o n 3 0 - 2 1 (2)a. and (2)b.

(Code 1972, § 806.05; Code 1982, § 17-20; Ord. No. 4022, 12-11-1979; Ord. No. 4072, § 2, 12-9-1980; Ord. No. 4814, § IV, 2-10-1998; Ord. No. 5679, § II, § 9-25-
2012)


Sec. 30-23. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services.

It shall be unlawful for any person to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate broker's organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, handicap, or familial status.

(Code 1972, § 806.06; Code 1982, § 17-21; Ord. No. 4022, 12-11-1979; Ord. No. 4072, § 2, 12-9-1980; Ord. No. 4814, § V, 2-10-1998; Ord. No. 5679, § II, § 9-25-
2012; Ord. No. 5679, § II, § 9-25-2012)


Sec. 30-24. - Administration.

The authority and responsibility for administering this article shall be in the city commission on human relations. The commission shall administer this article in a manner affirmatively to further the policies of this article and to prevent or eliminate discriminatory housing practices. The commission shall cooperate with and render technical assistance through federal, state or other public or private agencies, organizations and institutions that are formulating or carrying out programs to prevent or eliminate discriminatory housing practices.

(Code 1972, § 806.07; Code 1982, § 17-22; Ord. No. 4022, 12-11-1979; Ord. No. 4072, § 2, 12-9-1980; Ord. No. 4110, § 1, 2-23-1982; Ord. No. 5679, § II, § 9-25-
2012)


Sec. 30-25. - Complaint procedure.

 
(a)











(b)






(c)



(d)



(e)
 
Any person who claims to have been aggrieved or injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably aggrieved or injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the commission. Complaints shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as the commission requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, a copy shall be furnished to the person who allegedly committed or are about to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice. Within 30 days after receiving a complaint, it shall be investigated and the commission shall determine if cause exists for the allegations made in the complaint. The commission may request the assistance of the city attorney in its investigations. If the commission finds cause of the complaint, it shall attempt to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation,  and persuasion. The complaint shall be dismissed if the commission finds no cause. The commission, at any time it has reason to believe that any person has been engaged in a discriminatory practice prohibited by this article, may issue a complaint.
A complaint under subsection (a) of this section shall be filed within 60 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him and with the leave of the commission, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified.
If conciliation efforts fail, the commission shall promptly set a date for hearing of the matters alleged in such complaint and subsequent occurring related matters, but only after giving at least five days prior written notice to the person who allegedly committed or is about to commit the alleged unfair housing practice.
The hearing shall be conducted in a fair and impartial manner according to rules adopted by the commission; the person aggrieved and the person who allegedly committed or is about to commit the alleged unfair housing practice may appear with legal counsel and shall have the right to present proof and cross examine witnesses in all matters relating to the complaint and subsequent related occurrences.
After such hearing, the commission will report on the matter heard to the city council with copies of such report being forwarded to the city
 

attorney. Upon the receipt of the report, the city council will review the same and will take such action as it deems appropriate by entering an order to cease and desist or such other appropriate order, and shall cause such order to be served on all parties.
(Code 1972, § 806.08; Code 1982, § 17-23; Ord. No. 4022, 12-11-1979; Ord. No. 4072, § 2, 12-9-1980; Ord. No. 4110, § 1, 2-23-1982; Ord. No. 5679, § II, § 9-25-
2012; Ord. No. 5679, § II, § 9-25-2012)


Sec. 30-26. - Enforcement by city.

The city council, upon receiving the report of the commission as provided for in s e c t i o n 3 0 - 2 5 (e), shall in such cases wherein it enters a cease and desist order certify such case to the city attorney or city prosecutor for appropriate action.

(Code 1972, § 806.09; Code 1982, § 17-24; Ord. No. 4022, 12-11-1979; Ord. No. 4072, § 2, 12-9-1980; Ord. No. 5679, § II, § 9-25-2012)


Sec. 30-27. - Discrimination in public accommodation prohibited—Exceptions.

 
(a)



(b)





(c)
 
All persons within the City of Maplewood are free and equal and shall be entitled to the full and equal use and enjoyment within this city of any place of public accommodation, as hereinafter defined, without discrimination or segregation on the grounds of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation or disability.
It is an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person, directly or indirectly, to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person or to attempt to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, services or privileges made available in any place of public accommodation, or to segregate or discriminate against any such person in the use thereof on the grounds of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation or disability.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to a private club, a place of accommodation owned by or operated on behalf of a religious corporation, association or society or other establishment which is not in fact open to the public, unless the facility of such establishments are made available to the customers or patrons of a place of public accommodation.
 
(Ord. No. 5679, § II, § 9-25-2012)


Sec. 30-28. - Additional unlawful discriminatory practices.

It shall be unlawful discriminatory practice:

 
(1)

(2)



(3)


(4)
 
To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the commission of acts prohibited by this article or to attempt to do so;

To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any other person because such persons has opposed any practice prohibited by this article or because such person has filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or hearing conducted pursuant to this article;
For the city to discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, as it relates to employment, disability or familial status as it relates to housing; or
To discriminate in any manner against any other person because of such person's association with any person protected by this article.
 

(Ord. No. 5679, § II, § 9-25-2012)


Sec. 30-29. - Exemptions.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to invalidate or limit any law of the state or of the city that requires dwellings to be designated and constructed in a manner that affords persons with disabilities greater access than is required by this article.
Nothing in this article:
 

(1)


(2)


(3)
 

Requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
Limits the applicability of any reasonable local restriction regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling, nor does any provision of said chapter regarding familial status apply with respect to housing for older persons.
Shall prohibit conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance, as defined by RSMo § 195.010.
 
(Ord. No. 5679, § II, § 9-25-2012)


Chapter 32 - LAW ENFORCEMENT


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
 

Sec. 32-1. - Mutual aid and emergency aid.

Under the authority set forth in RSMo 70.873, and in addition to any mutual aid powers under other provisions of the city Charter or this Code, the city police, fire and public works departments are hereby authorized to respond and provide assistance as requested in any mutual aid or emergency aid request in the state or in any bordering state. Any officer or employee of any such city department providing assistance pursuant to this provision shall have the same powers, immunities and liabilities as if acting within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city and shall be considered on active duty as he would be when acting within the boundaries of the city. Any officer or employee of another jurisdiction providing such mutual aid or emergency assistance to the city shall have the same powers, immunities and liabilities as if acting within his own jurisdiction.

(Code 1982, § 28-6; Ord. No. 4574, § 1, 1-12-1993)


Secs. 32-2—32-20. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT



Sec. 32-21. - Chief of police; duties and responsibilities.

 
(a)

(b)
 
The chief of police shall have command of the police department of the city. The chief of police shall:
 
(1)



(2)

(3)





(4)
 
Have the power to make or order an arrest with proper process for any offense against the laws of the city, and in such other cases as is authorized by the law of this state; and keep the offender in the city's jail or other place to prevent escape until a trial can be had before a proper officer unless such prisoner has been admitted to bail and has given good and sufficient bond to assure his appearance for trial.
Have the power to make arrests without process in any case in which such arrests are allowed by state law.

Have custody of all property seized and held for evidence, and, if the possession or sale of such property is unlawful, destroy such property after it has been used as evidence. If the property seized was stolen property and not contraband and is otherwise lawfully saleable or possessable, it shall be claimed by the owner. If the owner is not known, the property may be sold at public or private sale, the proceeds to be placed in the city's general fund.
Have custody of all abandoned property, cash or property left in any place. If the property or cash is under $50.00 in value, and if no person claims the property within ten days after the property has come into the custody of the chief of police, the property may be sold at public or private sale to the highest bidder and cash turned over to the city treasurer. If the property or cash is worth more than $50.00, the chief of police shall hold the property for a year. If no claimant appears, the property may be sold to the highest bidder at a public or private auction, all cash will be turned over to the city treasurer. After deducting expenses and costs of the auction, he shall turn the proceeds over to the city treasurer who shall deposit them in the general fund.
 
(Code 1972, § 203A.02; Code 1982, § 26-16; Ord. No. 3877, § 3, 4-25-1977; Ord. No. 5031, §§ I—IV, 11-27-2001)


Sec. 32-22. - Education and training.

 
(a)
 
Bonus payments. There shall be a bonus payment made for education and training as follows:
 

(1)


(2)



(3)



(4)


(5)
 

Upon the approval of the chief of police of the school to be attended and the course or curriculum to be studied, the cost of tuition and books shall be paid for any regular police officer enrolling for such instruction.
Upon satisfactory completion of 11 semester hours of instruction in approved courses of law enforcement or related courses at any accredited junior college, college or university by any regular police officer, that police officer shall receive an achievement bonus of $15.00 per month.
Upon satisfactory completion of 22 semester hours of instruction in approved courses of law enforcement or related courses at any accredited junior college, college or university by any regular police officer, that police officer shall receive an achievement bonus of $30.00 per month.
Upon satisfactory completion of 33 hours of instruction in approved courses of law enforcement or related courses at any accredited junior college, college or university by a regular police officer, that officer shall receive an achievement bonus of $45.00 per month.
Upon satisfactory completion of courses resulting in an associates degree in criminal justice from any accredited junior college, college, or university by a regular police officer that police officer shall receive a proficiency remuneration of $100.00 per month; provided that police officer shall have been continuously employed by the city as a police officer for more than 42 months.
 
(b)



(c)
 
Maintenance of records. The chief of police shall keep and maintain a record of the participation and achievement of all officers in the program pursuant to which the above achievement bonuses are awarded, and this record shall be available to the civil service commission and the city council for use in evaluating promotions.
Reimbursement of city. Unless otherwise waived by the city council, any police officer that voluntarily leaves the service of the city after having had paid for him by the city, the cost of such education and training as provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section, authorizes the city to deduct
 

from any monies due such police officer a sum to reimburse the city for such training and education according to the following schedule:
 

(1)


(2)


(3)


(4)


(5)
 

With less than one year of service from the beginning date of such education and training, 100 percent of the total cost of the tuition and books paid by the city for that police officer.
With less than two years of service from the beginning date of such education and training, 80 percent of the total cost of tuition and books paid by the city for that police officer.
With less than three years of service from the beginning date of such education and training, 60 percent of the total cost of tuition and books paid by the city for that police officer.
With less than four years of service from the beginning date of such education and training, 40 percent of the total cost of tuition and books paid by the city for that police officer.
With less than five years of service from the beginning date of such education and training, 20 percent of the total cost of tuition and books paid by the city for that police officer.
 
(Code 1982, § 26-17; Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-28-1995)


Secs. 32-23—32-47. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - POLICE RESERVE FORCE



Sec. 32-48. - Established.

There is hereby established a reserve police force for the city. (Code 1982, § 26-30; Ord. No. 4337, § 1, 1-22-1985)

Sec. 32-49. - Appointment of members.

Members of the police reserve force shall be appointed by the chief of police with the approval of the city manager. (Code 1982, § 26-31; Ord. No. 4337, § 1, 1-22-1985)

Sec. 32-50. - Members to serve without compensation.

Members of the police reserve force shall serve as such without compensation. (Code 1982, § 26-32; Ord. No. 4337, § 1, 1-22-1985)

Sec. 32-51. - Control and supervision of force.

The police reserve force shall be under the direct control and supervision of the chief of police of the city. (Code 1982, § 26-33; Ord. No. 4337, § 1, 1-22-1985)

Sec. 32-52. - Removal.

The chief of police shall have authority to remove, suspend, or discharge with or without cause any member of the police reserve force of the city. (Code 1982, § 26-34; Ord. No. 4337, § 1, 1-22-1985)

Sec. 32-53. - Qualiications.

Only persons of good character and health over the age of 21 years and not more than 50 years of age who have successfully completed such medical, physical, mental and other requirements that may be prescribed by the chief of police shall be appointed to the police reserve force.

(Code 1982, § 26-35; Ord. No. 4337, § 1, 1-22-1985)


Sec. 32-54. - Uniforms.

All members of the police reserve force shall wear identifying uniforms and emblems when carrying out any official duty, task or assignment. The type of uniform will be determined by the chief of police.

(Code 1982, § 26-36; Ord. No. 4337, § 1, 1-22-1985)
 

Sec. 32-55. - Duties.

It shall be the duty of all members of the police reserve force of the city to:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Be conservators of the peace.

Be active and vigilant in the preservation of good order in the city. Perform such other duties as may be required of them.
 

(Code 1982, § 26-37; Ord. No. 4337, § 1, 1-22-1985)


Sec. 32-56. - Powers.

 
(a)
 
In performing their lawful duties, members of the police reserve force shall have the following powers:
 

(1)



(2)
 

Members of the police reserve force are authorized to carry regulation weapons when on duty and in uniform only. Members are prohibited from carrying a concealed weapon at any time or from carrying an exposed weapon prior to successfully completing a firearms qualification program and probation period approved by the chief of police.
Members of the police reserve are vested with the power of arrest in all cases where an offense against a municipal ordinance of the city has been committed.
 
(b)


(c)
 
In addition to the powers in subsection (a) of this section, the police reserve force shall have such other powers as may be provided for by law or ordinance of the city.
The police reserve force members shall be considered to be on duty only when scheduled by the chief of police or his designee.
 

(Code 1982, § 26-38; Ord. No. 4337, § 1, 1-22-1985; Ord. No. 5031, § V, 11-27-2001)


Sec. 32-57. - Agreement to cooperate with the county and municipalities.

The city hereby offers and agrees to cooperate with the county and with each and every municipality within the county for certain common police services on the terms and conditions contained and signed in the mutual aid agreements.

(Code 1982, § 26-39; Ord. No. 4337, § 1, 1-22-1985)


Sec. 32-58. - Participation in major case squad in cooperation with other municipalities or county governmental agencies.

 
(a)





(b)
 
For the purposes of this section, the term "major case squad" shall mean any formation, operation, organization or cooperative action between any county, governing body, any municipal government and the city. The purpose of which is intensive professional investigation of certain individual crimes that may occur in their general geographic area and which is operated and activated on request of a county sheriff, county police superintendent or the police chief of a political subdivision wherein a crime has occurred.
The officers of the city police department are authorized to participate in and cooperate with any law enforcement officer of jurisdictions in the major case squad operation or formation. The officer designated to act as the major case squad operation will be so designated by the chiefs of police and, when acting outside of the city as a member of the major case squad operation, shall be considered to be on active duty the same as if acting within the boundaries of the city.
 
(Code 1982, § 26-40; Ord. No. 4278, §§ 1, 2, 1-27-1987)


Chapter 34 - OFFENSES


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Sec. 34-1. - Report of gunshot, knife wounds.

Any physician or other person who shall treat or attempt to treat or dress in the city any wound from a gun or pistol shot or a knife shall report it to the police as soon as it is reasonably possible, giving the name and residence of the party who is being treated and whose wound is being dressed. If treatment is administered in an office, the party giving treatment shall call the police while the injured party is there, and detain the injured party until a police officer arrives or until 30 minutes has passed from the time of the telephone call to the police, whichever is sooner. In any case, all cases of treatment of such wounds shall be reported to the police within two hours from the first treatment of the wound.

(Code 1972, § 305.01; Code 1982, § 26-1)


Sec. 34-2. - Aiding and abetting.
 

Any person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit, or aids or abets in the commission of any act declared herein to be in violation of the ordinances of the city, whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons, or as a principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense and every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any provision of this chapter is likewise guilty of such offense, and shall be punished as provided in s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 .

(Code 1982, § 22-1)


Sec. 34-3. - Obedience to lawful orders required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to obey a lawful order of any police officer given in the line of duty. (Code 1982, § 22-2)

Sec. 34-4. - Refusing aid.

No person shall refuse or neglect to give aid or assistance to any officer of this city while such officer is in the discharge of his official duties and after being called upon for such aid or assistance.

(Code 1982, § 22-3)


Sec. 34-5. - Interference with police ofcer prohibited.

No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, run away from or otherwise interfere with a police officer in the discharge of his official duties. (Code 1982, § 22-4)

Sec. 34-6. - Impersonating ofcers prohibited.

No person shall falsely represent himself to be an officer, agent, employee or a police officer of the city, of the county, or of the state or federal government; and no person, without being lawfully authorized, shall exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of any such officer.

(Code 1982, § 22-5)


Sec. 34-7. - False declarations—Generally.

 
(a)
 
It shall be unlawful for any person, with the purpose to mislead a public servant in the performance of his duty, to:
 

(1)
 

Submit any written false statement, which he does not believe to be true:
 

a.	In an application for any pecuniary benefit or other consideration; or

b.	On a form bearing notice, authorized by law, that false statements made therein are punishable; or
 

(2)
 

Submit or invite reliance on:
 

a.	Any writing which he knows to be forged, altered or otherwise lacking in authenticity; or

b.	Any sample, specimen, map, boundary mark, or other object that he knows to be false.
 

(b)



(c)
 

The falsity of the statement or the item under subsection (a) of this section must be as to a fact which is material to the purposes for which the statement is made or the item submitted; and the provisions of RSMo 575.050(2) and (3) shall apply to prosecutions under subsection (a) of this section.
It is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the actor retracted the false statement or item but this defense shall not apply if the retraction was made after:
 
(1)

(2)
 
The falsity of the statement or item was exposed; or

The public servant took substantial action in reliance on the statement or item.
 

(d)
 

The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction under subsection (c) of this section.
 

(Code 1982, § 22-6)


Sec. 34-8. - Same—Proof of falsity of statements.

No person shall be convicted of a violation of s e c t i o n 3 4 - 7 based upon the making of a false statement except upon proof of the falsity of the statement by:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
The direct evidence of two witnesses;

The direct evidence of one witness together with strongly corroborating circumstances; Demonstrative evidence which conclusively proves the falsity of the statement; or
 

(4)
 

A directly contradictory statement by the defendant under oath together with:
 

a.	The direct evidence of one witness; or

b.	Strongly corroborating circumstances; or
 

(5)
 

A judicial admission by the defendant that he made the statement knowing it was false. An admission, which is not a judicial admission, by the defendant that he made the statement knowing it was false may constitute strongly corroborating circumstances.
 

(Code 1982, § 22-7)


Sec. 34-9. - Escape and aiding in escape prohibited.

 
(a)


(b)
 
It shall be unlawful for any person, while being detained, imprisoned or held in custody by any police officer, to break away, escape or attempt to escape from such officer or place of detainment or custody.
It shall also be unlawful for any person to attempt to rescue any person from the custody of a police officer.
 

(Code 1982, § 22-8)


Sec. 34-10. - Resisting or interfering with arrest.

 
(a)
 
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing that a law enforcement officer is making an arrest, for the purpose of preventing the officer from effecting the arrest, to:
 
(1)

(2)
 
Resist the arrest of himself by using or threatening the use of violence or physical force or by fleeing from such officer; or Interfere with the arrest of another person by using or threatening the use of violence, physical force or physical interference.
 
(b)

(c)
 
This section applies to arrests with or without warrants and to arrests for any crime or ordinance violation.

It is no defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the law enforcement officer was acting unlawfully in making the arrest; however, nothing in this section shall be construed to bar civil suits for unlawful arrest.
 
(Code 1982, § 22-9)


Sec. 34-11. - Interference with legal process.

 
(a)


(b)
 
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing any person is authorized by law to serve process for the purpose of preventing such person from effecting the service of process, to interfere with or obstruct such person.
The term "process" includes any writ, summons, subpoena, warrant other than an arrest warrant, or other process or order of a court.
 

(Code 1982, § 22-10)


Sec. 34-12. - Conspiracy.

It shall be unlawful for any person to take part in a conspiracy to commit an offense. A person is guilty of conspiracy with another person or persons to commit an offense if, with the purpose of promoting or facilitating its commission he agrees with such other person or persons that they or one or more of them will engage in conduct which constitutes such offense.

(Code 1972, § 305.32; Code 1982, § 22-11)


Sec. 34-13. - Reserved.

Editor's note— Ord. No. 5782, § I, adopted, repealed  §  3 4 - 1 3 , which pertained to failure to appear and derived from Code 1982, § 22-12; and Ord. No. 4585, § 1, adopted Mar. 9, 1993.

Sec. 34-14. - Sale of tobacco to a minor; possession of tobacco by a minor.

 
(a)
 
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
Distribute means a conveyance to the public by sale, barter, gift or sample.

Minor means a person under the age of 18 years.

Person means an individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, public or private corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision or any agency, board, department or bureau of the state or federal government, or any other legal entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.

Proof of age means a driver's license or other generally accepted means of identification that contains a picture of the individual and appears on its face to be valid.
 

Rolling papers means the paper designed, manufactured, marketed or sold for use primarily as a wrapping or enclosure for tobacco, which enables a person to roll loose tobacco into a cigarette.

Sample means a tobacco product distributed to members of the general public at no cost or at nominal cost for product promotional purposes.

Sampling means the distribution to members of the general public of tobacco product samples.

Tobacco products means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, or dipping tobacco.

Vending machine means any mechanical electric or electronic, self-service device that dispenses tobacco products upon the insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment.
 

(b)
 

Prohibition of the sale of tobacco to a minor.
 

(1)


(2)





(3)
 

No person shall sell or distribute any tobacco product or rolling papers to any minor. This subsection shall not apply to the distribution by family members on property that is not open to the public.
A person selling tobacco products or rolling papers or distributing tobacco product samples shall require proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that such prospective purchaser or recipient may be under the age of 18 years. Reasonable reliance on proof of age or on the appearance of the purchaser or recipient shall be a defense to any action for a violation of this section. No person shall be liable for more than one violation of this section on any single day.
The owner of an establishment at which tobacco products or rolling papers are sold at retail or through vending machines shall prominently display in a conspicuous place at every display from which tobacco products are sold and on every vending machine where tobacco  products are purchased a sign that shall:
 
a.	Contain in red lettering at least one-half inch high on a white background the following: "It is a violation of state law for cigarettes or other tobacco products to be sold to any person under the age of 18 years"; and
b.	Include a depiction of a pack of cigarettes at least two inches high defaced by a red diagonal diameter of a surrounding red circle, and the words "Under 18 years."
 
(4)
 
If a sale is made by an employee of the owner of an establishment in violation of this section, then the employee shall be guilty of an offense established herein. If a vending machine is in violation of this section, then the owner of the establishment shall be guilty of an offense established herein. If a sample is distributed by an employee of a company conducting the sampling, then such employee shall be guilty of an offense established herein.
 
(c)
 
Prohibition of the purchase or possession of tobacco by a minor.
 

(1)

(2)
 

It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase, attempt to purchase or to possess any tobacco products or rolling papers.

It shall be unlawful for a minor to misrepresent that he has attained the age of 18 years for the purpose of purchasing or receiving tobacco product or rolling papers.
 
(Code 1982, § 22-13; Ord. No. 4921, § I, 1-25-2000)


Sec. 34-15. - Electronic cigarettes/vaporizing products.

 
(a)
 
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
Person means an individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, public or private corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision or any agency, board, department or bureau of the state or federal government, or any other legal entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.

Vaporizing products are electronic devices which employ a battery to power a heating chamber that converts a liquid solution containing tobacco-derived nicotine, through a non-combustive process, into a vapor or vapor-like mist. The definition includes electronic cigarettes, electronic cigars, electronic cigarillos, and electronic pipes, which are personal vaporizing products on which users inhale through a mouthpiece.
 

(b)
 

Distribution of vaporizing products to or possession by persons under 18 years of age prohibited:
 

(1)


(2)
 

A person, either directly or indirectly by an agent or employee, or by a vending machine owned by the person or located in the person's establishment, may not sell, offer for sale, give, or furnish any vaporizing products or any component to a person under 18 years of age.
Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing any vaporizing product, or any cartridge or component of any vaporizing product, to another person, the person selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing the vaporizing product shall verify that the person is at least 18 years of age by:
 
a.	Examining from any person that appears to be under 27 years of age a government-issued photographic identification that establishes the person is at least 18 years of age or
b.	For sales made through the internet or other remote sales methods, performing an age verification through an independent, third-
 

party age verification service that compares information available from public records to the personal information entered by the person during the ordering process that establishes the person is 18 years of age or older.
 
(3)


(4)
 
No minor under 18 years of age shall possess any vaporizing product, buy any vaporizing product, or, in the furtherance or facilitation of obtaining any vaporizing product shall display or use a false or forged identification card or transfer, alter, or deface an identification card.
It is not a violation of this Act for a person under 18 years of age to purchasec or possess a vaporizing product if the person under the age of 18 purchases or is given the vaporizing product from a retail seller of vaporizing products or an employee of the retail seller pursuant to a plan or action to investigate, patrol, or otherwise conduct a "sting operation" or enforcement action against a retail seller of any vaporizing product or a person employed by the retail seller of vaporizing products or on any premises authorized to sell vaporizing products to determine if vaporizing products are being sold or given to persons under 18 years of age if the "sting operation" or enforcement action is approved by the department of state police, the county sheriff, a municipal police department, the department of public health, or a local health department.
 
(Ord. No. 5743, § II, 9-9-2014)


Sec. 34-16. - Spitting in public places.

No person shall spit upon the floor, walls, platform, sides or steps of any public building or place. (Code 1972, § 302.11; Code 1982, § 15-1)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5743, adopted Sept. 9, 2014, renumbered § 3 4 - 1 5 as § 3 4 - 1 6 .


Secs. 34-17—34-33. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - CURFEW FOR MINORS



Sec. 34-34. - Established.

No person under the age of 17 years shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the streets, highways, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public places, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following day, except on weekends, the hours shall be 12:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday.

(Code 1972, § 305.03(A); Code 1982, § 22-26; Ord. No. 3926, § 1, 2-13-1978)


Sec. 34-35. - Penalties.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Any parent, guardian or other person who violates s e c t i o n 3 4 - 3 6 after having received notice of the first violation, as described in s e c t i o n 3 4 - 3 7 , shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 .
Any person under the age of 17 years who violates s e c t i o n 3 4 - 3 4 after having received notice of the first violation as described in s e c t i o n 3 4 - 3 7 shall be dealt with in accordance with the juvenile laws of the state.
 
(Code 1972, § 305.03(E); Code 1982, § 22-30; Ord. No. 3926, § 1, 2-13-1978)


Sec. 34-36. - Unlawful for parents, guardians, etc., to permit violations.

No person who is the parent, guardian or other adult having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 17 years shall knowingly or with reason to know, permit such minor to violate the provisions of s e c t i o n 3 4 - 3 4 .

(Code 1972, § 305.03(B); Code 1982, § 22-27; Ord. No. 3926, § 1, 2-13-1978)


Sec. 34-37. - Procedure upon violation.

Any police officer finding a minor violating the provisions of s e c t i o n 3 4 - 3 4 shall notify such minor of the violation and escort such minor to the police department and contact such minor's parent, guardian or other adult having the care and custody of the minor. A police officer shall retain custody until the parent, guardian or other adult having the care and custody of that minor is located. The manner in which s e c t i o n 3 4 - 3 4 has been violated shall be communicated to that adult, whereupon the minor shall be released to such adult.

(Code 1972, § 305.03(D); Code 1982, § 22-28; Ord. No. 3926, § 1, 2-13-1978)


Sec. 34-38. - Exemptions.
 

The provisions of this article shall not apply when the minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or another adult person having the care and custody of that minor, or when such minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business as directed by such adult.

(Code 1972, § 305.03(C); Code 1982, § 22-29; Ord. No. 3926, § 1, 2-13-1978)


Secs. 34-39—34-64. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS



Sec. 34-65. - Prostitution.

 
(a)
 
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
Patronizing prostitution. A person "patronizes prostitution" if:

 
(1)


(2)


(3)
 
Pursuant to a prior understanding, he gives something of value to another person as compensation for that person or a third person having engaged in sexual conduct with him or with another;
He gives or agrees to give something of value to another person on an understanding that in return therefor that person or a third person will engage in sexual conduct with him or with another; or
He solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual conduct with him or with another, or to secure a third person to engage in sexual conduct with him or with another, in return for something of value.
 

Prostitution. A person commits "prostitution" if he engages or offers or agrees to engage in sexual conduct with another person in return for something of value to be received by the person or by a third person.

Sexual conduct occurs when there is:

 
(1)


(2)


(3)
 
"Sexual intercourse," which means any penetration, however slight, of the female sex organ by the male sex organ, whether or not an emission results;
"Deviate sexual intercourse," which means any sexual act involving the genitals of one person and the mouth, tongue or anus of another person; or
"Sexual contact," which means any touching, manual or otherwise, of the anus or genitals of one person by another, done for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire of either party.
 

Something of value means any money or property, or any token, object or article exchangeable for money or property.

 
(b)

(c)

(d)
 
No person shall perform an act of prostitution. No person shall patronize prostitution.
In any prosecution for prostitution or patronizing a prostitute, the sex of the two parties or prospective parties to the sexual conduct engaged in, contemplated or solicited is immaterial, and it is no defense that:
 
(1)

(2)
 
Both persons were of the same sex; or

The person who received, agreed to receive or solicited something of value was a male and the person who gave or agreed or offered to give something of value was a female.
 
(Code 1972, § 305.06; Code 1982, § 22-41; Ord. No. 3970, § 1, 12-11-1978)


Sec. 34-66. - Indecent exposure.

No person shall knowingly expose his genitals under circumstances in which he knows that his conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm. (Code 1972, § 305.15; Code 1982, § 22-42; Ord. No. 3969, § 1, 12-11-1978)

Sec. 34-67. - Pornography.

 
(a)
 
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
Displays publicly means exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in such manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguishing by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street, highway or public sidewalk or from the property of others or from any portion of the person's store, or the exhibitor's store or property when items and material other than this material are offered
 

for sale or rent to the public.

Explicit sexual material means any pictorial or three-dimensional material depicting human masturbation, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual intercourse, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, sadomasochistic abuse or emphasizing the depiction of post-pubertal human genitals; provided, however, that works of art or of anthropological significance shall not be deemed to be within the foregoing definition.

Furnish means to issue, sell, give, provide, lend, rent, mail, deliver, transfer, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or otherwise provide.

Material means anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any statue or other figure, or any recording or transcription, or any mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction or anything that is or may be used as a means of communication. The term "material" includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates and other latent representational objects.

Minor means any person under the age of 18 years.

Performance means any play, motion picture film, videotape, dance or exhibition performed before an audience.

Pornographic means any material or performance if:

 
(1)

(2)


(3)
 
Applying contemporary community standards, its predominant appeal is to prurient interest in sex;

Taken as a whole with the average person, applying community standards, it depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive way; and
Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
 

Promote means to manufacture, issue, sell, rent, provide, mail, deliver, transfer, transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or advertise or to offer or agree to do the same.

Sadomasochistic abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification.

Sexual conduct means actual or simulated acts of human masturbation, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or the beast of a female in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
 

(b)
 

Promoting pornography. A person commits the offense of promoting pornography if, knowing its content and character, he:
 

(1)

(2)
 

Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any pornographic material for pecuniary gain; Produces, presents, directs, or participates in any pornographic performances for pecuniary gain.
 
(c)
 
Furnishing pornographic materials to minors. A person commits the offense of furnishing pornographic materials to minors if, knowing its content and character, he:
 
(1)


(2)
 
Furnishes any pornographic material, knowing that the person to whom it is furnished is a minor or acting in reckless disregard of the likelihood that such person is a minor;
Produces, presents, directs or participates in any pornographic performance that is furnished to a minor knowing that any person viewing such performance is a minor or action in reckless disregard of the likelihood that a minor is viewing the performance.
 
(d)
 
Public display of explicit sexual material. A person commits the offense of public display of explicit sexual material if he knowingly:
 

(1)

(2)
 

Displays publicly explicit sexual material; or

Fails to take prompt action to remove such a display from property in his possession after learning of its existence.
 

(e)
 

Evidence in pornographic cases.
 

(1)
 

In any possession under this section, evidence shall be admissible to show:
 

a.	What the predominant appeal of the material or performance would be for ordinary adults.

b.	The literary, artistic, political or scientific value of the material or performance.

c.	The degree of public acceptance in this state and in the local community.

d.	The appeal to prurient interest in advertising or other promotion of the material or performance.

e.	The purpose of the author, creator, promoter, furnisher or publisher of the material or performance.
 

(2)
 

Testimony of the author, creator, promotor, furnisher, publisher, or expert testimony, relation to factors entering into the determination of the issues of pornography, shall be admissible.
 
(f)
 
Injunctions and declaratory judgments.
 

(1)
 

Whenever material or a performance is being or is about to be promoted, furnished or displayed in violation of this section, a civil action may be instituted in the circuit court by the city attorney against any person violating or about to violate those sections in order to obtain a declaration that the promotion, furnishing or display of such material or performance is prohibited. Such an action may also seek an injunction appropriately restraining promotion, furnishing or display of the material or performance.
 

(2)


(3)


(4)





(5)

(6)
 

Any action brought under this section may be brought only in the circuit court of the county in which such person resides, or where the promo or displaying is taking place or is about to take place.
Any promoter, furnisher or displayer of, or a person who is about to be a promoter, furnisher or displayer of, the material or performance involved may intervene as of right as a party defendant in the proceedings.
The trial court and the appellate court shall give expedited consideration to actions and appeals brought under this section. The defendant shall be entitled to a trial of the issues within one day after joinder of issue and a decision shall be rendered by the court within two days of the conclusion of the trial. No restraining order or injunction of any kind shall be issued restraining the promotion, furnishing or display of any material or performance without a prior adversary hearing before the court.
A final declaration obtained pursuant to this section may be used to form the basis for an injunction and for no other purpose.

All laws regulating the procedure for obtaining declaratory judgments or injunctions that are inconsistent with the provisions of this section shall be inapplicable to proceedings brought pursuant to this section. There shall be no right to jury trial in any proceedings under this section.
 
(g)
 
Violations. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine or imprisonment.
 
(Code 1982, § 22-44; Ord. No. 4801, § 1, 9-23-1997)


Sec. 34-68. - Restrictions on residency of registered sex ofenders.

Registered sex offenders are hereby prohibited from residing within 1,000 feet of a park, library or church with youth programs. (Ord. No. 5425, § I, 8-28-2007)

Secs. 34-69—34-94. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



Sec. 34-95. - Assault.

It shall be unlawful for any person to:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
 
Attempt to cause or recklessly cause physical injury to another person;

With criminal negligence, cause physical injury to another person by means of a deadly weapon; Purposely place another person in apprehension of immediate physical injury;
Recklessly engage in conduct which creates a grave risk of death or serious physical injury to another person; or

Knowingly cause physical contact with another person knowing the other person will regard the contact as offensive or provocative.
 

(Code 1972, § 305.33; Code 1982, § 22-56; Ord. No. 3728, § 1, 5-30-1973)


Sec. 34-96. - Harassment.

 
(a)





(b)


(c)
 
Actions constituting harassment. A person shall be guilty of harassment if, for the purposes of frightening or disturbing another, he communicates in writing or by telephone a threat to commit a felony; makes a telephone call or communicates in writing unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature, or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose hearing they are made; makes a telephone call anonymously; or makes repeated telephone calls.
Responsibility. It shall be prima facie evidence that the person or persons in whose name or names the telephone used in violation of this section is addressed or listed shall have committed or authorized a violation of this section.
Penalty. Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in a manner provided for in sections 1 - 1 1 and 1 - 1 2 .
 
(Code 1982, § 22-57; Ord. No. 4586, § 1, 3-9-1993)


Sec. 34-97. - Afrays.

It is unlawful for two or more persons, in any public place in the city, voluntarily or by agreement to engage in any fight or use any blows or violence toward the other or others in any angry or quarrelsome manner, or do each other any other willful mischief, or to assault or strike another in any public place to the terror or disturbance of others.

(Ord. No. 5543, § I, 9-22-2009)
 

Sec. 34-98. - Endangering the welfare of a child.

A person commits the offense of endangering the welfare of a child if he:

 
(1)

(2)


(3)
 
Knowingly acts in a manner that creates substantial risk to the life, body, or health of a child less than 17 years old;

Knowingly encourages, aids, or causes a child less than 17 years old to engage in any conduct which causes or tends to cause the child to come within the provisions of RSMo 211.031(1) or (2);
Is a parent, guardian, or other person legally charged with the care or custody of a child less than 17 years old and he recklessly fails or refuses to exercise reasonable diligence in the care or control of such child to prevent him from coming within the provisions of RSMo 211.031(1) or (2).
 

(Ord. No. 5448, § I, 1-22-2008)


Sec. 34-99. - Unattended child in a motor vehicle.

No person, age 16 years or older, who is in the company of a child or children of the age of ten years or less, shall knowingly allow the child or children to be unattended in a motor vehicle.

(Ord. No. 5448, § I, 1-22-2008)


Secs. 34-100—34-126. - Reserved.


ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Sec. 34-127. - Damaging property.

It shall be unlawful for any person to:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Knowingly damage property of another;

Damage property for the purpose of defrauding an insurer; or

Destroy, damage or deface any real property, structures, vehicles or equipment owned by the city, the county, the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District, the state, the bi-state development agency or utilities providing electric, natural gas, water or communications service.
 

(Code 1972, § 305.21; Code 1982, § 22-71; Ord. No. 5417, § I, 8-14-2007)


Sec. 34-128. - Trespass.

 
(a)


(b)
 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly enter unlawfully or knowingly remain unlawfully in a building or inhabitable structure or upon real property.
A person does not commit the offense of trespass by entering or remaining upon real property unless the real property is fenced or otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or as to which notice against trespass is given by:
 
(1)

(2)
 
Actual communication to the actor; or

Posting in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders.
 

(Code 1972, §§ 305.22, 305.23; Code 1982, § 22-72; Ord. No. 3815, § 1, 4-28-1975)


Sec. 34-129. - Stealing.

No person shall appropriate property or services of another under the value of $150.00, with the purpose to deprive him thereof, either without his consent or by means of deceit or coercion.

(Code 1972, § 305.10; Code 1982, § 22-73; Ord. No. 3976, § 1, 2-26-1979)


Sec. 34-130. - Receiving stolen property.

 
(a)


(b)
 
It shall be unlawful for any person to, for the purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest therein, receive, retain or dispose of property of another knowing that it has been stolen, or believing that it has been stolen.
Evidence of the following is admissible in any prosecution under this section to prove the requisite knowledge or belief of the alleged receiver:
 

(1)

(2)
 

That he was found in possession or control of other property stolen on separate occasions from two or more persons; That he received other stolen property in another transaction within the year preceding the transaction charged;
 

(3)
 

That he acquired the stolen property for a consideration that he knew was far below its reasonable value.
 

(Code 1972, § 305.10A; Code 1982, § 22-74; Ord. No. 3862, § 1, 11-22-1976)


Sec. 34-131. - Institutional vandalism.

A person commits the violation of institutional vandalism by knowingly vandalizing, defacing, or otherwise damaging any of the following:

 
(1)


(2)

(3)

(4)
 
Any church, synagogue, or other facility, building, structure or place used for religious worship or other religious purpose, including any personal property contained therein, any adjacent grounds, and any personal property located on such grounds;
Any cemetery, mortuary, military monument or other facility used for the purpose of burial or memorializing the dead;

Any school, educational facility, community center, hospital or medical clinic owned and operated by a religious or sectarian group; or

Any motor vehicle that is owned, operated, leased or under contract by a school district or private school for the transportation of children.
 

(Code 1982, § 22-75; Ord. No. 4923, § I, 1-25-2000)


Sec. 34-132. - Passing bad checks.

 
(a)


(b)





(c)





(d)
 
A person commits the offense of passing a bad check when, with purposes to defraud, he issues or passes a check or other similar sight or order for the payment of money knowing that it will not be paid by the drawee, or that there is no such drawee.
If the issuer had no account with the drawee or if there was no such drawee at the time the check order was issued, this shall be prime facie evidence of his purpose to defraud and of his knowledge that the check or order would not be paid provided such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees within ten days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee.
If the issuer has an account with the drawee, failure to pay the check or order within ten days after notice in writing that has not been honored because of insufficient funds or credit with the drawee is prime facie evidence of his purpose to defraud and of his knowledge that the check or order would not be paid provided that such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee hereon together with all costs and protests fees within ten days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee.
Notice in writing means notice deposited as first class mail in United States mail and addressed to the issuer at his address as it appears on the dishonored check or to his last known address.
 
(Code 1982, § 22-76; Ord. No. 5022, § I, 10-23-2001)


Sec. 34-133. - Fraudulent use of credit or debit device.

 
(a)
 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
Credit device means credit cards and magnetic bank cards and includes numbers used to charge telephone calls.

Debit device includes a card, code, number, or other device (other than a check, draft, or similar paper instrument) used to initiate an electronic fund transfer.
 

(b)
 

A person commits the offense of fraudulent use of a credit device or debit device if he uses a credit or debit device for the purpose of obtaining services or property knowing that:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
The device is stolen, fictitious, or forged;

The device has been revoked or canceled; or

For any other reason, his use of the device is unauthorized.
 

(Ord. No. 5456, § I, 2-26-2007)


Secs. 34-134—34-164. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE



Sec. 34-165. - Peace disturbance.

 
(a)
 
A person commits the crime of peace disturbance if:
 

(1)
 

He unreasonably and knowingly disturbs or alarms another person by:
 

a.	Making a loud noise;

b.	Using offensive and indecent language in a face-to-face manner to a specific individual under circumstances which are likely to
 

produce an immediate violent response from a reasonable recipient;

c.	Threatening to commit a felonious act against any person under circumstances which are likely to cause a reasonable person to fear that such threat may be carried out;
d.	Fighting; or

e.	Creating a noxious and offensive odor.
 

(2)
 

He is in a public place or on private property of another without consent purposely causes inconvenience to another person or persons by unreasonably and physically obstructing:
 
a.	Vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or

b.	The free ingress or egress to or from a public or private place.
 

(3)
 

He, or any person or animal or machine they own or control, or any person on his property with his permission, does any of the following:
 

a.	Makes a loud or annoying noise which reasonably disturbs neighbors or nearby persons; or

b.	Creates a noxious and offensive odor which reasonably disturbs neighbors or nearby persons.
 

(4)
 

He shall cause, or he owns or possesses property from which originates, sound that is a public disturbance noise.
 

(b)
 

The following sounds are hereby determined to be public disturbance noises:
 

(1)






(2)


(3)



(4)



(5)

(6)
 

Frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds made by any animal which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort and repose of property owners or possessors, except that such sounds made in animal shelters, or commercial kennels, veterinary hospitals, pet shops, or pet kennels licensed under and in compliance with the provisions of this Code shall be exempt from this subsection; provided,
that notwithstanding any other provision of this section, if the owner or other person having custody of the animal cannot, with reasonable inquiry, be located by the investigating officer or if the animal is a repeated violator of this subsection, the animal may be impounded;
The frequent, repetitive or continuous sounding of any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle, except as a warning of danger or as specifically permitted or required by law;
The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds in connection with the starting, operation, repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, off-highway vehicle, or internal combustion engine, within a rural or residential district, so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors of real property;
The use of sound amplifier or other device capable of producing or reproducing amplified sound upon public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or sales or for attracting the attention of the public to any vehicle, structure or property or the contents therein, except as permitted by law;
The making of any loud and raucous sound within 1,000 feet of any school, hospital, sanitarium, nursing or convalescent facility;

The creation by use of a musical instrument, whistle, sound and amplifier or other device capable of producing or reproducing sound, of loud and raucous sounds which emanate frequently, repetitively or continuously from any building, structure or property located within the city, such as sounds originating from a band session or social gathering.
 
(c)


(d)
 
No sound source specifically exempted from a maximum permissible sound level by this section shall be a public disturbance noise, insofar as the particular source is exempted.
The following sounds are exempt from the provisions of this section at all times:
 

(1)

(2)


(3)

(4)
 

Sounds originating from aircraft in flight;

Sounds created by safety and protective devices, such as relief valves, where noise suppression would defeat the safety release intent of the device;
Sounds created by fire alarms; and

Sounds created by emergency equipment and emergency work necessary in the interest of law enforcement or of the health, safety or welfare of the community.
 
(Code 1982, § 22-86; Ord. No. 4628, § 1, 10-12-1993; Ord. No. 5499, § I, 2-12-2009)


Sec. 34-166. - False reports—Generally.

 
(a)
 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

Give false information to a law enforcement officer for the purpose of implicating another person in a crime; Make a false report to a law enforcement officer that a crime has occurred or is about to occur; or
Make a false report or causes a false report to be made to a law enforcement officer, security officer, fire department or other organization, official or volunteer, which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property that a fire or other incident calling for an emergency response has occurred.
 
(b)


(c)
 
It is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the actor retracted the false statement or report before the law enforcement officer or any other person took substantial action in reliance thereon.
The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction under subsection (b) of this section.
 

(Code 1972, § 305.27; Code 1982, § 22-88)


Sec. 34-167. - Same—Bombs.

It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make a false report or cause a false report to be made to any person that a bomb or other explosive has been placed in any public or private place or vehicle.

(Code 1982, § 22-89)


Sec. 34-168. - Misuse of emergency telephone service.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Emergency defined. The term "emergency" means any incident involving danger to life or property that calls for an emergency response dispatch of police, fire, emergency medical service, and/or other public safety agency.
Unlawful act. It shall be unlawful for a person to misuse emergency telephone service by use of a telephone to summon emergency service agencies, by contacting 9-1-1, the emergency services telephone number, for nonemergency situations three or more times within a 30-day period.
 
(Ord. No. 5444, § I, 1-8-2008)


Sec. 34-169. - Drinking in public.

Except as provided elsewhere in this article, any person who shall disturb the peace by noisy, riotous or disorderly conduct in any park, public building, street, sidewalk, alley, highway, parking lot, thoroughfare or public place; who shall use indecent, or profane language; or who shall purchase or otherwise obtain any beer, wine or spirituous or malt liquors and drink the same in any public building, street, sidewalk, alley, highway, parking lot, thoroughfare or other public place, shall be guilty of violating this section.

(Code 1982, § 22-90; Ord. No. 4333, § 1, 10-27-1987)


Sec. 34-170. - Police dogs.

 
(a)



(b)


(c)
 
It shall be unlawful for any person to taunt, torment, tease, beat, strike, interfere with, endanger, injure, kill, or administer or subject any desensitizing drugs, chemicals, or substance to any dog used by a law enforcement officer when the person is in the presence of an officer performing official duties or when the dog is placed in a kennel or any other enclosure.
This section does not apply to a police officer, to a veterinarian that may perform euthanasia, to emergency situations when delay would cause a dog undue suffering and pain, or to veterinarian care rendered to the animal.
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or both such fine and imprisonment.
 
(Code 1982, § 22-91; Ord. No. 4690, § 1, 6-13-1995)


Sec. 34-171. - Hate ofenses.

 
(a)
 
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
Disability means a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities, being regarded as having such an impairment, or a record of having such an impairment.

Gender identity means the gender-related identity, appearance, mannerisms or other gender-related characteristics of an individual, with or without regard to the individual's designated sex at birth.

Sexual orientation means an individual's real or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality.

 
(b)
 
Hate offenses. Any violation of sections 3 4 - 9 5  (assault), 3 4 - 9 6 (harassment), 3 4 - 1 2 7 (damaging property), 3 4 - 1 2 8  (trespass), 3 4 - 1 3 1  (institutional vandalism) and  3 4 - 1 6 5  (peace disturbance) that is knowingly motivated because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or disability of the victim or victims shall also be classified as a hate offense punishable as a violation under this section.
 
(Code 1982, § 22-92; Ord. No. 4922, § I, 1-25-2000; Ord. No. 5679, § III, 9-25-2012)


Sec. 34-172. - Transporting open container of alcoholic beverage in motor vehicles.

 
(a)
 
A person commits the crime of transporting an open container of alcoholic beverage in a motor vehicle if he transports in any vehicle operating upon a public highway, street or alley any alcoholic beverage, except in the original container which shall not have been opened and the seal upon which shall not have been broken and from which the original cap or cork shall not have been removed, unless the opened container be in
 

a compartment outside of the passenger compartment of the vehicle which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in such vehicle while it is in motion.
 
(b)



(c)
 
Nothing in this section shall be construed as to prohibit the otherwise legal consumption of alcoholic beverages by passengers on a privately or publicly owned transit authority that has been chartered and is not being utilized for conveyance of the general public, where the operation and control of such conveyance is by a person not in possession of or with ready access to such alcoholic beverage.
Recreational motor vehicles. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the otherwise legal consumption of an alcoholic beverage by passengers riding in the living quarters of a recreational motor vehicle. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent any motor vehicle from being registered as a commercial motor vehicle if it could otherwise be so registered.
 
(Code 1982, § 22-93; Ord. No. 4927, § I, 2-22-2000)


Sec. 34-173. - Funeral picketing

 
(a)



(b)


(c)
 
No person shall knowingly picket or engage in other protest activities, nor shall any association or corporation knowingly cause picketing or other protest activities to occur, within 300 feet of any residence, cemetery, funeral home, church, synagogue, or other establishment or location during or within one hour before or one hour after the conducting of any actual funeral or burial service at that place.
As used in this section, "other protest activities" shall mean any action that is disruptive or undertaken to disrupt or disturb a funeral or burial service.
As used in this section, "funeral" and "burial service" shall mean a ceremony, wake or memorial service held in conjunction with the burial, cremation or death of a deceased person, but this section shall not apply to processions while in transit beyond any 300 feet zone as described in subsection (a) of this section.
 
(Ord. No. 5698, § I, 3-12-2013)


Sec. 34-174. - Disorderly conduct.

Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct.

 
(1)


(2)


(3)

(4)


(5)

(6)

(7)


(8)


(9)

(10)

(11)


(12)


(13)
 
Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in danger of safety of his/her life, limb or health.
Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged.
Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm.

Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property.
Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and cause, provoke or engage in any fight or brawl. Any person who shall assemble in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities.
Any person who shall frequent any public place and obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick artifice or device, or attempt to do so.
Any person, while in a public place, who utters in a loud, abusive or threatening manner, any obscene words, epithets or similar abusive language. Words merely causing displeasure or annoyance are not prohibited.
Any person who shall use fight provoking words directed to another person.

Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and do bodily harm to another.

Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a law enforcement officer or other person having authority.
Any person who damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition.
Any person who, either purposefully or while in an intoxicated or drugged condition, causes inconvenience to another person or persons in a public place or on private property of another without consent by unreasonably and physically obstructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic or the free ingress or egress to or from the public or private place.
 

(Ord. No. 5720, § I, 11-12-2013)

Editor's note— Ord. No. 5720, § I, adopted Nov. 12, 2013 set out provisions intended for use as § 3 4 - 1 7 3 . Inasmuch as section so numbered already exists, said provisions have been redesignated as § 3 4 - 1 4 at the discrection of the editor.

Secs. 34-175—34-197. - Reserved.
 

ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY



Sec. 34-198. - Abandonment of airtight or semi-airtight containers.

 
(a)






(b)


(c)
 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, discard or knowingly permit to remain on premises under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned or discarded ice box, refrigerator, or other airtight or semi-airtight container which has a capacity of 1½ cubic feet or more and an opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without rendering such equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein.
Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman.
The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue under subsection (b) of this section.
 

(Code 1972, § 302.16; Code 1982, § 22-101)


Sec. 34-199. - Inhaling or drinking certain substances.

 
(a)



(b)
 
No person shall inhale or drink any compound, liquid, chemical or any substance known as glue, adhesive cement, mucilage, dope or other material or substance or combination of materials or substances with the intent to become intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed, irrational or otherwise changing, distorting or disturbing eyesight, thinking, balance or coordination.
This section shall not apply to cases in which a person inhales or drinks any material or substance under direction of a physician, surgeon, dentist or podiatrist authorized to prescribe such material or substance.
 
(Code 1972, § 302.17; Code 1982, § 22-102)


Sec. 34-200. - Weapons generally.

 
(a)





(b)



(c)


(d)


(e)

(f)



(g)



(h)








(i)



(j)
 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear under his clothes, or to conceal about his person, or to display in a threatening manner, any dangerous or deadly weapon including, but not by way of limitation, any pistol, revolver, slingshot, blackjack, cross-knuckles or knuckles of lead, brass or other material, or any bowie knife, dirk, dagger, razor or any knife resembling a bowie knife or having a blade in excess of 2½ inches in length, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, display, use, possess or carry any knife having the appearance of a pocketknife, the blade of which can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure on the handle or other mechanical contrivance. Any such knife is hereby declared to be a dangerous or deadly weapon and shall be subject to forfeiture to the city as provided in this section.
No person shall sell to a minor under the age of 16 years, without the consent of that child's guardian or parents, any ammunition, firearms, or any deadly weapon.
No person other than a police officer shall discharge any firearms except during some patriotic celebration, or at some shooting match under the control of a responsible person.
Every person convicted of any violation of this section shall forfeit to the city such dangerous or deadly weapon so concealed or displayed. Nothing in this section shall be construed to forbid United States marshals, sheriffs, constables and their deputies, and any regular, special or ex
officio police officer, or any other law enforcement officer of the United States, the state, the county or the city, or any other authorized member
of the city government from carrying or wearing, while on duty, such weapons as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of their duties.

It shall be the duty of every police officer, upon making an arrest and taking such a concealed weapon from the person of the offender, to deliver such weapon to the chief of police to be held by him until the final determination of the prosecution for such offense; and upon a finding of guilty, it shall then be the duty of the chief of police to dispose of such weapon as directed by the municipal judge.
It shall be unlawful for any person carrying an air weapon (as defined herein) to willfully enter or go upon the premises or property of another, or to fire or discharge any air weapon while on the premises or property of another, or to fire any projectile from an air weapon over, into through or across the premises or property of another without first having obtained the written permission from the owner, lessee or person in charge of such premises or property. It shall also be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any air weapon from, across or into any street, sidewalk, road, highway or any park. As used herein, the term "air weapon" shall mean any air rifle, air gun or pistol, BB gun, sling shot, spring gun or gun  or rifle containing a gas-propelled cartridge, tear gas gun, vapor gas gun or any similar weapon, whether such be classed as a toy or not, which impels with force a projectile or pellet of any kind.
Subsection (a) of this section, as it applies to firearms, shall not apply to any person who has a valid concealed carry endorsement issued pursuant to RSMo 571.094 or a valid permit or endorsement to carry concealed firearms issued by another state or political subdivision of another state.
It shall be unlawful for any person to openly carry a firearm or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use. This subsection shall not apply to either of the following: (i) any person who has a valid concealed carry endorsement issued pursuant to RSMo ch. 571, or a valid permit or
 

endorsement to carry concealed firearms issued by another state or political subdivision of another state; and (ii) any person transporting such weapons in a nonfunctioning state or in an unloaded state to and from his or her vehicle to his or her residence and from his or her residence to his or her vehicle.
(Code 1972, § 305.19; Code 1982, § 22-103; Ord. No. 4842, § I, 9-8-1998; Ord. No. 5129, § 2, 10-14-2003; Ord. No. 5602, § I, 4-12-2011; Ord. No. 5752, § I, 10-14-
2014)


Sec. 34-201. - Persons prohibited from carrying concealed frearms city buildings.

 
(a)





(b)



(c)


(d)



(e)






(f)
 
No person who has been issued a concealed carry endorsement by the state director of revenue under RSMo 571.094 or who has been issued a valid permit or endorsement to carry concealed firearms issued by another state or political subdivision of another state, shall, by authority of that endorsement or permit, be allowed to carry a concealed firearm or to openly carry a firearm in any building or portion of that building owned, leased, or controlled by the city.
Signs shall be posted at each entrance of a building entirely owned, leased, or controlled by the city stating that carrying of firearms is prohibited. Where the city owns, leases, or controls only a portion of a building, signs shall be posted at each entrance to that portion of the building stating that carrying of firearms is prohibited.
This section shall not apply to buildings used for public housing by private persons, highways, or rest areas, firing ranges, or private dwellings owned, leased, or controlled by the city.
Any person violating this section may be denied entrance to the building or ordered to leave the building. Additionally, any city employee violating this section may be disciplined. All city employees are authorized to deny entrance to persons violating this section and to order persons violating this section to leave buildings owned, leased, or controlled by the city.
Carrying of a concealed firearm in violation of this section by any individual who holds a concealed carry endorsement pursuant to RSMo 571.094 shall not be a criminal act but may subject the person to denial to the building or removal from the building. If such person refuses to leave the building and a peace officer is summoned, such person may be issued a citation for an amount not to exceed $100.00 for the first offense. If a second citation for a similar violation occurs within a six-month period, such person shall be fined an amount not to exceed $200.00. If a third citation for a similar violation is issued within one year of the first citation, such person shall be fined an amount not to exceed $500.00.
No person who has been issued a certificate of qualification which allows the person to carry a concealed firearm before the director of revenue begins issuing concealed carry endorsements in July 2004 shall, by authority of that certificate, be allowed to carry a concealed firearm or to openly carry a firearm in any building or portion of a building owned, leased, or controlled by the city.
 
(Code 1982, § 22-104; Ord. No. 5129, § 1, 10-14-2003)


Sec. 34-202. - Controlled substances—Generally.

 
(a)



(b)


(c)

(d)


(e)
 
As used in this section, the terms "controlled substances," "counterfeit substances," "barbiturates," "stimulants," and "hallucinogenic drugs" shall mean controlled substances, counterfeit substances, barbiturates, stimulants, and hallucinogenic drugs as defined by the laws of the state, RSMo ch. 195, as amended.
No person shall have in his possession, custody or control, or sell, offer for sale, give or offer to give, to any other person, any controlled substance.
No person shall possess any apparatus, device or instrument for the unauthorized use of controlled substances.

No person shall manufacture, possess, have under his control, sell, prescribe, administer, dispense, distribute or compound any controlled or counterfeit substance.
The provisions and prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any person who is specifically authorized by the laws of the state to manufacture, possess, have under his control, sell, prescribe, administer, dispense, distribute or compound any controlled or counterfeit substance, nor to any person who is authorized under the laws of the state to possess any apparatus, device or instrument for the use of any controlled substance.
 
(Code 1972, § 305.34; Code 1982, § 22-105; Ord. No. 4040, § 1, 5-13-1980)


Sec. 34-203. - Same—Procurement.

No person shall obtain or procure, or attempt to obtain or procure, the administration of a controlled substance, barbiturate, stimulant, or hallucinogenic drug as defined in RSMo ch. 195 by means of:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
 

Fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or subterfuge;

The forgery or alteration of a prescription or of any written order; The concealment of a material fact; or
The use of a false name or the giving of a false address.
 

(Code 1972, § 305.35; Code 1982, § 22-106; Ord. No. 4041, § 1, 5-13-1980)
 

Sec. 34-204. - Drug paraphernalia.

 
(a)
 
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
Controlled substance shall be defined as and include the following:

 
(1)










(2)
 
"Cannabis," which includes marihuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature
stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination; and
"Controlled substances," as defined and enumerated in RSMo ch. 195 in effect on January 27, 1981.
 

Drug paraphernalia.

 
(1)
 
The term "drug paraphernalia" means and includes all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section. It includes, but is not limited to:
 
a.	Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
b.	Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances;
c.	Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant that is a controlled substance;
d.	Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;
e.	Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;

f.	Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;
g.	Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana;
h.	Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
i.	Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;
j.	Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;

k.	Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body;
l.	Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
1.	Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
2.	Water pipes;

3.	Carburetion tubes and devices;

4.	Smoking and carburetion masks;

5.	Roach clips: Meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;
6.	Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;

7.	Chamber pipes;

8.	Carburetor pipes;
 

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
 

Electric pipes; Air-driven pipes; Chillums;
Bongs;

Ice pipes or chillers.
 

(2)
 

In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:
 
a.	Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;

b.	Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;
c.	The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this section;

d.	The proximity of the object to controlled substances;

e.	The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;

f.	Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this section; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this article shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
g.	Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;

h.	Descriptive materials accompanying the object that explains or depicts its use;

i.	National and local advertising concerning its use;

j.	The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;

k.	Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
l.	Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise;

m.	The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community;

n.	Expert testimony concerning its use.

 
(b)



(c)





(d)


(e)
 
Possession. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section.
Manufacture or delivery. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section.
Delivery to minors. Any person 18 years of age or over who violates subsection (c) of this section by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person less than 18 years of age who is at least three years his junior is guilty of a special offense.
Advertisements. It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
 
(Code 1972, § 305.36; Code 1982, § 22-107; Ord. No. 4076, § 1, 1-27-1981)


Sec. 34-205. - Seat belts; child passenger restraint system.

 
(a)
 
As used in this section, the following terms shall mean:

Child booster seat means a seating system which meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in  4 9  C.F.R. 571.213, as amended, that is designed to elevate a child to properly sit in a federally approved safety belt system.

Child passenger restraint system means a seating system which meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in  4 9  C.F.R. 571.213, as amended, and which is either permanently affixed to a motor vehicle or is affixed to such vehicle by a safety belt or a universal attachment  system.

Passenger car shall mean every motor vehicle designed for carrying ten persons or less and used for the transportation of persons; except that, the term "passenger car" shall not include motorcycles, motorized bicycles, motor tricycles, and trucks with a license gross weight of 12,000 pounds or more. The term "passenger car" shall include what is commonly referred to as a "pickup truck", whether said truck has one or two rows of passenger seating.
 

(b)



(c)






(d)



(e)
 

Except as otherwise provided in this section, each driver and front seat passenger of a passenger car manufactured after January 1, 1968, operated streets or highways within this city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt that meets federal National Highway, Transportation and (NHTSA) requirements, except that a child 16 years of age or less shall be protected as required in subsection (c) of this section.
The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not be applicable to persons who have a medical reason for failing to have a seat belt fastened about his/her body, nor shall the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) be applicable to persons while operating or riding a motor vehicle being used in agricultural work-related activities, nor to any person employed by the United States Postal Service while performing duties for that federal agency which require the operator to service postal boxes from their vehicle, or which require frequent entry into and exit from their vehicle.
Each person who violates the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall be guilty of an infraction for which a fine not to exceed $10.00 may be imposed. All other provisions of law and court rules to the contrary notwithstanding, no court costs shall be imposed on any person due to a violation of this section. In no case shall points be assessed against any person, pursuant to RSMo § 302.302, for a violation of this section.
Every driver transporting a child 16 years of age or less shall be responsible, when transporting such child in a motor vehicle operated by that driver on the streets or highways of this city, for providing for the protection of such child as follows:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)


(4)


(5)



(6)





(7)


(8)





(9)



(10)
 
Children less than four years of age, regardless of weight, shall be secured in a child passenger restraining system appropriate for that child; Children weighing less than 40 pounds, regardless of age, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate for that child; Children at least four years of age, but less than eight years of age, who also weigh at least 40 pounds but less than 80 pounds, and who are
also less than four feet, nine inches tall, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system or booster seat appropriate for that child;

Children at least 80 pounds or children more than four feet, nine inches in height shall be secured by a vehicle safety belt or booster seat appropriate for that child;
A child who otherwise would be required to be secured in a booster seat may be transported in the back seat of a motor vehicle while wearing only a lap belt if the back seat of the motor vehicle is not equipped with a combination lap and shoulder belt for booster seat installation;
When transporting children in the immediate family when there are more children than there are seating positions in the enclosed area of a motor vehicle, the children who are not able to be restrained by a child safety restraint device appropriate for the child shall sit in the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle unless the motor vehicle is designed only for a front seat area. The driver transporting children in compliance with subsection (c)(6) shall not be in violation of subsection (e) hereof.
Subsection (e) of this section shall only apply to the use of a child passenger restraint system or vehicle safety belt for children 16 years of age or less being transported in a motor vehicle.
As used in subsection (e), the term "child booster seat" shall mean a seating system which meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards that is designed to elevate a child to properly sit in a federally approved safety belt system; and the term "child passenger restraint system" shall mean a seating system which meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards and which is either permanently affixed to a motor vehicle or is affixed to such vehicle by a safety belt or a universal attachment system.
Subsection (e) of this section shall not apply to any public carrier for hire. The provisions of subsection (e) shall not apply to students four years of age or older who are passengers on a school bus designed for carrying 11 passengers or more and which is manufactured or equipped pursuant to Missouri Minimum Standards for School Buses.
Any person who violates subsection (e) of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $50.00 and court costs.
 

(Ord. No. 5745, § I, 9-23-2014)

Editor's note— Ord. No. 5745, § I, adopted Sept. 23, 2014, repealed the former § 3 4 - 2 0 5 and enacted a new § 3 4 - 2 0 5 as set out herein. The former  § 3 4 - 2 0 5 pertained to passenger restraint requirements and derived from Code 1982, § 22-108; and Ord. No. 4173, § 1, adopted Feb. 28, 1984.

Sec. 34-206. - Market carts; removal prohibited.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)
 
It shall be unlawful to remove carts, baskets or other devices, furnished by merchants for the convenience of customers for use on the mercantile premises, from said premises, without the expressed written consent of the merchant.
Copies of this section shall be posted in a conspicuous place in and on mercantile premises where market carts, baskets or other devices are furnished for use by customers and on said carts, baskets or other devices.
Any person removing said items shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined $25.00 for the first offense, which may be paid at the city traffic violations bureau and, for each succeeding offense to be fined not less than $50.00 and no more than $1,000.00 upon conviction in the municipal court.
 
(Code 1982, § 22-109; Ord. No. 4276, § 1, 12-9-1986; Ord. No. 4895, § I, 7-27-1999)


Sec. 34-207. - Stationary operation of large vehicles.

 
(a)
 
No person shall allow a motor vehicle engine to continuously run under the following conditions:
 

(1)
 

The motor vehicle has a vehicle weight greater than 6,000 pounds;
 

 
(2)

(3)
 
The motor vehicle remains stationary with the engine running for more than ten minutes; and

The motor vehicle is stationary in a position in which any part of the motor vehicle is located within 100 feet of any portion of a residential structure.
 
(b)
 
Every person who violates this section, upon conviction, shall be subject to punishment pursuant to s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 .
 

(Code 1982, § 22-111; Ord. No. 4412, §§ I—III, 10-24-1989; Ord. No. 5745, § II, 9-23-2014)

Editor's note— Ord. No. 5745, §§ I, II, adopted Sept. 23, 2014, repealed  §  3 4 - 2 0 7 , which pertained to seat belts required; exceptions; penalty and derived from Code 1982, § 22-110; and Ord. No. 4314, §§ II, III, adopted Aug. 11, 1987. Ordinance provisions renumbered § 34-208 as  3 4 - 2 0 7 .

Secs. 34-208—34-239. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VIII. - NUISANCES



Sec. 34-240. - Declaration of acts or conditions.

In addition to any other act declared to be a nuisance by this Code or other ordinances of the city, nuisances are hereby defined and declared to be as follows:
 

(1)


(2)

(3)

(4)


(5)


(6)


(7)


(8)



(9)


(10)

(11)


(12)

(13)


(14)

(15)



(16)


(17)
 

Any act done or committed, permitted or allowed to be done or committed, by any person, or any substance or thing kept, maintained, placed or found in or upon any public or private place which is injurious or dangerous to public health;
Any pursuit followed or act done by any person to the hurt, injury, annoyance, inconvenience or damage of the public;

The existence of graffiti, as defined in s e c t i o n 3 4 - 2 6 3 , which graffiti is visible to any person utilizing any public or private right-of-way;

Any building or other structure of whatever type kept or maintained, or which is permitted by any person owning or having control of such structure to be kept or maintained, in a condition unsafe, dangerous, unhealthy, injurious or annoying to the public;
Any building where hazardous materials are stored or materials used for explosives are stored which is not maintained in compliance with federal law, state statute, county ordinance or this Code;
Any factory or business place permitted by the person owning or having charge of the same to operate or be in such condition as to become offensive, annoying or injurious to the public;
Any animal pen or cage permitted by the person owning or controlling the same to be in such condition as to be offensive, annoying or injurious to the public or harmful to the animal confined;
Any swimming pool, open containers of water, or pool of water kept, maintained or allowed to remain stagnant, or which enables the breeding of mosquitoes, and any foul or dirty water or liquid discharged through any pipe, or thrown into or upon any public right-of-way or private property to the injury or annoyance of the public;
Any toilet, private sewer, vault or basement kept in such a condition as to emit an offensive odor; and any urine, liquid waste, or substance emitting an offensive, noxious, unhealthy or disagreeable odor in any public place;
Any condition which is conducive to the feeding or harborage of rats;

Any garbage, refuse, debris or other materials stored or allowed to remain on any premises as prohibited in s e c t i o n 1 2 - 1 1 7 , pertaining to the adoption of the property maintenance code;
Any carcass of a dead animal which the owner or keeper thereof permits to remain within the limits of this city exceeding 12 hours;  Any animal or vegetable matter upon any premises liable to become putrid, offensive, or unhealthy, except manure deposits which are
promptly incorporated into cultivated soil;

Any compost pile or any compost materials or pile not maintained in compliance with s e c t i o n 4 0 - 2 9 , pertaining to composting;

Any obstruction caused or permitted on any street or sidewalk to the danger or annoyance of the public, and any rock, dirt, garbage, refuse or debris thrown or placed by any person on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place or on any premises or in any stream of water within the city which in any way may cause or is liable to cause injury or annoyance to the public;
Any sidewalk, gutter or curb permitted to remain in an unsafe condition or out of repair by any person required to keep the sidewalk, gutter or curb in good condition or repair;
Any premises upon which any of the following acts or conditions have occurred or continue to occur, whether by the owner, occupants or persons frequenting or congregating about the property:
 
a.	Commission of acts which are prohibited by federal law or state statute committed within the premises, or on the property thereof, or within the immediate vicinity of the property, and which have resulted in arrests that are classified as felonies occurring two or more times within a period of 90 days which acts affect the safety, convenience and tranquility of persons residing, making use or conducting business within the adjacent area;
b.	Manufacture, distribution, sale or use of illegal drugs prohibited by federal law, state statute or city ordinance within the premises, or
 

on the property, or within the immediate vicinity of the premises;

c.	More than two instances within a 180-day period of commission of acts which are prohibited by state statute or city ordinance committed within the premises, or on the property thereof, or within the immediate vicinity of the property and which have resulted in arrests which acts affect the safety, convenience and tranquility of persons residing, making use or conducting business within the adjacent area;
d.	More than two instances within a 180-day period of consumption of alcoholic beverages on the public right-of-way adjacent to the premises or on the parking lot of the premises as prohibited in s e c t i o n 3 4 - 1 6 9 , pertaining to drinking in public;
e.	More than two instances within a 180-day period of incidents of:

1.	Indecent conduct as prohibited by  s e c t i o n  3 4 - 6 6 ; or

2.	Public urination;

f.	More than two instances within a 180-day period of incidents of peace disturbance or domestic violence resulting in calls to calls to the police;
g.	More than two instances within a 180-day period of peace disturbance of the public or behavior which intimidates the public committed by unsupervised juveniles resulting in calls to the police;
h.	More than two instances within a 180-day period of incidents of harassing or intimidating behavior, such as by blocking the path of persons passing by, making rude comments, or comments intended to frighten nearby inhabitants or persons passing by the property;
i.	More than two instances within a 180-day period of failure by the property owner to remove any litter as required in article X of this chapter, pertaining to littering;
j.	More than two instances within a 180-day period of incidents of loud noise emitted from electronic equipment of any type including radios and televisions on the premises or any parked vehicles belonging to the owner, occupants or persons frequenting the premises plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet outdoors, or which disturbs the peace of persons residing within the same building or an adjacent building;
k.	Any violation of this Code, which if continued is liable to endanger, annoy or injure the public;

l.	Each act or thing done or made, permitted, allowed or continued on any property, public or private, by any persons or corporation, their agents or employees, to the damage or injury of any of the inhabitants of this city, and not specified above.

(Code 1972, § 302.01(A), (B); Code 1982, § 21-1; Ord. No. 4684, § 2, 3-28-1995; Ord. No. 5373, § I, 10-24-2006)


Sec. 34-241. - Inspections.

The city manager, chief of police and fire chief, or any officer, agent or employee appointed by or for any of them, are authorized to enter and inspect all premises in the city for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article. Whenever the person in possession of a building, structure or other premises refuses admittance to any person named in this section who requests admittance for the purpose of fulfilling his duties under the provisions of this article, then such person to whom admittance has been refused may obtain a warrant to enter, upon probable cause shown to a magistrate or other person authorized to issue such warrants.

(Code 1972, § 302.01(C); Code 1982, § 21-2)


Sec. 34-242. - Abatement procedures.

Nuisances shall be abated as follows:

 
(1)





(2)
 
In cases in which an immediate threat to the public health, welfare or safety is apparent, the city manager may abate or cause the abatement of the nuisance, without notice, by any suitable means. The costs of the abatement shall be certified by the city manager to the city council that may, by ordinance, levy the cost of the abatement as a special tax against the property on which the nuisance was located. Such tax shall be collected as other city taxes are collected and shall be a first lien on the property against which it is assessed until it is paid.
In all other cases, the city manager or his designee shall hold a hearing determine whether a nuisance exists and whether and how it should be abated.
 
a.	At least five days' notice shall be given of such hearing to the owner and occupant of the premises upon which the alleged nuisance exists, or to such person's agent, and to the person causing or maintaining the alleged nuisance if other than the owner or occupant and if such person can be found. Such notices shall be given in writing and delivered in person to the party's residence or place of business.
b.	All interested parties may appear at the hearing and testify and present evidence concerning the alleged nuisance.

c.	In determining whether the activity or conditions constitute a nuisance, the city manager or his designee shall consider the following factors:
1.	The magnitude of the harm caused by the alleged detrimental activity or conditions;
 

2.	The length of time that the alleged detrimental activity or conditions have existed;

3.	The effect of the activity or conditions at the property on the value of adjacent properties and those in the surrounding area;

4.	The number of times that public safety officers have been dispatched to the property; and

5.	The extent of efforts by the owner or person having charge of the property to remedy the alleged detrimental activity or conditions.
d.	If, after the hearing, it is found that a nuisance exists and that it must be abated, the city manager or his designee may order the owner or occupant of the premises on which the nuisance exists or the person other than the owner or occupant who caused or maintains  the nuisance, to abate the nuisance within a prescribed period of time, or abate it by other means.
e.	The city manager or his designee shall effect the abatement of the nuisance by any measures necessary to cause its cessation and the prevention of its recurrence, including the ordering of revocation of occupancy permits for the persons residing at the dwelling or place of business where the nuisance has occurred and the denial of occupancy permits within the city to those persons for a period not to exceed six months, or the closure of the premise where the nuisance has occurred for a period not to exceed six months.
f.	The city manager or his designee shall levy a tax for the costs of the abatement incurred by the city under the provisions of subsection
(1) of this section.

g.	Any person adversely affected by the abatement order shall have a right of judicial review as provided by RSMo 536.100.

h.	If the revocation of occupancy permits or the closure of the property is ordered, the city manager shall direct the chief of police to set a time period within which the property shall be vacated. The owner of the property, person in charge of the property and the occupant shall be notified to vacate the premises within the time period ordered by the chief of police. It shall become the duty upon such notice of both the owner and the occupant of such premises to comply by vacating the premises within the time period ordered by the chief of police. It shall be considered a violation of this Code if such premises are not vacated within the time period ordered by the chief of police. The chief of police is authorized to remove persons from the premises that have not been vacated within the time period ordered. The chief of police shall have the premises secured to prevent unlawful entry.
i.	Failure to comply with the lawful order of the city manager or his designee under the provision of this section shall be sufficient to subject a person to the penalties prescribed for violations of a provision of this Code.
 
(3)


(4)


(5)
 
No person shall deny entry to any person authorized to abate a nuisance to the property on which the nuisance to be abated exists, nor shall any person interfere with or hinder in any way the efforts of such authorized person or persons to abate the nuisance.
In any case, the city manager may authorize the city attorney to file suit against the owner or occupant of the property on which the nuisance exists, or the person other than the owner or occupant who caused or maintains the nuisance, to abate that nuisance.
In case of the abatement of a nuisance on the property of more than one person, all special taxes assessed under the provisions of this chapter shall be assessed in proportion to the amount of work and expense for the abatement of the nuisance for each separate parcel.
 

(Code 1972, § 302.01(D); Code 1982, § 21-3; Ord. No. 5373, § II, 10-24-2006)


Secs. 34-243—34-262. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IX. - GRAFFITI



Sec. 34-263. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Graffiti means either or both of the following, as the context requires:

 
(1)



(2)
 
The intentional act of defacing, damaging or destroying any public or private building, structure, place, or personal property affixed to real property, within the city, by spraying or marking with paint, ink, chalk, dye, or other similar substance any drawing, inscription, figure or mark of the type commonly known and referred to as graffiti; or
Any such drawing, inscription, figure or mark so sprayed or marked.
 

(Code 1982, § 15-86; Ord. No. 4684, § 1, 3-28-1995)


Sec. 34-264. - Penalty.

Any person convicted of a violation of s e c t i o n 3 4 - 2 6 5 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 or to imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment. When appropriate, in addition to such fine and/or imprisonment, the court shall require those convicted of violation of  s e c t i o n 3 4 - 
 2 6 5 to remove the graffiti and restore to its original condition the property on which the graffiti was created.
 

(Code 1982, § 15-88; Ord. No. 4684, § 1, 3-28-1995)


Sec. 34-265. - Graiti unlawful.

It shall be unlawful for any person to create graffiti on any public or private building, structure, place, or personal property affixed to any real property, within the city, which graffiti is visible to any person utilizing any public or private right-of-way.

(Code 1982, § 15-87; Ord. No. 4684, § 1, 3-28-1995)


Sec. 34-266. - Abatement of nuisance.

Whenever the public works director determines that graffiti exists on any public or private building, structure, place, or any personal property affixed to real property, within the city, and that such graffiti is visible to any person utilizing any public or private right-of-way, the public works director may request that the city manager take actions pursuant to  s e c t i o n  3 4 - 2 4 2  to determine whether such graffiti exists and constitutes a nuisance, and to provide for the abatement of any such nuisance. In determining a prescribed period of time to abate a nuisance of graffiti in any order pursuant to  s e c t i o n  3 4 - 2 4 2 (2), the city manager shall take into account how the then-seasonal temperature may affect the ability to paint exterior surfaces or to take other actions involved in abating the graffiti nuisance.

(Code 1982, § 15-89; Ord. No. 4684, § 1, 3-28-1995)


Secs. 34-267—34-295. - Reserved.


ARTICLE X. - LITTERING


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 34-296. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Aircraft means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation or for flight in the air, including, but not limited to, airplanes, helicopters, lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.

Authorized private receptacle means a plastic trash bag fastened securely or a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in s e c t i o n 
 4 0 - 2 0 .

Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:
 

(1)

(2)


(3)








(4)
 

Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;

Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this subsection shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; or
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
 

Drive-in restaurant means any restaurant where food, frozen desserts or beverages sold from such restaurant are regularly available for consumption out of doors, on bicycles or in motor vehicles or other types of vehicles.

Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.

Litter means garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other waste material that, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
 

Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year and sold to the public.

Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample, device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature other than a commercial handbill or newspaper, as defined herein.

Park means a park, reservation, playground, swimming pool, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation.

Parkway means a strip of land located between a sidewalk and a physical street, whether such land is located on a part of the street right-of-way or not.

Place of business means any place other than private premises, public building, or public place, as herein defined.

Private premises means any dwelling, house, building or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.

Public building means any building owned or occupied by any governmental agency.

Public place means any and all streets, including street rights-of-way, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.

Public receptacle means a litter storage and collection receptacle furnished by any person, or by any governmental agency for use by the public.

Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, and solid market and industrial wastes.

Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.

Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported. (Code 1972, § 306.0; Code 1982, § 15-31; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)

Sec. 34-297. - Prohibited in public places.

No person shall throw or deposit litter on or upon any street, sidewalk, parkway, gutter, alley or other public place within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized receptacles for collection or in official city dumps.

(Code 1972, § 306.02; Code 1982, § 15-32; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)


Sec. 34-298. - Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering required.

Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any place.

(Code 1972, § 306.05; Code 1982, § 15-33; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)


Sec. 34-299. - Duty to keep sidewalks, parkways, gutters, streets, and alleys free of litter.

All persons occupying any place of business, public building or private premises shall keep such place of business, public building, or private premises, as the case may be, including the sidewalk, parkway, gutter, street (to the centerline thereof), and alley (to the centerline thereof) adjoining or abutting to the place so occupied free and clear of litter. To this end:
 

(1)



(2)



(3)
 

No person or authority owning, occupying, or in control of a place of business, public building, or private premises shall sweep into or deposit (or cause to be swept or deposited) in any sidewalk, parkway, gutter, street, or alley, or other public place within the city an accumulation of litter from any place of business, public building, or private premises.
The operator of a drive-in restaurant shall at least once in each 12-hour period during which it is open for business collect and dispose, in authorized receptacles, all litter on the premises of such drive-in restaurant, including the sidewalk, parkway, gutter, street (to the centerline thereof), and alley (to the centerline thereof) adjoining or abutting to such premises.
The occupier of a place of business and the authority in control of the public building shall, at least once in each 24-hour period during which it is open for business or open to the public, as the case may be, collect and dispose of all litter on the premises of such place of
 

business or public building, as the case may be, in authorized receptacles, including the sidewalk, parkway, gutter, street (to the centerline thereof), and alley (to the centerline thereof) adjoining or abutting to such premises. For purposes of this subsection, the operator of any shopping center shall be deemed to be the occupier of all common areas of such shopping center, including, but not limited to, parking areas, parking lots, and landscaped areas which are not leased or rented to any particular tenant, but not including any sidewalks, parkways, or gutters adjoining or abutting to any premises rented to a particular tenant.
 
(4)
 
The occupier of any private premises shall, at least once in each calendar week, collect and dispose of all litter on such private premises, in authorized receptacles, including the sidewalk, parkway, gutter, street (to the centerline thereof), and alley (to the centerline thereof) adjoining or abutting to such private premises.
 

(Code 1972, § 306.06; Code 1982, § 15-34; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)


Sec. 34-300. - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.

No person while an operator or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property, nor shall any operator of a vehicle allow or permit the throwing or disposing of any litter from such vehicle by himself or by any passenger thereof upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property.

(Code 1972, § 306.07; Code 1982, § 15-35; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)


Sec. 34-301. - Operation of trucks causing litter prohibited.

No person shall drive or move, or direct or employ a driver to drive or move, any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley, or public place; nor shall any person drive or move, or direct or employ a driver to drive or move, any vehicle or truck within the city the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.

(Code 1972, § 306.08; Code 1982, § 15-36; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)


Sec. 34-302. - Throwing litter in parks prohibited.

No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city, except in public receptacles and in such manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein.

(Code 1972, § 306.09; Code 1982, § 15-37; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)


Sec. 34-303. - Throwing litter in lakes and fountains prohibited.

No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, stream, river or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. (Code 1972, § 306.10; Code 1982, § 15-38; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)

Sec. 34-304. - Depositing litter on occupied private property.

No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not; except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain public receptacles or authorized receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any place.

(Code 1972, § 306.03; Code 1982, § 15-45; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)


Sec. 34-305. - Throwing or depositing litter on vacant lots prohibited.

No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. (Code 1972, § 306.04; Code 1982, § 15-46; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)

Sec. 34-306. - Clearing of litter by city.

 
(a)
 
Notice to remove. The health inspector, and his delegate, is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any premises within the city to properly dispose of litter located on such premises, or the sidewalks, parkways, gutters, streets (to the centerline thereof), or alleys (to the centerline), adjoining or abutting to such premises, which litter is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be in writing, and shall be given:
 
(1)
 
In person;
 

 
(2)


(3)
 
By registered mail or certified mail, requesting a return receipt signed by the addressee or an agent of the addressee, addressed to the owner at his last known address as furnished to or by the city; or
By posting a copy of such notice on the premises themselves for a period of not less than five days in such a way that it might also be seen by persons not in possession of such premises.
 
Once a notice of violation and order to correct has been given to the owner of any premises within the city in any manner herein enumerated, and after abatement, the same violation recurs in or on the same lot or tract of land by the same person responsible within one calendar year, no further notice need be given such responsible person.
 

(b)



(c)











(d)
 

Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner so notified to properly dispose of such litter within five days after the giving of the written notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the director of public works, and his delegate, is hereby authorized and empowered to obligate the city to pay for the collection and disposal of such litter, or to order its collection and disposal by the city.
Charge included in tax bill or other bill. When the city has effected the collection and disposal of such dangerous litter or has paid for its collection and disposal, the cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of eight percent per annum from the date of the completion of the work to the date of payment, if not paid by such owner prior thereto, may be charged to the owner of such property by forwarding a bill to such owner by the city, and such charge shall be due and payable by such owner at the time of receipt of such bill. In the case of an owner of property exempt from real estate taxes, the bill for the cost of such collection and disposal, plus the accrued interest, may be mailed by regular mail, addressed to the owner at his last known address as furnished to or by the city. When computing the actual cost of the collection and disposal of such dangerous litter, the city shall include in such actual cost, before any interest charges, a service charge equal to 25 percent of the costs of labor and of the  use of equipment, as well as any dumping charges, to reflect the administrative costs incurred by the city in connection with the billing for such collection and disposal.
Recorded statement constitutes lien. When the full amount due to the city is not paid by such owner within 90 days after the sending of a bill for the collection and disposal of such litter as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the director of public works, or his delegate, shall cause to be recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county (or his successor), a verified statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, including any interest, computed in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, the date the work was done, and the legal description of the premises on which such work was done. The recording of such verified statement shall constitute a lien on such premises and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest; plus cost of court, if any, for collection, including a reasonable attorney's fee of at least 25 percent of the amount collected, until final payment has been made. Such costs and expenses may be collected in any manner allowed by law, and shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of 15 percent in the event the same is not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which such charges appears becomes delinquent, or in the case of the owner of property exempt from real estate taxes, three months after the date the bill for such work was mailed by regular mail addressed to the owner thereof at his last known address as furnished to or by the city. A copy of the verified statement recorded in accordance with these provisions, and certified as a true and complete copy by the recorder of deeds of the county, or his successor, or the recorded verified statement itself, shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest and appropriate costs and penalties, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement, and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law.
 
(Code 1972, § 306.17; Code 1982, § 15-47; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980; Ord. No. 5319, § I, 2-28-2006)


Secs. 34-307—34-330. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - HANDBILLS AND NOTICES



Sec. 34-331. - Handbills—Throwing or distributing in public places restricted.

No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street, parkway, gutter, alley or other public place within the city, nor shall any person hand out, distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.

(Code 1972, § 306.11; Code 1982, § 15-39; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)


Sec. 34-332. - Same—Placing on vehicles prohibited.

No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.

(Code 1972, § 306.12; Code 1982, § 15-40; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)
 

Sec. 34-333. - Same—Distribution where property is posted prohibited.

No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to  do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Soliciting," or any similar notice which indicates in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises.

(Code 1972, § 306.13; Code 1982, § 15-41; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)


Sec. 34-334. - Same—Distribution at inhabited private premises restricted; exception.

 
(a)







(b)
 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this article, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to newspapers (as defined in s e c t i o n 3 4 - 2 9 6 ), except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements in an unbound condition upon any street, sidewalk, parkway, gutter, alley or other public place or upon private property.
 
(Code 1972, § 306.14; Code 1982, § 15-42; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)


Sec. 34-335. - Dropping litter from aircraft.

No person in any aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object. (Code 1972, § 306.15; Code 1982, § 15-43; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)

Sec. 34-336. - Posting notices restricted.

No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law.

(Code 1972, § 306.16; Code 1982, § 15-44; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 8-26-1980)


Chapter 36 - PARKS AND RECREATION


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Sec. 36-1. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Park means a park, reservation, playground, swimming pool, beach, recreation center, or other area owned or used by the city and devoted to recreation of any kind.

Vehicle means any conveyance propelled in any way, including among other things, a trailer in tow. (Code 1972, § 304.01(A)(2), (3); Code 1982, § 23-36)

Sec. 36-2. - Enforcement.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)


(d)
 
The superintendent of parks and recreation and park attendants shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.
The superintendent of parks and recreation and any park attendant shall have the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this chapter.
The superintendent of parks and recreation and any park attendant shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park, or used, in violation of this chapter.
Any other penalty for violation of a provision of this Code shall also apply.
 

(Code 1972, § 304.04; Code 1982, § 23-41)


Secs. 36-3—36-20. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION



Sec. 36-21. - Created; composition.

There shall be a city parks and recreation commission with nine directors who shall be citizens of the city appointed by the city council. (Code 1972, § 203.09(A); Code 1982, § 23-16; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 9-9-1975)

Sec. 36-22. - Terms.

Each director of the commission created by this article shall hold office for three years unless removed by the city council or until the successor is qualified. (Code 1972, § 203.09(B); Code 1982, § 23-17; Ord. No. 3832, § 2, 9-9-1975)

Sec. 36-23. - Filling of vacancies.

Vacancies on the commission created by this article may be filled in the same manner as original appointments are made, but for only the remaining unexpired portion of the term.

(Code 1972, § 203.09(C); Code 1982, § 23-18)


Sec. 36-24. - Organization; rules of procedure.

The directors of the commission created by this article shall appoint, by majority vote and from their number, a president, and they shall adopt such rules and regulations for their guidance as may be expedient.

(Code 1972, § 203.09(D); Code 1982, § 23-19)


Sec. 36-25. - Duties.

The parks and recreation commission shall advise the city council and the superintendent of parks and recreation:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)


(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)
 
As to devising, extending, developing and maintaining a park or system of public parks and recreational programs and facilities.

As to the selection and designation of lands to be used and appropriated for park purposes and recreational programs and facilities. As to leasing, purchasing, condemning or otherwise acquiring lands, easements and other interests in realty for parks and recreational
programs and facilities.

As to superintending, controlling and managing parks and recreational programs and facilities of the city.

As to improving, constructing, adorning, regulating and maintaining city parks and city recreational programs and facilities. As to ordinances necessary for the regulation and government of city parks and city recreational programs and facilities.
As to the planting, care, maintenance and removal of all trees in city parks and on public rights-of-way.
 

(Code 1972, § 203.09(E); Code 1982, § 23-20; Ord. No. 3790, § 2, 11-25-1974; Ord. No. 4886, § I, 3-23-1999)


Secs. 36-26—36-53. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - PARK RULES


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Secs. 36-54—36-79. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITED CONDUCT



Sec. 36-80. - Park property protection and animals.
 

No person in a park shall:

 
(1)


(2)


(3)


(4)



(5)


(6)

(7)





(8)
 
Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of five years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
Dig, or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down-timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting, or other means or agency.
Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon, or across such lands, except on special written permit issued hereunder.
Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences or gun carriages or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes.
Tie or hitch a horse or other animal to any tree or plant.

Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall he remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest, or young of any reptile or bird; nor shall he collect, remove, have in his possession, give away, sell or offer to sell, or buy or offer to buy, or accept as a gift, any specimen alive or dead of any of the group of tree snails. Snakes known to be deadly poisonous, such as rattlesnakes, moccasins, coral snakes, or other deadly reptiles, may be killed on sight.
Give or offer, or attempt to give to any animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious substances.
 

(Code 1972, § 304.02(A)(2)—(9), (C)—(G), (H)(1), (3)—(5), (7)—(9), (11)—(14), (I); Code 1982, § 23-37(a); Ord. No. 5478, § I, 7-8-2008)


Sec. 36-81. - Vehicles and trafc.

No person in a park shall:

 
(1)


(2)


(3)


(4)


(5)


(6)


(7)



(8)


(9)


(10)


(11)

(12)
 
Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicles traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles together with such regulations as are contained in this and other ordinances.
Fail to obey all traffic officers and park employees in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and such supplementary regulations as may be issued subsequently by the superintendent of parks and recreation.
Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, or parking, and all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property.
Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding 20 miles an hour, except upon such roads as the superintendent of parks and recreation may designate, by posted signs, for speedier travel.
Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the superintendent of parks and recreation.
Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions thereat and with the instructions of any attendant who may be present.
Full-park on the road or driveway at any time. In order to enjoy some special natural scenic feature, vehicles may be parked with the two left wheels near the right edge of the paving for not more than five minutes. No stopping or parking is permitted, even briefly, on the left-hand side of any road or driveway.
Leave any vehicle anywhere in the park with one or more wheels chained, or with motor set in gears and doors locked, or in any manner fixed or arranged so that such vehicle cannot readily be moved by hand.
Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night without lights clearly visible for at least 100 feet from both front and rear on any driveway or road area except in legally established parking areas.
Fail to immediately notify an attendant of an emergency in the nature of a break-down requiring the assistance of a tow truck, mechanic or other person.
Double park any vehicle on any road or parkway unless directed by a park official. Fail to use a muffler adequate to deaden the sound of the engine in a motor vehicle.
 

(Code 1972, § 304.02(A)(2)—(9), (C)—(G), (H)(1), (3)—(5), (7)—(9), (11)—(14), (I); Code 1982, § 23-37(b); Ord. No. 5478, § I, 7-8-2008)


Sec. 36-82. - Bicycles.

No person in a park shall:

 
(1)
 
Ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular road or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a
 

bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use.
 

(2)



(3)

(4)

(5)


(6)
 

Ride a bicycle other than on the right-hand side of the road paving as close as conditions permit, and bicycles shall be kept in single file when two or more are operating as a group. Bicyclists shall at all times operate their machines with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass to the right of any vehicle they are overtaking, and pass to the right of any vehicles they may be meeting.
Ride any other person on a bicycle.

Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is a space available.

Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving, or set against trees, or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by them.
Ride a bicycle on any road between 30 minutes after sunset or before 30 minutes before sunrise without an attached headlight plainly visible at least 200 feet in front of, and without a red taillight or red reflector plainly visible from at least 150 feet from the rear of, such bicycle.
 

(Code 1972, § 304.02(A)(2)—(9), (C)—(G), (H)(1), (3)—(5), (7)—(9), (11)—(14), (I); Code 1982, § 23-37(c); Ord. No. 5478, § I, 7-8-2008)


Sec. 36-83. - Waters and waterways.

No person in a park shall:

 
(1)





(2)


(3)



(4)

(5)
 
Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places, as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted. Nor shall any person frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat when such activity is prohibited by the superintendent of parks and recreation upon a finding that such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
Frequent any waters or places designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except between such hours of the day as shall be designated by the superintendent of parks and recreation for such purposes for each individual area.
Erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any beach or bathing area any tent, shelter or structure of any kind unless there shall be an unobstructed view into that tent, shelter or structure from at least two sides; nor shall any guy wire, rope or extension or exterior brace or support be connected or fastened from any such structure to any other structure, stake, rock or other object outside thereof.
Appear in bathing costume at any place in the parks except within the limits of designated bathing places or areas.

Dress or undress on any beach, or at a swimming pool or park or in any vehicle, toilet or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose.
 

(Code 1972, § 304.02(A)(2)—(9), (C)—(G), (H)(1), (3)—(5), (7)—(9), (11)—(14), (I); Code 1982, § 23-37(d); Ord. No. 5478, § I, 7-8-2008)


Sec. 36-84. - Boats; ishing; hunting, trapping, etc.

No person in a park shall:

 
(1)



(2)


(3)


(4)


(5)

(6)



(7)
 
Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether motor powered or not, upon any waters, except at places designated for boating by the superintendent of parks and recreation. Such activity shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as are now or may hereafter be adopted.
Use the public docks for dockage or other purpose without first making arrangements for such accommodation with the superintendent of parks and recreation, who shall assign space and collect reasonable rental charges in conformity with established regulations and rates.
Navigate, direct, or handle any boat in such a manner as to unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the occupants of any other boat.
Launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind on any waters between the closing hour of the park at night and opening hour the following morning, nor shall any person be on, or remain on or in, any boat during the closed hours of the park.
Engage in commercial fishing, or the buying or selling of fish caught in any waters.

Fish in any waters, whether fresh or salt, and whether by the use of hook-and-line, net, trap or other device, except in waters designated by the superintendent of parks and recreation for that use and under such regulations and restrictions as have been or may be prescribed by the superintendent of parks and recreation.
Hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time. No person shall use, carry or possess firearms of any descriptions, or air-rifles, spring-guns, bow- and-arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is forbidden.
 

(Code 1972, § 304.02(A)(2)—(9), (C)—(G), (H)(1), (3)—(5), (7)—(9), (11)—(14), (I); Code 1982, § 23-37(e); Ord. No. 5478, § I, 7-8-2008)


Sec. 36-85. - Picnics; camping; games; horseback riding.
 

No person in a park shall:

 
(1)



(2)


(3)


(4)



(5)





(6)





(7)
 
Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end.
Violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces together with tables and benches follows generally the rule of "first come, first served."
Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, or use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere.
Camp in other than permanent cabins for organized camping, provided by the superintendent of parks and recreation and used by groups of persons under adequate supervision. No person shall set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for such purpose, such as house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon, or the like.
Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games, such as football, baseball and quoits, is prohibited except on the fields and courts or areas provided therefor. Roller skating shall be confined to those areas specifically designated for such pastime.
Ride a horse except on designated bridle trails. Where permitted, horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained, and ridden with due care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended, nor shall they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub.
 

(Code 1972, § 304.02(A)(2)—(9), (C)—(G), (H)(1), (3)—(5), (7)—(9), (11)—(14), (I); Code 1982, § 23-37(f); Ord. No. 5478, § I, 7-8-2008)


Sec. 36-86. - Alcoholic beverages; explosives; soliciting; sleeping; tobacco products.

No person in a park shall:

 
(1)






(2)





(3)





(4)



(5)

(6)



(7)


(8)

(9)


(10)
 
Have brought alcoholic beverages, nor shall any person drink alcoholic beverages at any time in the park, at certain specifically designated recreation centers where meals or lunches are served under concession privileges the sale of alcoholic beverages by such concessionaire will be permitted under the strict regulation and control of the superintendent of parks and recreation. Sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made only in individual drinks (not in original packages or otherwise in bulk) and shall be served for consumption on the immediate premises of the concession.
Bring or have in his possession, or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, any firecrackers, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable material, or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or article that, in conjunction with any other substances or compound, would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints.
Have been responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into areas other than automobile parking concourses and walks immediately adjacent thereto, and in such other areas as may be clearly marked by signs bearing the words "Domestic Animals Permitted In This Area." Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting the running of dogs at large. All dogs in those areas where such animals are permitted shall be restrained at all times on adequate leashes not greater than six feet in length.
Occupy any seat or bench, or enter into or loiter or remain in any pavilion or other park structure or section thereof which may be reserved and designated by the superintendent of parks and recreation for the use of the opposite sex. Exception is made for children less than five years of age.
Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private.

Build or attempt to build a fire, except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the superintendent of parks and recreation. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material, within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.
Enter an area posted as "Employees Only" or "Closed to the Public," nor shall any person use, or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
Go onto the ice of any of the waters except such areas as are designated as skating fields, and provided a safety signal is displayed. Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats, or benches, or other areas, or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or
indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.

Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the superintendent of parks and recreation he claims to have upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule.
 

 
(11)


(12)
 
Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area, or participating in any activity, under the authority of a permit.
Use any tobacco products within 50 feet of any playground area unless inside/under a pavilion that is within the boundaries as defined or to the edge of the park.
 

(Code 1972, § 304.02(A)(2)—(9), (C)—(G), (H)(1), (3)—(5), (7)—(9), (11)—(14), (I); Code 1982, § 23-37(g); Ord. No. 5478, § I, 7-8-2008)


Sec. 36-87. - Selling; advertising; posting signs.

No person in a park shall:

 
(1)



(2)

(3)
 
Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is here made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the superintendent of parks and recreation.
Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire.

Paste, glue, tack or neither otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park.
 

(Code 1972, § 304.02(A)(2)—(9), (C)—(G), (H)(1), (3)—(5), (7)—(9), (11)—(14), (I); Code 1982, § 23-37(h); Ord. No. 5478, § I, 7-8-2008)


Sec. 36-88. - Park operating policies; opening and closing hours.

 
(a)



(b)
 
Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to the public every day of the year from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. except for holders of a permit issued by the superintendent of parks and recreation where the hours differ from those established herein. The opening and closing hours for the parks shall be posted therein for public information.
Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the superintendent of parks and recreation at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the superintendent of parks and recreation shall find reasonably necessary.
 
(Code 1972, § 304.03(A), (B); Code 1982, § 23-38; Ord. No. 4098, § 1, 6-23-1981)


Sec. 36-89. - Lost articles.

The finding of lost articles by park attendants shall be reported to the superintendent of parks and recreation who shall make every reasonable effort to locate the owners. The superintendent of parks and recreation shall make every reasonable effort to find articles reported as lost.

(Code 1972, § 304.03(C); Code 1982, § 23-39)


Sec. 36-90. - Use permits.

 
(a)

(b)
 
A permit shall be obtained from the superintendent of parks and recreation for any group in excess of 25 persons desiring to use a park.

A person seeking issuance of a permit as required by subsection (a) of this section shall file an application with the superintendent of parks and recreation. The application shall state:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)
 
The name and address of the applicant;

The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or association sponsoring the activity, if any; The day and hours for which the permit is desired;
The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired; An estimate of the anticipated attendance;
Any other information that the superintendent of parks and recreation shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue hereunder.
 
(c)
 
The superintendent of parks and recreation shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds:
 

(1)

(2)


(3)

(4)

(5)
 

That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public's enjoyment of the park; That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation;

That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;

That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the city; That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour required in the application.
 
(d)
 
Within seven days after receipt of an application the superintendent of parks and recreation shall apprise an applicant in writing of his reasons
 

for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal in writing within seven days to the city council, which shall consider the application under the standards set forth in subsection (c) of this section and sustain or overrule the superintendent's decision within 30 days. The decision of the city council shall be final.
 
(e)


(f)


(g)
 
A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in said permits.
The persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the persons to whom such permit shall have been issued.
The superintendent of parks and recreation shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause shown.
 
(Code 1972, § 304.03; Code 1982, § 23-40)


Secs. 36-91—36-110. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IV. - DOG PARK



Sec. 36-111. - Establishment.

There shall be hereby established an area for off leash recreation of dogs under supervision of their owners. The name of said area is the Maplewood Dog Park.

(Code 1982, § 23-70; Ord. No. 5262, § I, 5-24-2005)


Sec. 36-112. - Fees.

The annual fee for residents of the City of Maplewood, the City of Richmond Heights, and the City of Brentwood, or employees of the City of Maplewood, for use of the dog park by one dog is $20.00. The annual fee for a person residing in any of the above referenced cities for a second dog is $5.00. The annual fee for persons residing outside of the above referenced cities is $50.00 per dog. Said fee shall be paid to the city clerk.

(Code 1982, § 23-71; Ord. No. 5262, § I, 5-24-2005)


Sec. 36-113. - License tags.

The city clerk shall issue a tag to persons who have paid the fee for use of the dog park. The tag shall be inscribed with "Maplewood Dog Park" and the year of issue. The tag shall be affixed to the collar of the dog registered for the dog park.

(Code 1982, § 23-72; Ord. No. 5262, § I, 5-24-2005)


Sec. 36-114. - Regulations.

 
(a)

(b)
 
Only dogs currently licensed by the city clerk to use the Maplewood Dog Park shall be permitted to use the facility. The following regulations shall govern use of the Maplewood Dog Park:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)


(5)


(6)

(7)


(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)
 
Maplewood Dog Park is for members, their dogs and those accompanying them. The owner (adult in charge of the dog) is responsible for his dog.
The owner is responsible for any injuries or damages caused by his dog.

No children 12 years of age or younger are allowed inside the fenced area; children ages 13 through 17 years are permitted inside the fenced area only when accompanied by a person over the age of 18 years.
Dogs showing any signs of aggression must be immediately removed from the park. If you are asked to leave the park, you must do so immediately.
Dogs must wear a current Maplewood Dog Park tag, and have up-to-date rabies vaccinations. Tags must be visible at all times.

Dogs must wear a buckle collar and current dog park tags while at the park. For safety reasons, all other restraints must be removed prior to entering the fenced area. This includes leash, gentle leader, halter and harness, pinch and spike collars.
Dogs must be in view of and under voice control of their owners at all times. Owners must discourage excessive barking.
Owners must clean up dog feces.

At no time shall an owner leave the fenced area without his dog. Owners must fill any holes their dog digs.
 

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)



(17)


(18)
 

All dogs must be on-leash until inside the fenced area.

Gates must be kept closed and latched except when entering or exiting. There is a limit of two dogs per owner in the park at any time.
The Maplewood Dog Park is divided into large dog and small dog areas. The small dog area is for dogs less than 30 pounds. Owners of small dogs have priority to use the small dog area, and owners of larger dogs have priority to use the large dog area. Dog owners must honor a request to move to the appropriate side of the park.
An owner wishing to join Maplewood Dog Park is allowed two free visits with the dog before a membership must be purchased. Proof of rabies vaccinations must be presented at time of visit.
The following are not allowed at the Maplewood Dog Park:
 

a.	Dogs in heat.

b.	Aggressive dogs.

c.	Dogs that are ill or injured.

d.	Puppies under four months of age.

e.	Animals other than dogs.

f.	Food, treats, rawhide, glass or breakables.

g.	Alcohol and drugs.
 

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)
 

No smoking or tobacco use inside the fenced area. No climbing on or over the fence.
No leaning against the fence or sticking hands through the fence. No loitering outside the fence.
The hours of operation are dawn to dusk, except during winter hours, the park shall be open until 7:00 p.m.
 

(Code 1982, § 23-73; Ord. No. 5262, § I, 5-24-2005; Ord. No. 5550, § I, 11-10-2009)


Sec. 36-115. - License suspension and revocation.

The city shall enforce all dog park rules and regulations. Comments regarding rules and regulations enforcement shall be forwarded to the director of public works. Any police officer, public works employee or park attendant (as assigned by the director of public works) may direct any person who fails to comply with the above regulations to leave the dog park. If it is determined by the city that rules and regulations have not been followed, the director of public works, after considering all evidence, may suspend dog park licenses up to 60 days. The parks and recreation commission may suspend dog park licenses for more than 60 days and/or permanently revoke a dog park license after considering all evidence relevant to the grounds for suspension or revocation of a license. Any person whose dog park license is under consideration to be suspended for more than 60 days or revoked by the parks and recreation commission shall be given written notice of such action at least ten days prior to the parks and recreation commission meeting for which the matter will be considered.

(Code 1982, § 23-74; Ord. No. 5262, § I, 5-24-2005; Ord. No. 5433, § I, 10-23-2007; Ord. No. 5550, § II, 11-10-2009)


Chapter 38 - PERSONNEL


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Sec. 38-1. - Purpose.

It is the purpose of these rules to set forth the principles and procedures which will be followed by the city in the administration of its personnel program. They are intended to establish an efficient, equitable, and functional system of paid personnel administration based on merit principles which govern the appointment, promotion, transfer, layoff, dismissal, discipline, and other related conditions of employment.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-2. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Allocation means the establishment of a position in a department budget.

Anniversary date means the effective date of any salary increase or decrease shall constitute the employee anniversary date for pay purposes (except for across-the-board wage adjustments).
 

Appeal means that any permanent employee in the city service who is separated, demoted, or suspended without pay shall have the right of appeal to the civil service commission.

Appointing authority means the city manager having the power of appointment and removal of subordinate positions in any office, department, or any person or group of persons having the power by virtue of the city code, or other lawfully delegated authority to make appointment to positions in the city service.

Appointment means the designation to a position in the city service of a person on an appropriate eligible list who has qualified for the appointment through an appropriate examination; or appointment status deemed appropriate by virtue of this Code.

Assembled examination means an examination for which applicants are required to appear at a specific place for the purpose of taking a written test.

Certification means the act of the city manager in supplying a department head with an appropriate number of names of applicants who are eligible, in accordance with the provisions of this Code and these rules, for recommendation for appointment to a position for which certification is required.

Class means one or more positions sufficiently similar in respect to assigned work duties and responsibilities, which justify assignment to the same salary range.

Class series means the arrangement in a sequence of classes that are alike in kind of work and responsibility, but not at the level of assigned work and responsibility.

Classification means the original assignment of a position to an appropriate class on the basis of the kind, difficulty, and responsibility of work to be performed.

Demotion means the movement of an employee from one position to another position having a lower maximum salary rate because of disciplinary reasons, incapacity to perform the work, inefficiency or unsatisfactory work performance.

Department means any of the departments in the city government, now or as hereafter established under the provisions of the this Code.

Department head means the official head of any department.

Eligible means a person whose name is on a current eligible list and who may under these rules be certified for appointment to a position in the city service.

Emergency means a sudden and unforeseen happening that requires the unscheduled services of an employee to protect the health welfare and safety of the community.

Employment date means the date of official appointment to a position in the city service for any period of continuous service.

Grievance means a disagreement relating to employment and working conditions or relationships between an employee and his supervisor or other employees.

Layoff means the separation of an employee from the city service which has been made necessary by lack of work or funds or other reasons not related to fault delinquency or misconduct on the part of the employee.

Normal hourly rate, for the purpose of payroll computations, shall be deemed a 40-hour week.

Permanent employee means a regular employee who has successfully completed the probationary period.

Position means a group of current duties and responsibilities assigned or delegated by competent authority requiring the fulltime, parttime, or temporary employment of one person.
 

(1)



(2)


(3)
 

The term "regular position" means a position included in the adopted annual budget that is neither specified as parttime or temporary employment nor limited for a period of less than the budget year; also any such position established during a given budget year unless the appointing authority certifies to the director that such person shall not be continued in the succeeding year's budget.
The term "parttime position" means employment in a permanent position for work on a basis of less than eight hours a day or less than 80 hours in a biweekly pay period which may be of regular or intermittent nature.
The term "temporary position" means a position comprising duties which occur, terminate and reoccur seasonally or intermittently according to the needs of a department; nonpermanent employment lasting less than 1,040 hours.
 

Position description means a written statement of the characteristic duties, responsibilities and qualification requirements that distinguish a specific position from other positions.

Probationary period means a 12-month working test period during which a newly appointed employee is required to demonstrate his fitness by actual performance of the duties of the position to which he is appointed.
 

Promotion means the movement of any employee after proper examination and certification from one position to a position having a higher maximum salary rate.

Promotion examination means an examination for positions in a particular class, admission to which is limited to permanent employees in the city service who meet the qualifications set forth in the examination announcement notice.

Promotional list means the names of persons arranged in descending order of their final ratings on promotional examinations for classes of positions for which they have competed and are qualified for appointment.

Reclassification means the official determination by the city manager that a position be assigned to a class different from the one to which it was previously classified.

Regular employee means an employee who has been appointed to a permanent position in the city service in accordance with these rules.

Resident means a person whose principal place of domicile is within the corporate boundaries of the city.

Transfer means the movement of an employee from one department division or unit of the city government to another from one position to another position of the same class or to another class having the same maximum salary range.

Unassembled examination means an examination process which consists of the rating of training and work experience and/or oral interview test.

Vacancy means a duly created position which is not occupied and for which funds have been provided. (Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)

Sec. 38-3. - Penalties.

 


city.
 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Code or these rules shall be subject to discipline up to and including removal from the service of the
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-4. - Positions covered by rules.

These rules shall apply to all city employees with the exception of all persons filling elective offices, members of appointed boards, commissions and committees, persons engaged under contract to supply expert professional or technical services for specified periods of time, and volunteer personnel.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-5. - Administration of rules.

The city manager shall be charged with the responsibility for the administration of these rules. (Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)

Sec. 38-6. - Departmental regulations.

These rules shall not be construed as limiting in any way the power and authority of any department head to make departmental operating rules and regulations governing the conduct and performance of employees. Departmental operating rules and regulations shall not conflict with provisions of these rules or ordinances. Departmental rules shall be approved by the city manager and shall be published and a copy furnished each employee to whom they apply. Such rules and regulations when approved, published, and distributed as herein provided, shall have the force and effect of rules of that department, and disciplinary action may be based upon breach of any such rules and regulations.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-7. - Prohibition of political activity and discrimination.

 
(a)


(b)
 
No person employed with the city, or seeking admission thereto, shall be appointed, promoted, demoted, removed, or advanced on any basis or for any reason other than qualification, merit, and fitness for the service or lack thereof.
No person shall use or promise to use, directly or indirectly, any official authority or influence, whether possessed or anticipated, to secure or attempt to secure for any person an appointment or advantage in appointment to a position within the city, or an increase in pay or other advantage in employment in any such position, for the purpose of influencing a vote or political action of any person.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)
 

Sec. 38-8. - Unlawful acts prohibited.

 
(a)



(b)



(c)



(d)
 
No person shall make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating, or report in regards to any application for employment, test, certification, or appointment held or made under these rules, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of such personnel provisions for the rules and regulations made thereunder.
No persons seeking appointments, promotion or retention in the city service shall either directly or indirectly give, promise, render, or pay any money, service, or other valuable thing to any person for, or on account of, or in connection with, his test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion.
No employee shall defeat, deceive, or obstruct any person in his right to examination, eligibility, certification or appointment under these rules, or furnish to any person any special or confidential information for the purpose of affecting the rights or prospects of any person with respect to employment, promotion or retention in the city service.
No employee in the service of the city, or seeking admission thereto, shall be appointed, promoted, reduced, removed, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of his race, sex, color, national origin, political affiliation, disability, veteran status or religious opinions or affiliations.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-9. - Annual review of personnel rules and regulations.

Once each calendar year the civil service commission, together with all department heads and/or department personnel shall review the personnel rules and regulations for the purpose of making appropriate recommendations to the city council for changes/amendments/modifications thereto.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-10. - Civil service system and commission established.

 
(a)
 
There shall be a merit based civil service system for the city. All city employees shall be appointed by the city manager and shall hold their status under this section. The merit based personnel rules and regulations apply to all employees of the city, with the exception of all persons filling elective office, members of appointed boards, commissions and committees, persons engaged under contract to supply expert professional or technical services for specified periods of time, and volunteer personnel.
 
(1)


(2)
 
The city manager shall hold employment status under the merit based personnel rules and regulations that apply to all city employees, with the only exception being the initial appointment or removal by the city council.
All department heads shall hold employment status under the merit based personnel rules and regulations that apply to all city employees, with the only exception being the initial appointment or removal by the city manager.
 
(b)



(c)
 
This Code shall provide for the existence of the office of city treasurer, tax collector, finance department, public works department, fire department, police department, board of adjustments, plan and zoning commission, library board, parks and recreation department, law department, city administrative department, and board of trustees of the policemen's and firemen's retirement fund.
The city manager shall implement merit based rules and regulations for the administration of the civil service system. Any subsequent amendments to the rules and regulations may be adopted by the city council, and implemented by the city manager only after a public hearing held in the manner prescribed in the city Charter. All rules and regulations adopted shall be consistent with the provisions of this section. Such merit based rules and regulations shall provide for the following matters in addition to such other matters as may be necessary and advisable in carrying out the intent and purpose of this section:
 
(1)

(2)


(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)
 
General terms and provisions of the merit based rules and regulations.

Open and competitive recruitment and selection of all employees, excluding all department heads and the city manager for initial appointment. Included are other personnel actions taken with the city covering all employees.
List of eligibles, appointments and probationary periods.

Equitable and adequate compensation for all city employees under the civil service system. Hours of work, leave of absence, and other benefits.
Separation and disciplinary actions. Appeals, grievances, and investigations.
Employee relations, employee service ratings, and employee conduct. Records and reports.
Prohibitions and penalties.
 

Fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of personnel administration shall be without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, veteran status or religious creed and with proper regard for their privacy and constitutional rights as citizens. Employees shall be protected against coercion for partisan and nonpartisan political purposes and shall be prohibited from using their official authority for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of an election or a nomination for office.
 

(d)





(e)
 

For the benefit of the public service and by reason of the enactment of this personnel code, an employee holding a city position at the time this sect full effect, who was serving in that same or comparable position at the time of its adoption and who would be covered by the personnel system, sha subject to competitive tests as a condition of continuance in the same position, but in all other respects shall be subject to the personnel system est this chapter; however, such employees shall be required to come within the provisions of the civil service system where the job classification is cove system, and the requirements thereof in order to qualify for advancement.
There shall be a civil service commission which shall consist of five members to be appointed by the city council. No person shall be appointed to that commission who holds a salaried public office or employment. No person while on the commission shall hold or be a candidate for an office of public trust. Nor shall any member be appointed to or remain on the commission at the same time as a relative is in the employ of the city. A relative shall be understood as any member of one's immediate family by reason of relationship of son or daughter, wife, mother-in-law, father- in-law, brother or sister-in-law, aunt, uncle, or grandparents or grandchildren. In such instance the related incumbent member of the civil service commissioner is epso facto removed, and the council shall appoint a new member to complete the unexpired term of the removed commissioner.
 
(1)



(2)


(3)



(4)





(5)


(6)



(7)


(8)



(9)



(10)
 
Of the first civil service commission to be appointed, two commissioners shall hold office until the first Tuesday in April of the second year after their appointment, two until the first Tuesday in April of the third year after their appointment; and one until the first Tuesday in April of the fourth year after his appointment.
When civil service commissioners have been appointed under the provisions of this section, each succeeding city council shall, as soon as practicable after organization, appoint commissioners for four years who shall take the place of those whose terms of office expire.
The chairperson of the commission shall be elected by a majority of the commission for a term of two years without the right of succeeding himself by re-election to another term. This shall not prohibit a person from being elected to consequent terms, provided the terms do not succeed and are not consecutive to each other. Three members shall be present to transact business.
Before entering upon the duties of their office each commissioner shall take and subscribe an oath, which shall be filed and kept in the office of the city clerk, to support the Constitutions of the United States and the State of Missouri and to obey the laws and aim to secure and maintain an honest and efficient merit based civil service system free from partisan distinction or control, and to perform the duties of his office to the best of his ability.
A member of the commission may be removed by the affirmative vote of four members of the council after being given a written statement of the charges against the commission member and a hearing, which shall be a public hearing, if the commission member so requests.
The commission shall, whenever necessary and under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the commission, hold examinations for the purpose of determining qualifications of the applicants for positions; which examinations shall be practicable and shall fairly test fitness of persons to discharge the duties of the position to which they seek appointment.
The commission shall, upon the request of the city council or upon its own initiative, inquire into the administration of the personnel system and, on the basis of the inquiry, make recommendations regarding the system.
The commission shall hear whatever written appeals to the personnel rules provide for the commission to hear and, after hearing such appeal, certify findings and recommendations regarding the appeal to the city council, city manager, and the employee or supervisor who filed the appeal.
A written appeal from a department head can be heard by the civil service commission in accordance with the merit based rules and regulations governing all employees. The findings and recommendations of the civil service commission regarding the appeal shall be discussed with the city manager.
A written appeal from the city manager can be heard by the civil service commission in accordance with the merit based rules and regulations governing all employees. The findings and recommendations of the civil service commission regarding the appeal shall be discussed with the city council.
 
(f)


(g)


(h)
 
The civil service commission may contract or otherwise arrange for such technical services in connection with personnel selection, administrative, and legal services as may be desired, including the giving of examinations.
The city council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. The city council shall provide suitable rooms in which the civil service commission may hold its meetings.
Notice of each appointment or removal in the city service shall be submitted by the city manager to the city council within five days.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006; Ord. No. 5679, § IV, 9-25-2012)


Sec. 38-11. - Status and rights of city employees.

Employees who have secured permanent status under previously existing personnel systems of the city shall be considered to have attained the status of permanent employees as provided by these rules; those who are serving probationary periods under previously existing systems shall continue in a probationary status until they have successfully completed such periods as defined under preceding systems, at which time they shall attain the status of permanent employees.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)
 

Secs. 38-12—38-38. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - THE CLASSIFICATION PLAN



Sec. 38-39. - Classiication plan established; contents.

A position classification plan, based upon and graded according to assigned work duties and responsibilities shall be developed and maintained by the city manager to provide standardization and the proper classification of all positions in the classified service of the city. With the approval of the city council and as adopted by ordinance, new classes may be established, combined or abolished. The position classification plan shall include:
 

(1)

(2)
 

An outline of classes of positions in the classified service arranged in appropriate salary ranges. Position descriptions in such form as prescribed by the city manager and approved by the council.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-40. - Purpose.

The purposes of the classification plan shall be:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)


(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)
 
To provide like pay for like work.

To establish standards for recruiting testing, and other selection purposes.

To provide appointing authorities with the means of analyzing work distribution, areas of responsibility, lines of authority, and other relevant relationships between individuals and groups of positions.
To assist appointing authorities in determining personal service costs and projections for the annual budget requirements. To provide a basis for the developing standards of work performance.
To establish lines for promotional opportunity.

To indicate employee training needs and development potentials. To provide uniform and meaningful titles for all positions.
To provide the fundamental basis of the compensation program and the other aspects of the personnel program.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-41. - Administration.

The city manager shall conduct position classification studies at such times as the city manager deems it necessary or whenever the duties and responsibilities of existing positions have undergone significant change, or when new positions are to be established, or upon request of a head, or affected employee, if the classification of such position has not been reviewed within the last 12 months.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-42. - Classiication of positions.

 
(a)
 
Each position in the city service shall be classified by the city manager with the approval of the city council to its appropriate class in accordance with the character, difficulty and responsibility of its designated duties. Positions shall be assigned to a specific class when:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
 
The same descriptive titles may be used to designate each position in the class;

The same kinds and levels of work, education, experience, knowledge, ability, skills and other qualifications may be required of incumbents; Similar tests of fitness may be used to examine and rank incumbents; and
The same range of compensation will apply equally under substantially the same general employment conditions.
 

(b)

(c)
 

Compensation or the pay range shall not be a factor in determining the classification of any position or the standing of any incumbent.

It shall be the duty of the department head to report to the city manager any and all organization and program changes which will significantly alter or affect changes in existing positions or positions proposed to be established. When any department head requests establishment of new or additional positions, or a change in allocation of an existing position, he shall address his request to the city manager, accompanied by a statement of the work duties and responsibilities of the position, and the current organization chart. The city manager shall forward a copy of said statements to the civil service commission.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-43. - Efect of classiication changes on incumbent.
 

(a)


(b)
 

Whenever the title of a class is changed without a change in duties and responsibilities, the incumbent shall have the same status in the retitled clas in the former class.
When a position is assigned to a class different from the one to which it was previously classified, the pay status of the employee affected will be changed in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations governing transfers, demotions, and promotions in the city service.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-44. - Position descriptions.

 
(a)



(b)



(c)



(d)
 
Master set of descriptions maintained. The city clerk shall maintain a master set of all approved position descriptions. Said position descriptions, as approved by the city manager and city council, shall constitute the official position descriptions of the position classification plan. The city clerk shall provide each department head with a set of the position descriptions for the position classification plan.
Nature of descriptions. Position descriptions are descriptive only and are not restrictive. They are intended to indicate the kinds of positions that are to be assigned to the respective classes as determined by their duties and responsibilities and shall not be held to exclude those duties and responsibilities which are not specifically mentioned, but are similar as to kind and level.
Implied qualifications. Qualifications commonly required of all incumbents of positions of different classes, such as acceptable physical condition, ability to perform the job with or without an accommodation, honesty, sobriety and industry, shall be deemed to be implied as qualification requirements for each class, even though they are not specifically mentioned in the position description.
Interpretation of position descriptions. The position descriptions are intended to indicate assigned duties, responsibilities, and specific tasks and are not to be construed as declaring what the duties or responsibilities of any position may be or as limiting or modifying the power of the department head and/or the city manager to assign, direct, and control the work of the employees under his supervision.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-45. - Use in selection process.

The description for any position as interpreted herein, shall constitute the basis for the recruitment and for the test to be included in examinations for the position and for the evaluation of qualifications of candidates.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-46. - Use of position titles.

The position titles shall be the official title of every position assigned to the classification plan for the purpose of personnel actions and shall be used on all payrolls, budget estimates, and official records. Administrative titles or other working titles authorized by the city manager may be used to designate any position for purposes of internal administration or in oral or written contacts with the public.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Secs. 38-47—38-65. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - THE COMPENSATION PLAN



Sec. 38-66. - Authority to establish salaries.

The city council shall have the power to establish salaries of the city manager, and all other officers and employees under the jurisdiction of the city manager.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-67. - Schedule plan.

The schedule plan for the city service shall include:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
A schedule of standard salary ranges and rates of pay indicating the minimum and maximum rates of pay for each pay grade. A list of classes of positions by grade, with the minimum and maximum rates of pay shown for each.
Supplements, amendments and/or revisions from time to time, as approved by the city council.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)
 

Pay ranges shall be related directly to the position classification plan for the classified service and shall be determined with due consideration to ranges of pay for other grades, the relative difficulty and responsibility of work in the several grades, the recruiting experience of the city, the availability of employees in particular occupational categories, prevailing rates of pay for similar employment in private and other public jurisdictions in the area, employee turnover, cost- of-living factors, the financial policies and economic considerations of the city. The minimum and maximum rates of pay assigned to several grades shall be those which most nearly reflect these factors.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-69. - Amendment of the compensation plan.

 
(a)





(b)
 
Prior to preparation of each annual budget, as well as other times, the city manager shall make comparative salary studies as he deems
necessary concerning factors affecting the level of salaries in the municipal service. On the basis of the information derived from such a wage and salary study, the city manager shall recommend to the city council such changes in the pay plan pertinent to the fairness and adequacy of the overall compensation program.
In arriving at such salary recommendations, the city manager shall take into consideration the advice and suggestions of the department heads as to the duties, degree of responsibility and working conditions involved. Recommended grades shall be submitted to the city council by the city manager. When passed by the city council, these amendments shall become part of the compensation plan and shall become the current official salary schedule applicable to the respective grades as enumerated therein and shall be used by all departments in connection with all payrolls, budget estimates, and official records and reports relating to salaries.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-70. - Total remuneration.

 
(a)





(b)
 
Any salary rate established for an employee shall be the total remuneration for the employee, not including reimbursement for official travel or other special allowances as provided herein. Except as otherwise provided in these articles, no employee shall receive pay from the city in addition to the salary authorized under the schedules provided in the pay plan for services rendered by him, either in the discharge of his ordinary duties or any additional duties which may be imposed upon him or which he may undertake or volunteer to perform.
In any case in which part of the compensation for services in a city position exclusive of all overtime services is paid by another department, division, or any outside agency such as the county, state, or the federal government, or from a different fund or account, any such payment shall be deducted from the compensation of the employee concerned, to the end that the total compensation paid to any employee from all sources combined for any period shall not exceed the amount payable at the rate prescribed for the class or position to which the employee is assigned and wages of positions in the city service.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-71. - Dual employment.

A regular employee holding a position in the city service may be eligible for employment in any additional position or positions in the city service at the discretion of the city manager with the consent of the employee.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-72. - Application of the compensation plan.

The compensation plan, containing standard salary ranges for respective grades of positions, shall be applied to all grades in accordance with the following:

 
(1)






(2)



(3)
 
Rates. All rates prescribed in the ranges of pay represent the remuneration authorized for fulltime employment. Where employment in a position is on a parttime basis, that is, where the week's work is less than the ordinary work week, or where the days worked totaled weekly on a continuing basis consist of less than the ordinary work week total, or where the days worked on a continuing basis consist of less than the ordinary number of working hours of an ordinary working day, such service shall be compensated on the basis of the equivalent hourly rate for fulltime employment.
Minimum and maximum rates. Under each salary schedule there is set forth a minimum and a maximum salary rate. Except as otherwise provided in these rules, appointment to any permanent position shall be made at the minimum rate and advancement from one salary rate to the next higher rate and to the maximum rate for the grade shall be made on the basis of meritorious service and efficiency.
Temporary employment. Temporary employees shall be compensated at the hourly rate established in the annual budget and shall be paid for only those hours which they actually work.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-73. - Beginning salary.
 

The minimum rate of pay for a grade shall normally be paid to any person on his original appointment to a position in the city services. Original appointment above this rate may be made, subject to one or more of the following conditions:
 

(1)

(2)


(3)

(4)


(5)
 

The applicant must clearly exceed the minimum requirements for the position as set out in the official position description.

The position opening must have been extensively advertised in local and regional publications and there must be a shortage of qualified persons.
There are no other applicants on the eligibility list with equal qualifications.

When an employee is reemployed, an appointment may be made at a salary in the range for the grade corresponding to that which the employee had been receiving upon the termination of his previous service.
The city manager shall cause to be kept a record of all cases of employment above the minimum scale.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-74. - Salary advancements.

Initial salary advancements will be granted only upon completion of the first 12 months probationary service with the city, at which time an employee will be advanced to the next higher rate of pay in his classification as set forth in the compensation plan.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-75. - Pay rate adjustments.

 
(a)
 
Personnel actions affecting pay status. The following personnel actions shall affect the pay status of permanent employees in the manner provided:
 
(1)


(2)


(3)



(4)


(5)
 
Transfer. When an employee is transferred between departments and divisions of the city government or between positions within the same maximum salary rate, the salary rate of the employee will remain unchanged.
Promotion. When an employee is promoted from a position in one grade to a position in another grade having a higher maximum salary rate, the salary rate of the promoted employee shall be increased to at least the minimum rate for that grade or position.
Demotion, involuntary. When an employee is involuntarily demoted for disciplinary or similar reasons from a position in one grade to a position in a grade having a lower maximum salary rate, the salary of the employee shall be reduced to at least within the pay range established for the class to which the employee is demoted.
Demotion, voluntary. When an employee is voluntarily demoted from a position in one grade to a position in a grade having a lower pay range, the rate of pay for the employee shall be reduced as necessary to place it within the pay range assigned to the lower grade.
Salary reduction. The city manager may reduce for cause the salary of an employee one level within the employee's assigned pay range.
 

(b)





(c)
 

Notice of intention to effect pay reduction of permanent employee. In the case of a permanent employee, notice of intention to effect a reduction in pay and the reason for such action shall be given to the employee by the city manager not less than 15 calendar days prior to the effective date of salary reduction. Within five calendar days of notice of reduction in salary, a permanent employee may appeal in writing to the civil service commission.
Notice of intention to effect pay reduction of temporary employee. In the case of a temporary employee, notice of intention to effect a reduction in pay and the reason for such action shall be given to the employee by the city manager not less than five calendar days prior to the effective date of salary reduction. A temporary employee does not have the right to appeal to the civil service commission.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-76. - Pay anniversary dates.

The effective date of any salary increase or decrease, except for cost-of-living increase, shall constitute an employee's pay anniversary date. (Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)

Sec. 38-77. - Temporary assignment to higher level position.

In any case when a permanent employee is qualified for and is temporarily required to regularly serve in and accept the responsibility for work in a position of a higher class within their department which will involve a period of time covering five days or longer, such employee shall receive equal or higher rate of pay while so assigned, subject to the approval of the department head involved and the city manager. An employee may be temporarily assigned for a period not to exceed five days to the work of any position in the same or lower class without change in pay.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)
 

Sec. 38-78. - Overtime and compensatory time.

 
(a)






(b)

(c)



(d)


(e)
 
Overtime or arrangements for overtime work, inasmuch as possible, shall be approved in advance by the department head in accordance with the established policies and procedures implemented by the city manager. Employees shall be paid for overtime work at the rate of time and a
half of the normal hourly rate for the assigned position classification, provided funds are available. At the request of the employee concerned and with the approval of the department head and/or in the event funds are not available, an employee may be granted compensatory time off at the rate of time and a half for hours worked in lieu of cash compensation for overtime work.
Unless authorized by the city council, the city manager and department heads shall not be compensated for overtime work.

Compensatory time shall not be allowed to accumulate in excess of 40 hours and must be taken as time off within the calendar year in which it is earned. In no event shall any employee be paid cash equivalent for compensatory time and upon death or termination of employment for any reason, no employee shall receive a cash payment as the equivalent of the compensatory time previously allowed and accumulated.
Whenever an employee qualified for overtime is held over because of an emergency, he shall receive overtime payment or compensatory time credit at the rate of time and a half for all hours worked in excess of his regular work shift.
An emergency means a sudden and unforeseen happening that, in the opinion of the department head or authorized supervisor, requires the unscheduled services of an employee to protect the health, welfare and safety of the community. Employees shall be required to work overtime when the same is necessary, and disciplinary action may be taken against employees who without good or sufficient reason:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Refuse to work overtime.

Fail to appear when scheduled to work overtime.

Having indicated he would work overtime, fail to appear.
 

(f)
 

The city manager shall require monthly reports of overtime and compensatory time from all department heads.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-79. - Call back time.

Whenever an employee qualified for overtime is called back on an emergency to work after his regular working hours and after he has left his last work site, the minimum overtime payment or the minimum compensatory time credit shall be one hour of work at the rate of time and a half.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-80. - Travel allowances.

 
(a)






(b)

(c)



(d)
 
The city manager will review and approve or reject all requests for reimbursable travel for all city employees to receive authorization to attend any meeting, seminar, or school that pertains to city business. The employee's department head will submit a request to the city manager in writing stating the purpose of and location of the meeting, seminar, or school. If the city employee is given authorization to attend a meeting, seminar, school, or any other function that would pertain to city business, expenses such as lodging, meals, parking fees, commercial transportation, telephone and facsimile charges, tips, and other justifiable expenses shall be reimbursed at actual cost to the city employee.
All travel expense reports shall be filled out within 30 days of completion of the authorized reimbursable travel.

Whenever a city employee is authorized to use his privately owned vehicle for the purpose of city business, the employee will be reimbursed at a rate per mile established from time to time by the city council, providing they are not paid a monthly expense allowance for the use of their privately owned vehicle for the performance of their official duties.
The city manager may authorize advance funding for authorized travel subject to strict accountability.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Secs. 38-81—38-103. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IV. - APPLICATIONS AND APPLICANTS



Sec. 38-104. - Announcement of examinations.

Notice of all examinations for appointment to positions in the city service shall be published by posting announcements on official bulletin boards and in such other places as the city manager deems advisable. Each official announcement shall specify the title and salary range of the position for which the examination is announced; the general nature of the work to be performed; qualifications necessary or desirable for the performance of the work; the manner of making application; closing date for receiving applications and other pertinent information. Notice of all examinations for promotions in the city service shall be published by other methods.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)
 

Sec. 38-105. - Application form.

All applications shall be on forms prescribed by the city manager and shall be filed with the city manager on or prior to the closing date specified in the announcement. Applications may require information concerning personal characteristics, education, experience, reference and other pertinent information. All applications shall be signed and the truth of statements contained therein certified by such signature.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-106. - Disqualifcation.

 
(a)
 
The city manager may refuse to examine an applicant or after examination may disqualify such applicant, remove his name from an eligibility list or may remove such person already appointed if:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)
 
He is physically or mentally unable to perform the essential functions of the class with or without a reasonable accommodation. He is currently using or under the influence of narcotics or intoxicating liquors.
He has made false statement of material fact in his application.

He has used or attempted to use political pressure or bribery to secure an advantage in the examination.

He has directly or indirectly obtained information regarding the examination to which as an applicant he was not entitled. He has failed to submit his application correctly or within the prescribed time limits.
He has taken part in the compilation, administration or correction of the examination for which he is an applicant. He has previously been dismissed from a position in the city service for cause.
He has otherwise violated the provision of these rules.

He has taken for another or allowed another to take for him, all or part of any examination, or has been found cheating in any way on an examination.
 
(b)
 
Whenever an application is rejected or an employee is removed from service for any of the above reasons, notification shall be given to the applicant or employee. Applications, whether accepted or rejected, shall remain on file and shall not be returned.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-107. - Disqualifcation by reason of criminal activity.

All applicants who have been convicted of a felony and who have not received a pardon, restoration of civil rights or certificate from the court attesting that they were juvenile at the time of conviction, or who have pled guilty to a felony, shall have their applications rejected.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-108. - Necessary special qualifcations for applicants for the position of frefghter and/or police ofcer.

At the time of the last date for filing for the position of firefighter and/or police officer, individuals must have passed their 21st birthday. Any individual who is employed by the city as a firefighter and/or police officer, and has passed his 35th birthday, are not allowed to participate in the existing policemen's and firemen's retirement fund, but will be afforded the opportunity to participate in LAGERS and have social security withheld from their compensation in order to receive those benefits. Proof of birth date shall be required before appointment.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Secs. 38-109—38-129. - Reserved.


ARTICLE V. - EXAMINATIONS



Sec. 38-130. - Competitive examinations.

All appointments, with the exception of the city manager, shall be according to merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practical by competitive examinations. Examination shall be practical and shall relate to the matters which shall test fairly the capacity and fitness of the candidate to discharge efficiently the duties of the position for which examinations are held. The examinations may be assembled or unassembled and may include oral, physical, or performance tests or any combination of these. The civil service commission may adopt or authorize the use of such other examination procedures as they determine to be appropriate in order to meet the needs of the service while ensuring the selection of such employees on the basis of merit and fitness.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-131. - Eligibility for competitive examination.
 

Competitive examinations shall be open to all personnel whose applications shall meet the standards or requirements of the position to be filled. No question in any test shall relate to race, sex, national origin, disability (except if accommodation is needed for the examination), veteran status, political or religious opinion, affiliation or service. Any applicant who takes an entrance examination for any position and fails to make a passing grade is eligible to retake the examination again after 60 days.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-132. - Rating of examinations.

Sound measurement techniques and procedures shall be used in rating the results of examinations and determining the relative standings of the competitors. In all examinations, the minimum ratings by which eligibility may be achieved shall be set by the city manager. The final examination grade may be based on all factors of the examination, including education requirements, experience, and other pertinent information. The final earned rating of each competitor shall be determined by computing the earned ratings on each part of the examination. All competitors may be required to obtain at least a minimum rating on each or any part of the examination in order to receive a final passing grade or to be allowed to participate in the remaining parts of the examination.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-133. - Medical examinations.

 
(a)


(b)
 
The city manager shall determine by medical examinations whether applicants for any position or employees possess the prescribed standard of health.
After an initial job offer or promotion has been made, the city manager may require examination of eligibles or employees to determine whether they possess the required physical fitness for assigned duties. The expense of required medical examinations shall be paid by the city. In the case of eligibles for the police and fire departments, such medical reports shall be submitted to the police and firemen's pension board for determination of acceptance or nonacceptance or reasonable accommodation, when required. No applicants for hiring to these departments found ineligible for membership in the pension program by the pension board of trustees for reasons of health or medical history shall be
eligible for employment by the city.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Secs. 38-134—38-164. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VI. - ELIGIBLE LIST



Sec. 38-165. - Employment list.

The city manager shall cause to be established and maintain such employment lists of various job classifications in the city service as necessary to meet the needs of the service.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-166. - Reemployment list.

A reemployment list composed of those persons having been released from the city service without prejudice and not of their own volition, but because of a reduction in working force in a department, shall be maintained. Those persons with the longest continuous employment in the city positions shall be placed at the top of the list for consideration for first reemployment rights.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-167. - Vacancies.

Should a vacancy occur in the city service, the city manager shall determine the most appropriate method for soliciting applicants for the position. (Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)

Sec. 38-168. - Residency requirements.

Individuals shall be recruited from a geographic area as wide as necessary to ensure obtaining well-qualified candidates. Employment shall not be limited to residents of the city, except those instances where residency is required to conform with state law.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)
 

Sec. 38-169. - Employment of relatives.

Persons related to each other shall not be employed in the same division or department which would cause them to work under the same supervisor or to cause the possibility of one relative supervising another.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Secs. 38-170—38-191. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VII. - APPOINTMENTS



Sec. 38-192. - Vacancies.

All vacancies in the city service shall be filled by reemployment, promotion, original appointment, transfer or demotion as provided in these rules. When a vacancy in the city service is to be filled, the city manager shall advise the civil service commission of such vacancies, and the civil service commission shall proceed with the advertising, testing and screening for the vacancies, and shall submit three recommendations, if available, for each position to the city manager and department head provided open or promotional eligible lists have been exhausted. The city manager, in consort with the affected department head shall have the authority to reject the three recommendations of the civil service commission with cause and to request three more recommendations until a suitable applicant is found.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-193. - Appointments.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Regular, parttime, and temporary positions. Appointments to fill vacancies in regular, parttime, and temporary positions shall only be made following certification from an open or promotional eligible list.
Emergency appointments. In the case of an emergency which could not have been foreseen, such as, but not limited to, a flood, tornado, or blizzard, which requires immediate employment of one or more persons to prevent serious impairment of the public business and for which it is not practicable to secure the needed person by certification from an eligible list in time to meet the emergency, the city manager may appoint any qualified person during such emergency for a period not to exceed 30 days.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-194. - Transfer.

A position may be filled by transferring an employee from a position of the same class or similar class with essentially the same basic minimum qualifications and having the maximum salary rate. Interdepartmental transfers must be approved by the requisitioning department, the city manager, and the employee concerned. The relinquishing department may delay the transfer for up to 30 calendar days in order to obtain a replacement. There shall be no transfers during probationary period(s).

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-195. - Appointment forms.

No duly appointed employee may be placed on the payroll until all appointment and other forms have been properly completed and approved by the city manager.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Secs. 38-196—38-213. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VIII. - PROBATIONARY PERIOD



Sec. 38-214. - Purpose.

The probationary period is for employees new to the city service and employees affected by interdepartmental transfer and shall be an integral part of the selection process. The probationary period shall be utilized by the department head as an opportunity to observe the new or transferred employee's work, and to train and aid the new or transferred employee in adjusting to his position. During the probationary period individuals are at will employees who may be discharged or resign at any time with or without cause.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)
 


Sec. 38-215. - Duration.

All original appointments shall be tentative and subject to a probationary period of 12 months of actual service. Any interruption of service during the probationary period shall not be counted as part of the probationary period.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-216. - Resignation, dismissal, and discipline during probationary period.

During the probationary period, any employee who resigns or is dismissed and who is subsequently reemployed shall commence a new probationary period. At any time during the probationary period, an employee may be dismissed by the city manager, at any time, with or without cause, and may be disciplined, up to and including suspension, at any time at the discretion of his supervisor and the city manager.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-217. - Notiication of end of probationary period.

At least 15 days prior to the expiration of an employee's probationary period and in such manner as the city manager may prescribe, the department head shall notify the city manager in writing whether the services of the employee have been satisfactory and whether the employee should continue in his position. A copy of this notice shall be given to the employee by the department head. Upon approval of the city manager of a favorable report, the appointment of the employee shall be made permanent at the expiration of the probationary period.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-218. - Appeal rights of probationary employees.

An employee who is rejected, dismissed, or disciplined (up to and including suspension) during the probationary period shall not have the right of appeal against such action.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Secs. 38-219—38-244. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IX. - HOURS OF WORK, LEAVES OF ABSENCE AND OTHER BENEFITS



Sec. 38-245. - Hours of work.

Regular working hours for all fulltime employees shall be 40 hours each week, which shall be the standard workweek, except as otherwise provided herein, or except as otherwise provided by departmental regulations approved by the city manager.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-246. - Holidays.

 
(a)
 
All employees of the city shall receive their regular compensation for the following legal holidays or parts thereof, or any other day proclaimed as a holiday, by which the public offices of the city are closed:
New Years Day

Martin Luther King Day Washington's  Birthday Memorial Day
Fourth of July Labor Day
Thanksgiving Day and the Friday of Thanksgiving day "weekend" (said Friday in lieu of Veterans Day) Christmas Day and December 26 (day after Christmas)
Personal holiday (see subsection (g) of this section)
 

(b)


(c)

(d)


(e)


(f)


(g)
 

Except for employees regularly scheduled to work on a shift basis when a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be observed as the l holiday; and when the legal holiday falls on Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed as the legal holiday.
All regular employees of the city service shall receive their regular compensation for the holidays stated in these personnel rules and regulations. All regular employees required to work on a holiday shall be paid at double their normal rate of pay for that holiday or given compensatory time
off.

Any official holiday stated in these rules and regulations which shall occur during an employee's scheduled vacation period shall not be counted as a day of vacation.
Any employee shall forfeit his right to payment for any holiday if he has an unexcused absence on the last regular work day preceding such holiday or on the next regular work day following such holiday.
Permanent employees may take one additional holiday each calendar year in addition to regularly scheduled holidays. This is to be a holiday scheduled with the approval of the department head and, as much as possible, to meet the requests of the employee to observe a special occasion of his choosing. If not taken in the calendar year, this holiday is forfeited.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-247. - Vacation leave.

 
(a)
 
Each regular fulltime employee, except temporary and seasonal employees, shall be allowed vacation leave with pay according to the following conditions:
 
(1)


(2)


(3)

(4)
 
Annual vacation may be earned at the rate of one day for each full calendar month of service as an employee on an annual salary basis. Each employee entering the service on or prior to the 15th day of the month shall accumulate leave credit for a full calendar month.
No annual vacation may be taken by an employee until he has been in the service of the city continuously for a period of one year computed from the first day on which he became entitled to vacation credit.
No claim for annual vacation credit in excess of the maximum provided in the succeeding subsections shall be approved.

The accumulation of vacation by an employee shall be 14 consecutive days plus the additional days as follows (the last being the maximum):
 


5 years service	
4 extra days

10 years service	
8 extra days

15 years service	
12 extra days

20 years service	
16 extra days



 
(b)

(c)


(d)

(e)



(f)


(g)


(h)



(i)

(j)
 
Employees shall not be eligible for vacation leave during their probationary period, nor in advance of vacation credit accrual.

Permanent parttime employees shall be granted vacation according to the above at the regular, parttime salary and in proportion to time actually worked.
Vacation leave shall be requested and approved in advance of its use, except in circumstances beyond the employee's control.

Accumulation of vacation leave credit shall not exceed 30 work days at any one time. Accumulations beyond 30 work days will either be paid or credited to sick leave if the employee so requests. Unused vacation accrual shall be paid upon termination of employment, except a termination during or at the end of the original probationary period.
Absence on account of sickness, injury or disability, in excess of that hereinafter authorized for such purpose, shall be charged against vacation leave allowance.
Each department head shall report vacation leave granted to the city manager and shall schedule vacation leaves in accord with operating requirements and, insofar as possible, to coincide with the request of the employee.
Annual vacation schedules for all employees shall be developed by department heads in accordance with department vacation policies formulated in writing and approved by the city manager. Such department vacation policies shall include, but not be limited to, requirements for timely advance notice of vacation requests, provisions for vacations selected based on seniority, etc.
Only one occurrence of splitting of vacation will be allowed per year.

For each employee leaving the service, the city manager shall deduct from salary due any sums which such employee may owe to the city for personal taxes or other obligations owing to the city, and such employee shall be entitled to receive only the amount of such salary due less the amount of any such indebtedness to the city.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)
 

Sec. 38-248. - Sick leave.

 
(a)


(b)

(c)





(d)
 
All fulltime permanent and parttime employees shall be entitled to sick leave with pay in accordance with this rule. Sick leave credit shall be earned at the rate of one day per completed month of service. Accumulation of sick leave credit shall not exceed 120 days at any one time.
An employee eligible for sick leave with pay may use such sick leave for absence due to illness, injury, or exposure to contagious disease.

An employee who is absent because of sickness shall inform his immediate supervisor of the fact and the reason therefor within one hour after starting time unless otherwise provided for and set forth in department rules and regulations, and failure to do so within a reasonable time may be cause for denial of pay for the period of absence. Department heads shall require a doctor's certificate after three days off before approving sick leave with pay; such certificates shall be transmitted to the city manager with the report of sick leave for entry in employee's records.
Any employee who is laid off, granted leave of absence without pay, or terminates employment under creditable circumstances and is later reinstated within one year, shall have available upon his return such unused sick leave accrual as he may have earned up to the time of his departure.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-249. - Injury leave.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)


(d)


(e)



(f)
 
Any employee injured on the job shall be eligible for injury leave with pay for a period of up to six months from the date of injury. Such leave will not be charged against an employee's sick leave or vacation leave.
While on injury leave, an employee will be paid at a rate equivalent to his regular salary but in no case shall the total worker's compensation benefits and injury leave pay exceed the employee's normal salary.
After using the six months of injury leave with pay, an employee shall use his sick leave accrual and if more leave is required, his vacation leave accrual. Sick leave and vacation leave shall continue to accrue while an employee is on injury or extended injury leave.
If, after returning to work, an employee must receive subsequent treatments due to his on-the-job injury, time off required for such treatment shall not be charged to the employee's accumulated sick leave or vacation leave.
To be eligible for injury leave with pay, the employee must notify his department head of the injury within 24 hours of the time the injury is sustained. Weekend and holiday injury reports must be made on the next regular working day. Notification must be made to the city manager with a written statement from a physician authenticating the extent of the injury and the estimated date of return to work.
Prior to returning to work, the employee shall provide his department head a written statement from a physician certifying that the employee is able to return to the job. This certification shall be forwarded to the city manager and made part of the employee's personnel records.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-250. - Military leave.

 
(a)





(b)





(c)



(d)


(e)



(f)
 
Eligibility. Regular employees in the city service who have been in the employ of the city for at least one year immediately preceding leaving the service of the city to enter the uniformed service of the United States, drafted into such service or employees subject to compulsory service who voluntarily enlist shall be granted a military leave of absence without pay to extend for one month beyond the date of termination of act of uniformed service. Those regular employees shall be eligible for benefits based on time of employment before entering service.
Restoration. An employee returning from military leave shall be entitled to restoration to his former position, provided he makes application within one month after his release from duty and has not been dishonorably discharged and he is physically and mentally capable of performing the duties of the position involved. In the event that the position he vacated no longer exists at the time he qualified for return to work, such person shall be entitled to be reemployed in another existing position of the same class.
Salary. An employee returning from military leave shall be reemployed at the prevailing salary range for the position to which he has been restored. He may be eligible for a merit increase upon completion of one year of service which shall include his time between his last merit increase and the date military leave was granted to him.
Seniority. Employees granted military leave of absence may count such service as time spent on the job for computing seniority in the event of a layoff.
Disposition of vacation and sick leave. A regular employee who leaves the city service directly for such military leave may elect to be paid for any accrued vacation as he may be entitled to if he were actually separating from the city service. His decision shall be noted on the personnel vacation leave, and any accrued vacation and sick leave credits shall be reinstated upon return of the employee.
National Guard and reserve leave. All regular employees who are members of the National Guard or any reserve component of the armed forces shall be entitled to a leave of absence from their respective duties without loss of time, pay, regular leave, impairment of efficiency rating, or any other right or benefit to which otherwise entitled, on all days on which they are employed with or without pay under the orders or authorization of competent authority on active training duty, duty with troops, field exercises, or instruction for a period not to exceed a total of ten working days in any calendar year.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)
 

Sec. 38-251. - Jury duty.

An employee may receive special pay when he is required to serve on a jury when the hours of jury duty conflict with the hours of his city work. When paid by the city for jury duty leave, the jury duty check should be turned over to the city.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-252. - Funeral leave.

Funeral leave will be granted for a maximum of three days to all regular employees to attend a funeral in the family of the employee. The city manager may grant an extension of up to an additional seven days.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-253. - Leave of absence without pay.

 
(a)



(b)
 
A department head, with the approval of the city manager, may grant a regular employee leave of absence pay for a period not to exceed one year. Such leave shall be granted only when it is in the best interest of the city and when it will not cause undue or unnecessary imbalances. No such leave shall be granted primarily in the interest of the employee. No employee will earn vacation or sick leave while on leave without pay.
Upon expiration of leave without pay, the employee shall return to work in the position held at the time leave was granted or to any other vacant position in the same class. Failure without good cause of the employee on leave to report promptly when leave has expired shall be considered as a resignation.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-254. - Absence without leave.

Any unauthorized absence of any employee from duty shall be deemed to be in absence without pay and may be made grounds for disciplinary action by the department head. In absence of such disciplinary action, any employee who absents himself for three or more days without authorized leave shall be deemed to have resigned. Such absence may be approved by the department head subsequently where extenuating circumstances are found to have existed.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-255. - Maternity.

 
(a)





(b)


(c)

(d)


(e)

(f)
 
No employee shall be compelled, coerced or ordered to begin maternity leave at any time during the period of pregnancy. An employee may be placed on maternity leave at any time during the period of pregnancy if, in the estimation of the immediate supervisor and with the concurrence of a medical certification, the employee is experiencing an unusual or difficult pregnancy to the extent that it seriously affects the quality and quantity of work performed.
Maternity leave may be considered leave without pay or sick leave. The use of this type of leave will in no way jeopardize the position of the employee.
An employee may request with a medical doctor certification and be granted maternity leave at any time during the period of pregnancy.

The maximum duration of maternity leave following the birth of child will be eight weeks unless need for additional leave is medically certified by a physician.
The employee will not accumulate any additional sick or vacation leave while on maternity leave.

An employee may expend all other types of leave before using maternity leave. An employee may not be compelled to use other leave, either sick or annual.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-256. - Health and life insurance.

Regular fulltime employees in the city service shall be enrolled, without cost, in the group life insurance program. Fulltime employees and their dependents may enroll in the basic and major medical insurance program, the cost of which may be shared between the city and the employee. The effective date of coverage is the first day of the calendar month following the first month of employment. During any authorized a leave of absence with pay, the coverage is continued. In the event an employee is authorized leave of absence without pay in excess of 30 calendar days, he must make his own arrangements to pay the insurance premiums during this period.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-257. - Retirement plan.
 

Regular fulltime employees in the city service will be enrolled as a participating member of the city's retirement plan, if eligible, as a condition of employment.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-258. - Mandatory retirement.

All city employees shall retire on attaining age 65 except for those departments/employees whose physical dexterity as relates to job performance and/or personal/public safety is not a factor. In the case of such exceptions, such personnel shall be required to submit to a physical examination. Upon successfully passing said physical examination, and subject to the approval of the appropriate department head and the city manager, such personnel may be retained in his position.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Secs. 38-259—38-279. - Reserved.


ARTICLE X. - SEPARATION AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS



Sec. 38-280. - Resignations.

Any employee who is in good standing may resign from the service by presenting his resignation in writing to the department head within a reasonable time prior to the effective date. Such resignations shall be promptly forwarded to the city manager. The city manager may make such investigation as he deems warranted for the purpose of verifying reasons for each resignation.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-281. - Cause for disciplinary action.

Disciplinary action, up to and including discharge, may be effectuated for cause. Cause exists when an employee acts in a manner that is contrary to the best interests of the city and its citizens or the employee's action or inaction affects his ability to adequately perform the duties of his position. Examples of conduct that may be subject to discipline include, but are not limited to, the following:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)


(4)



(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)



(9)



(10)

(11)


(12)


(13)

(14)
 

Habitual use of alcoholic beverages to excess or the illegal use of narcotics. Adjudication of guilt of a crime.
Being under the influence of or the taking of intoxicating beverages or intoxication while on duty, including the use of narcotics while on duty.
Use of abusive or improper treatment to a person under investigation, suspected of a crime, or in custody, provided the act committed was not necessarily or lawfully done in self-defense or to protect the lives of others, or to prevent the escape of a person lawfully in custody, or suspected of a crime.
Offensive conduct or language towards the public or towards city officers or employees. Insubordination.
Intentional damage or negligence in the care and handling of city property.

Violation of any official regulations or lawful orders or directives made or given by his superior, where such violation or failure to obey amounted to an act of insubordination or a serious breach of proper discipline, or resulted, or might reasonably have been expected to result, in loss or in injury to the city or the public.
Commission of acts or omissions unbecoming an incumbent of the particular office or position held, which render his reprimand, suspension, demotion, or discharge necessary or desirable for the economical or efficient conduct of the business of the city or for the best interest of the municipal government.
Violation of any of the provisions of this Code, ordinances, any administrative regulation or lawful orders or directives of his superior. Inducing or attempting to induce any officer or employee in the municipal service to commit an illegal act, to act in violation of any lawful
and reasonable departmental or official regulation or order, or to participate therein.

Solicitation, receipt from any person of, or participation in any fee, gift, or other valuable thing that is given in the hope or expectation of receiving a favor or better treatment than that accorded other persons.
Use or attempted use of political influence or bribery to secure an advantage in an examination or promotion.

Absence from duty, without leave, contrary to these rules or failure to report after leave of absence has expired or after such leave of absence has been disapproved or revoked and cancelled by the proper authority.
 

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)


(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)


(27)
 

Violating the city's anti-harassment policy or equal employment opportunity policy. Violating the city's workplace violence policy.
Theft or inappropriate removal or possession of the city's property.

Falsification of timekeeping records, employment application, personnel, or other city documents or records.

Possession, distribution, sale, transfer, or use of alcohol or illegal drugs in the workplace, while on duty, or while operating city-owned vehicles or equipment.
Violation of safety or health rules.

Excessive absenteeism or absence without notice. Unsatisfactory performance or conduct.
Engaging in acts of dishonesty, fraud, or sabotage.

Insubordination or refusal to comply with instructions or failure to perform reasonable duties, which are assigned. Damaging or destroying city property through careless or willful acts.
Engaging in such other practices as the city determines may be inconsistent with the ordinary and reasonable rules of conduct necessary to the welfare of the city, its employees or city residents.
Other circumstances for which the city feels that corrective action is warranted.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-282. - Reprimand.

A department head may reprimand any employee for cause. Such reprimand shall be in writing and addressed to the employee. A signed copy shall be delivered to the city manager for inclusion in the personnel file. Reprimands may not be appealed. However, the employee may file a letter of response to the reprimand, which shall be attached to the reprimand in his personnel file.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-283. - Deprivation of privileges.

Any employee found to have acted in the manner outlined in s e c t i o n 3 8 - 2 8 1 may, at the discretion of his supervisor or department head, lose privileges such as earned vacation time, special days, or other privileges. An employee will have the right to appeal such action, in writing, in accordance with s e c t i o n 3 8 - 
 3 1 2 , grievance procedure. (Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)

Sec. 38-284. - Suspension.

 
(a)







(b)
 
Suspension for cause. With the exception of suspensions due to an arrest for a felony, which are outlined below, a department head may, for cause, recommend to the city manager the suspension of an employee without pay for a duration deemed appropriate by the department head and city manager given the nature of the cause for which the employee is suspended. The suspension shall be effective immediately upon notification by the city manager. Such notice shall include the reasons for and the duration of the suspension. Within five calendar days of notice of suspension, any permanent employee who is suspended may appeal in writing to the civil service commission for a hearing, in accordance with article XI of this chapter.
Suspension due to felony or other violation of law. The department head shall notify the city manager of any permanent employee who is arrested for a felony charge or a serious violation of law and is either imprisoned pending a trial or released on bail or bond pending a trial. The employee's case shall be reviewed by the city manager. The city manager, taking into consideration the duties and services of the employee, shall have the authority to reassign an employee to a less sensitive position or to suspend the employee without pay until such time as a judgment is rendered by the court. If the employee is subsequently convicted, he may be removed from the municipal service. If the suspended employee is found not guilty and is released by the court, he shall be reinstated in his position, but will not receive back wages for the period of his suspension. The suspension shall be effective immediately upon notification by the city manager. Within five calendar days of notice of suspension, any permanent employee who is suspended may appeal in writing to the civil service commission for a hearing, in accordance with article XI of this chapter.
 
(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-285. - Demotion.

A department head may recommend to the city manager the demotion of an employee for cause. A written statement of the reason for any such action
shall be furnished to the employee and sent to the city manager. Upon his approval, the city manager shall notify the employee at least 15 calendar days prior to the effective date of the action. No employee shall be demoted to a lower class unless that employee is qualified for the position at the lower class. Within five
 

calendar days after receiving written notice of demotion, any permanent employee may appeal, in writing, to the civil service commission for a hearing, in accordance with article XI of this chapter.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-286. - Dismissal.

A department head may recommend to the city manager the dismissal for cause of any employee under his jurisdiction by delivering a written statement of the reason to the employee concerned and to the city manager. The dismissal shall become effective upon approval and notification to the employee by the city manager. Within five calendar days of the receipt of notification of dismissal, any permanent employee so dismissed shall have the right to appeal in writing to the civil service commission, and shall be granted a hearing as provided for in article XI of this chapter.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-287. - Reduction in force; layof.

A department head may recommend to the city manager the separation of any employee without prejudice due to operational or economic circumstances. Upon approval of the recommendation, the city manager shall give notice of at least ten working days to such employee. However, no permanent employee shall be separated from any department while there are provisional, probationary, parttime or temporary employees serving in the same class or positions in that department. Whenever a classified position is abolished or reduction in force becomes necessary, layoffs shall be accomplished in the following manner:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)


(4)
 

The first employees to be laid off are those who received a rating of below average or unsatisfactory on their last employee service rating. The remainder of employees shall be laid off in reverse order of their total service with the city.
The names of all employees who have been laid off shall be returned to their respective eligible list. The city manager may appoint an employee who is to be laid off to any existing vacancy in a lower class for which he is qualified.
Employees who have been laid off shall be eligible for rehire for a period not to exceed one year.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Secs. 38-288—38-307. - Reserved.


ARTICLE XI. - APPEALS, GRIEVANCES AND INVESTIGATIONS



Sec. 38-308. - Appeals of suspension, dismissals, or reductions in pay.

Any permanent employee who is suspended, dismissed, or reduced in pay shall have the right to appeal this action directly to the civil service commission. An appeal must be filed with the civil service commission within five calendar days after the effective date of such disciplinary action. The appeal must be in writing and set forth the reasons why the disciplinary action is believed to be improper. The civil service commission will begin an investigation within five calendar days from receipt of the written request from an employee. If, based on its investigation, the civil service commission determines that a hearing is appropriate, it will conduct such hearing within ten calendar days of the completion of its investigation. In any case, an advisory opinion will be rendered within 30 calendar days of receipt of the request by the civil service commission to the city manager with a copy to the city council. The city manager shall give full consideration to such opinion before making his final and binding decision on the appeal.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-309. - Classiication appeals.

All appeals pertaining to the classification of an employee will be made in writing to the city manager. The decision of the city manager shall be final in all matters of classification, and the employee shall have no further right of administrative appeal.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-310. - Retroactive adjustment.

All adjustments of grievances and appeals processed under the procedures provided in these rules shall be retroactive to the time the grievance or appeal is first submitted in writing by the aggrieved employee to his immediate supervisor.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-311. - Grievance policy.
 

It shall be the policy of the city to give individual employees an opportunity to discuss their grievances with their supervisors in order to find mutually satisfactory solutions as rapidly as possible. In the presentation of grievances at any supervisor level, discrimination or reprisal against the employee shall not be made because of his use of this policy.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-312. - Grievance procedure.

For grievances other than suspensions, dismissals, or reductions in pay (which must be appealed directly to the civil service commission), the following procedure must be followed:
 

(1)

(2)



(3)





(4)






(5)
 

Oral report. An employee who has a grievance shall first present his grievance to his immediate supervisor.

Written report. If the oral grievance presentation fails to resolve the grievance, the employee may, within three calendar days, submit a written grievance report to his immediate supervisor. Within five calendar days after receiving such grievance, the immediate supervisor shall furnish the employee with a written reply to the grievance.
Appeal to department head. If the written reply to the grievance is not satisfactory to the employee, he may, within ten calendar days after receiving a reply, submit the grievance in writing to his department head. The department head shall confer with the aggrieved employee and/or his authorized representative before rendering a decision. Such decision shall be reduced to writing and shall be delivered to the aggrieved employee within ten calendar days of the date on which the grievance was received by the department head.
Appeal to the city manager. If the department head's response fails to resolve the grievance, the employee may, within five calendar days of receipt of the department head's decision, submit the grievance in writing to the city manager. Within ten calendar days of the receipt of such a grievance, the city manager shall hear matters pertaining to the grievance in any manner that the city manager deems appropriate. The city manager shall forward a copy of his decision to the employee concerned and the appropriate department head within 30 calendar days of his receipt of the grievance.
Appeal to the civil service commission. If the decision of the city manager, in the opinion of the employee, is not satisfactory, he may, within five calendar days of the receipt of such decision, appeal same in writing to the civil service commission. Within ten calendar days of receipt of such appeal, the civil service commission shall hear matters pertinent to the appeal/grievance. In any case, an advisory opinion will be rendered within 30 calendar days of receipt of the request by the civil service commission to the city manager with a copy sent to the city council. The city manager will give full consideration to such opinion before making a final and binding decision on the appeal.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-313. - Conduct of investigations.

In connection with the review of a grievance, appeal, or for any other purpose necessary to determine the adherence to any provisions of these rules, the civil service commission may conduct such investigation involving the production of records or reports by a municipal department which shall be conducted in such manner as to cause the least possible disruption or inconvenience to such department in the conduct of its regular work.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Secs. 38-314—38-344. - Reserved.


ARTICLE XII. - EMPLOYEE RELATIONS



Sec. 38-345. - Performance standards.

The city manager shall develop standards of performance and systems of evaluating and recording worthy performance in relation to such standards. The standards of performance shall give consideration to the quality and quantity of work done, the manner in which the service is rendered, the conduct of employees, their faithfulness to their duties, and such other work characteristics as will measure fairly the work performance of employees. Such standards of performance and performance evaluations may be used in determining the suitability of probationary employees and the eligibility of salary adjustments, in discovering employees who should be transferred or promoted, in rating suitability for promotion, and in developing necessary training activities. Performance evaluation shall be reported in such manner and at such times as the city manager may require.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Secs. 38-346—38-363. - Reserved.


ARTICLE XIII. - EMPLOYEES' SERVICE RATINGS
 



Sec. 38-364. - General.

Employees' service ratings shall be prepared for all employees in the city service. (Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)

Sec. 38-365. - Frequency of employees' service ratings.

Employees shall be rated at least every 12 months. Employees will also be rated on the following special occasions:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Two months prior to the conclusion of the probationary period for initial appointments. Any time for exceptional or unsatisfactory service.
For regular employees separating from the city service for voluntary or involuntary reasons with over three months service.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-366. - Responsibility for employees' service ratings.

The city manager shall have the responsibility for administering the employees' service rating system. Each employee shall be rated by his immediate supervisor, whose rating then will be reviewed by the next higher supervisor when applicable. Copies of the service rating will be transmitted to the city manager for his approval with copies returned to the department and the employee affected.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-367. - Merit increases dependent upon service ratings.

 
(a)


(b)
 
An employee must receive a service rating of at least "average" on his annual service rating in order to be eligible for annual merit increase or promotion.
Any employee receiving a rating of "unsatisfactory" for two consecutive times shall be considered for disciplinary action by the city manager.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-368. - City employment attitude and evaluation.

The civil service commission shall cause to be effected an annual personnel study for the purpose of assessing:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Personnel attitudes. Management effectiveness.
Appropriateness of job classifications and job responsibilities.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Secs. 38-369—38-394. - Reserved.


ARTICLE XIV. - EMPLOYEES' CONDUCT



Sec. 38-395. - Discharge of duties.

Employees in the city service, recognizing that the public interest is their primary concern, shall faithfully discharge their official duties regardless of personal considerations.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-396. - Code of conduct.

In the discharge of their duties, employees shall adhere to the following codes of conduct:

 
(1)

(2)
 
Employees in the service of the city shall give fair and equal treatment to every citizen.

No employee in the service of the city shall grant a special consideration, treatment, or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen.
 

(3)



(4)



(5)


(6)


(7)


(8)


(9)



(10)

(11)


(12)



(13)
 

No employee in the service of the city shall have a direct financial interest in any contract with the city, or be directly financially interested, in th of any material, supplies, equipment or services. Any employee violating this section shall forfeit his office or employment and be subject to su penalties as may be provided by these rules or by ordinance.
No employee in the service of the city shall engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties in the public interest or would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties.
An employee in the service of the city who has a financial or other private interest in any proposed city legislation shall disclose the nature and the extent of such interest.
No employee in the service of the city shall accept any valuable, gift, whether in the form of service, loan, promise, or any other form, from any person which, to his knowledge, is interested, directly or indirectly, in any matter whatsoever, in business dealings with the city.
No employee in the service of the city shall disclose information, the disclosure of which would be detrimental to the city, nor shall he use such information to advance the financial or other private interests of himself or others.
No employee in the service of the city shall engage in or accept private employment or render service for private interest when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties.
No employee in the service of the city shall sell or barter anything to the city, or to a contractor to be supplied to the city, or make any contract with the city, or purchase anything from the city other than those things which the city offers generally to the public and then only on the same terms as are offered to the public.
No employee in the city service shall continue in such position after becoming a candidate for nomination or election to any city office.

No employee in the service of the city shall solicit any monetary contribution to the campaign funds of any candidate for city office, nor shall any employee of the service participate in the campaign of any candidate for city office.
No employee in the service of the city shall, directly or indirectly solicit, receive or be of any manner concerned in soliciting, obtaining, or receiving any monetary contribution or assistance, financial or otherwise, for any political purpose whatsoever from any officer or employee of the city.
No employee in the service of the city shall request or permit the use of city owned property for any purpose except the conduct of city business, unless authorized by the city manager.
 

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-397. - Responsibility of employees.

Each employee in the service of the city is responsible for the proper use and protection of city property entrusted to his use. Failure to exercise good judgment for the use and protection of equipment, tools, and vehicles so entrusted may be cause for disciplinary action.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-398. - Supplemental rules.

Each department head may supplement the employees' code of conduct, as set out in this article, with provisions which would be uniquely particular or applicable only to that department; however, any such additional provisions shall be submitted to the city manager for approval.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-399. - Enforcement.

Any violation of the provisions of these rules may be cause for discipline up to and including removal from the service of the city. (Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)

Secs. 38-400—38-426. - Reserved.


ARTICLE XV. - RECORDS AND REPORTS



Sec. 38-427. - Personnel records.

The city manager shall have the overall responsibility for all personnel files and records. (Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)
 

Sec. 38-428. - Service register.

The city manager shall oversee service registers for all employees in the city service identifying for each the class title, department assignment, salary rate, dates of employment, employment history, and such other data as he deems pertinent.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Sec. 38-429. - Reports to the city manager.

Every appointment, transfer, promotion, demotion, dismissal, and other temporary or permanent changes in the status of employees in the city service shall be reported to the city manager in writing. The city manager is authorized to prescribe the time, manner, form, and method of making any written report as may be stipulated in any of these rules.

(Comp. Ords. of 3-28-2006)


Chapter 40 - SOLID WASTE


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Secs. 40-1—40-18. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - REFUSE STORAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



Sec. 40-19. - Defnitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Bulky rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible or noncombustible waste materials from dwelling units, commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural establishments which are either too large or too heavy to be safely and conveniently loaded in solid waste transportation vehicles by solid waste collectors, with the equipment used for route collection.

Collection means removal of solid waste from its place of storage to the transportation vehicles.

Composting means a controlled biological reduction of organic waste to humus.

Demolition and construction waste means waste materials from the construction or destruction of residential, industrial or commercial structures.

Director means the director of the solid waste management program; the director of public works of the city or his authorized representative.

Disposable solid waste container means disposable heavy plastic bags with a capacity of three to six bushels specifically designed for storage of solid waste.

Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a structure, and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or are intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.

Garbage means putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food.

Hazardous wastes means and includes, but is not limited to, pathological wastes, explosive wastes, pesticides, pesticide containers, toxic or radioactive materials.

Multiple housing facility means a housing facility containing more than one dwelling unit under one roof.

Occupant means any person who, along or jointly or severally with others, shall be in actual possession of any dwelling unit or of any other improved real property, either as owner or as a tenant.

Processing means incinerating, composting, baling, shredding, salvaging, compacting and other processes whereby solid waste characteristics are modified or solid waste quantity is reduced.

Refuse. See Solid waste.

Solid waste means unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid or semi-solid state, including, but not limited to, garbage, ashes, street refuse, rubbish, dead animals and agricultural wastes, yard wastes, discarded appliances, special wastes, industrial wastes, and demolition and construction wastes.
 

(1)
 

The term "commercial solid waste" means solid waste resulting from the operation of any commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural
 

establishment, and multiple housing facilities with more than four dwelling units.
 

(2)
 

The term "residential solid waste" means solid waste resulting from the maintenance and operation of dwelling units, excluding multiple housing facilities with more than four dwelling units.
 

Solid waste container means the receptacle used by any person to store solid waste during the interval between solid waste collections. Solid waste disposal means the process of discarding or getting rid of unwanted material; in particular, the final deposition of solid waste. Solid waste management means the entire solid waste system of storage, collection, transportation, processing and disposal.
Storage means keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste from the time of its production until the time of its collection.

Transportation means the transportation of solid waste from the place of collection to a solid waste processing facility or solid waste disposal area.

Yard wastes means grass clippings, leaves and tree trimmings.

(Code 1972, § 302.13(A)(1), (3)—(11), (13)—(21); Code 1982, § 14-16; Ord. No. 3812, 4-14-1975; Ord. No. 4530, § 1, 4-28-1992)


Sec. 40-20. - Storage.

 
(a)





(b)



(c)






(d)





(e)


(f)



(g)


(h)
 
The owner or occupant of every dwelling unit and of every institutional, commercial or business, industrial or agricultural establishment producing solid waste within the corporate limits of the city, shall provide sufficient and adequate containers for the storage of all solid waste except bulky rubbish and demolition and construction waste to serve each such dwelling unit or establishment; and maintain such solid waste containers at all times in good repair.
The occupant of every dwelling unit and of every institutional, commercial, industrial, agricultural or business establishment shall place all solid waste to be collected in solid waste containers, as hereinafter set forth, and shall maintain such solid waste containers and the area surrounding them in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times.
Residential solid waste from all dwelling units excluding multiple housing facilities with more than four dwelling units shall be stored in containers of no more than 35 gallons nominal capacity or household carts with wheels not exceeding 100 gallons capacity and shall have been manufactured to serve this function. They shall be fitted with a flytight lid that shall be in place at all times except during a filling or emptying operation. Such containers shall be leak proof and waterproof. The weight of any individual container and contents shall not exceed 100 pounds. All solid waste containers shall be stored at least 25 feet behind the front of the building line unless screened from view from public streets.
Solid waste from commercial and multiple housing facilities with more than four dwelling units shall be stored in solid waste containers as approved by the director. The containers shall be waterproof, leak proof and shall be covered at all times except when depositing waste therein or removing the contents thereof. All solid waste containers shall be setback at least 25 feet behind any building line adjacent to a public street unless screened from view from public streets.
Tree limbs less than four inches in diameter and brush shall be securely tied in bundles not larger than 48 inches long and 18 inches in diameter when not placed in storage containers. The weight of any individual bundle shall not exceed 75 pounds.
Yard waste not composted or tied in bundles shall be stored in the household container or in recyclable paper bags, manufactured for this purpose and securely tied so as to prevent the dispersal of waste therein. The weight of any individual container or bag and contents shall not exceed 75 pounds.
Yard waste in recyclable paper bags or in bundles shall be placed at the curb for collection in such manner as not to interfere with surface water drainage.
Solid waste containers that are not approved shall be collected, together with their contents, and disposed of.
 

(Code 1972, § 302.13(B); Code 1982, § 14-17; Ord. No. 3812, 4-14-1975; Ord. No. 4530, § 2, 4-28-1992; Ord. No. 4930, §§ I, II, 4-11-2000)


Sec. 40-21. - Collection.

 
(a)






(b)


(c)
 
The city shall provide for the collection of all solid waste from all residential dwelling units, excluding multiple-housing facilities with more than four dwelling units in the city by contracting with a person for the entire city or portions thereof, as deemed to be in the best interests of the city. All solid waste from commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural establishments and multiple housing facilities with more than four dwelling units shall be collected by a collector chosen by and paid for by the owner or occupant of such premises. Such collector must have a city permit.
All solid waste from premises to which collection services are provided by the city shall be collected, except bulky rubbish as defined herein. All solid waste collected shall, upon being loaded into transportation equipment, become the property of the collection agency.
Solid waste containers as required by this article for the storage of residential solid waste shall be placed at the curb for collection. Any solid waste containers, tree limbs, yard wastes or other solid waste permitted by this article to be placed at the curb for collection shall not be so placed until after 5:00 p.m. preceding the regularly scheduled collection day. All empty containers must be removed from the curb by 12:00 midnight on the day of collection.
 

(d)

(e)
 

Bulky rubbish shall be collected twice yearly from the curb.

The following collection frequencies shall apply to collections of solid waste within the city:
 

(1)


(2)


(3)
 

All residential solid waste from all dwelling units, excluding multiple-housing facilities with more than four dwelling units, shall be collected at least once per week. At least 72 hours shall intervene between collections.
Commercial solid waste from all other sources shall be collected at least once per week and at a lesser interval when necessary for the preservation of the health or safety of the public.
No collections shall occur on January 1, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. Collection shall occur on the day following the holiday except that no collection shall occur on a Sunday. All collections shall occur between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Variations from the published collection schedule shall receive prior approval of the director.
 
(Code 1972, § 302.13(C); Code 1982, § 14-18(a)—(d), (f); Ord. No. 3812, 4-14-1975; Ord. No. 5083, § II, 11-26-2002)


Sec. 40-22. - Collection fees.

The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, impose a collection fee against property owners for the collection of solid waste for all residential dwelling units, excluding multihousing facilities with more than four dwelling units, such fee not to exceed the per dwelling unit cost charged to the city by the refuse collector providing such services, or in the city council's sole discretion, the city council may elect to provide for the payment to such refuse collector out of the general revenue fund of the city. The ordinance or resolution may also establish the frequency of billing, payment procedures and other procedures; if not so established by the ordinance or resolution, they shall be established by the director pursuant to s e c t i o n 4 0 - 3 0 . If such solid waste collection fee is imposed by the city council, the following provisions shall apply to any such solid waste collection and solid waste collection fees:
 

(1)












(2)
 

In addition to being subject to prosecution for violation of the provisions of s e c t i o n 4 0 - 2 8 , if any person shall fail to pay a solid waste collection fee 30 days after the beginning of the service period for which the bill is rendered, then such bill shall be delinquent and an additional charge of $0.25 per dwelling unit per month or part thereof shall be imposed as to such delinquent bill; provided, however, the minimum delinquency charge shall be $1.00 for any one month. If any person shall fail to pay the bill for solid waste collection fees and if such bills become delinquent one month or more, the city may cause the immediate stoppage of the collecting such garbage, trash, litter and rubbish from the premises, whereupon the dwelling unit shall be immediately vacated. In addition, if the owner or other person in control of or in occupancy of any unit fails to pay a solid waste collection fee, such owner or other person in control or occupancy of the dwelling unit shall be jointly and severally personally liable for payment of the amount of the solid waste collection fee and all other charges provided in this section (together with interest at the rate of nine percent per annum from the date due), and all such amounts shall also be a first lien upon such property until paid.
Any owner shall receive a credit against the collection fees imposed under this section for each full month the applicable dwelling is vacant, provided that:
 
a.	The property owner surrenders the occupancy permit for such dwelling unit and files an application for credit with the director no later than 30 days before the next billing period;
b.	The property owner swears under oath that the unit was vacant and furnishes to the director proof that the unit was vacant during the current billing period, and the vacancy lasted at least three consecutive months; and
c.	No solid waste from the unit was collected by the city during the vacancy.

(Code 1972, § 302.13(C); Code 1982, § 14-18(i); Ord. No. 3812, 4-14-1975; Ord. No. 5083, § II, 11-26-2002)


Sec. 40-23. - Transportation.

 
(a)






(b)



(c)
 
All transportation vehicles shall be well maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition, and shall be so constructed, maintained and operated as to prevent spillage of solid waste therefrom. All vehicles to be used for transportation of solid waste shall be constructed with watertight bodies and with covers which shall be an integral part of the vehicle or shall be a separate cover of suitable material with fasteners designed to secure all sides of the cover to the vehicle and shall be secured whenever the vehicle is transporting solid waste, or as an alternate, the entire bodies thereof shall be enclosed, with only loading hoppers exposed. No solid waste shall be transported in the loading hoppers.
Permits shall not be required for the removal, hauling or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities; however, all such material shall be conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles, or constructed and maintained so that none of the material being transported shall spill upon the public right-of-way.
Transportation and disposal of demolition and construction wastes shall be in accordance with s e c t i o n 4 0 - 2 4 .
 

(Code 1972, § 302.13(D); Code 1982, § 14-19; Ord. No. 3812, 4-14-1975)


Sec. 40-24. - Disposal.

 
(a)
 
Solid wastes shall be deposited at a processing facility or disposal area approved by the city and complying with all requirements of the state division of health. Out-of-state processing or disposal facilities shall have the approval of the state wherein located.
 

(b)
 

The director may classify wastes as hazardous wastes which will require special handling and shall be disposed of only in a manner acceptable to th and which will meet all local, state and federal regulations.
 
(Code 1972, § 302.13(E); Code 1982, § 14-20; Ord. No. 3812, 4-14-1975)


Sec. 40-25. - Entry into private property and residential buildings prohibited.

Solid waste collectors operating under contract with the city shall not enter upon private property or dwelling units or other residential buildings for the purpose of collecting residential solid waste.

(Code 1972, § 302.13(C); Code 1982, § 14-18(e); Ord. No. 3812, 4-14-1975; Ord. No. 5083, § II, 11-26-2002)


Sec. 40-26. - Littering prohibited; responsibility for clean up.

Solid waste collectors shall be responsible for the collection of all solid waste from the point of collection to the transportation vehicle. Any spillage or blowing litter caused as a result of the duties of the solid waste collector shall be collected and placed in the transportation vehicle by the solid waste collector. Collectors shall replace lids of all storage containers after emptying.

(Code 1972, § 302.13(C); Code 1982, § 14-18; Ord. No. 3812, 4-14-1975; Ord. No. 5083, § II, 11-26-2002)


Sec. 40-27. - Designation of supervisor; report of violations of chapter and improper collections.

Each solid waste collector, under contract to the city, shall designate a supervisor who shall maintain daily contact with the director to receive reports of missed or improper collections and report any violations of this article.

(Code 1972, § 302.13(C); Code 1982, § 14-18; Ord. No. 3812, 4-14-1975; Ord. No. 5083, § II, 11-26-2002)


Sec. 40-28. - Prohibited practices.

 
(a)
 
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
 

(1)


(2)

(3)


(4)


(5)



(6)
 

Allow or cause the placing, maintenance or accumulation of trash, garbage, junk or other waste or obnoxious matter in any building or upon any premises in the city except residential composting which complies with s e c t i o n 4 0 - 2 9 ;
Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container other than his own, without the written consent of the owner of such container;

Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection and transportation equipment, or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties;
Dispose of solid waste at any facility or location that is not approved by the city and the state division of health or the appropriate authority of the state in which the disposal facility is located;
Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the city without a permit from the city, or operate under an expired permit, or operate after a permit has been suspended or revoked, except residential compost piles that comply with s e c t i o n 4 0 - 2 9 ;
If and when a solid waste collection fee is imposed pursuant to s e c t i o n 4 0 - 2 2 , no property owner shall fail to pay any such solid waste collection fee within 60 days after the due date.
 
(b)
 
All vehicles, on which unbaled or loose waste paper is hauled over the streets shall be kept covered with a tarpaulin or other approved covering in such a manner as to prevent loose paper from blowing or falling from such vehicles.
 
(Code 1972, § 302.13(G); Code 1982, § 14-22; Ord. No. 3812, 4-14-1975; Ord. No. 4530, § 3, 4-28-1992; Ord. No. 5083, § I, 11-26-2002)


Sec. 40-29. - Composting.

 
(a)
 
All compost piles shall be maintained using approved composting procedures to comply with the following requirements:
 

(1)



(2)


(3)

(4)



(5)
 

All compost piles shall be enclosed in a freestanding compost bin. Each compost bin shall be no larger in volume than 75 cubic feet for properties 10,000 square feet and less in size, with an additional 75 cubic feet permitted for each additional 10,000 square feet of space. Compost bins shall be no taller than five feet.
All compost piles shall be maintained so as to prevent the attraction or harborage of rodents and pests. The presence of rodents in or near a compost pile shall be cause for the city to issue a complaint.
All compost piles shall be maintained so as to prevent unpleasant, rotten-egg-like, putrefactive, sweet, sour or pungent odors.

Unless written permission has been granted by the adjoining property owner, no compost pile shall be located less than five feet from the rear or side property line, or within 20 feet of any home, patio, pool or similar structure on the adjacent property. All compost piles shall be at least five feet behind the front building setback line.
No compost piles shall be located where it will impede the natural free flow of stormwater drainage.
 

(6)
 

Contents of compost piles.
 

a.	No compost piles shall contain any of the following:

1.	Lake weeds.

2.	Food scraps.

3.	Fish, fowl, meat or other animal products.

4.	Manure.

5.	Animal carcasses.

6.	Fruits, vegetables or nuts.

7.	Items not normally composted.

b.	Permitted ingredients shall include:

1.	Yard waste.

2.	Commercial compost additives.

3.	Wood chips.
 

(b)
 

Compost piles established in accordance with this article are for private use only. There shall be no commercial provision of material to be composted or commercial use of the product of such composting.
 
(Code 1982, § 14-23; Ord. No. 4530, § 5, 4-28-1992)


Sec. 40-30. - Director's authority to make rules and regulations.

The director of public works shall make, amend, revoke and enforce reasonable and necessary rules and regulations governing, but not limited to:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)


(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)


(12)
 
Requirements for wrapping of garbage deposited in solid waste containers.

Specifications for solid waste containers, including the type, composition, equipment, size and shape thereof. Identification of solid waste containers and of the covers thereof, and of equipment thereto appertaining, if any.
Weight limitations on the combined weight of solid waste containers and the contents thereof, and weight and size limitations on bundles of solid waste too large for solid waste containers.
Storage of solid waste in solid waste containers.

Sanitation, maintenance and replacement of solid waste containers. Schedules of and routes for collection and transportation of solid waste. Collection points of solid waste containers.
Collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste.

Handling of special wastes such as toxic wastes, sludges, ashes, agriculture, construction, bulky items, tires, automobiles, oils, greases, etc. No charge will be made by the city for the collection of solid waste from all residential dwelling units, excluding multiple-housing facilities
with more than four dwelling units.

Solid waste from commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural establishments and multiple-housing facilities with more than four dwelling units shall be collected by a collector chosen by and paid for by the owner or occupant of such premises.
 

(Code 1972, § 302.13(H); Code 1982, § 14-24; Ord. No. 3812, 4-14-1975; Ord. No. 4530, § 4, 4-28-1992)


Sec. 40-31. - Bonds.

Collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste shall be insured by a performance bond or a cashier's check equal to 25 percent of the total amount of the current year contract.

(Code 1972, § 302.13(K); Code 1982, § 14-25; Ord. No. 3812, 4-14-1975; Ord. No. 4530, § 4, 4-28-1992)


Chapter 42 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Sec. 42-1. - Director of public works.

 
(a)

(b)
 
There shall be a director of public works who shall have such powers and duties as are set forth in the provisions of this chapter. The director of public works shall be the executive head of the department of public works.
 

(c)

(d)
 

The director shall inspect all street excavations and all other work done under any permit or license issued under the provisions of this chapter. The director shall receive such salary as the council may determine by resolution or ordinance.
 
(Code 1972, § 501.02; Code 1982, § 28-1)


Sec. 42-2. - Authority to close streets, etc.

 
(a)





(b)
 
Whenever any street, highway, alley or other public place is in a dangerous condition, is being constructed, or is being repaired, or whenever it is deemed advisable by the director of public works or chief of police to detour traffic from any street, highway, alley or other public place, the director of public works or chief of police may erect or cause to be erected barricades at each end of such street, highway, alley or other public place, or any part thereof which is to be temporarily closed.
No person shall disregard such barricade nor shall any person drive a motor vehicle on any part of a street, highway, alley or other public place that is temporarily closed under the provisions of this section.
 
(Code 1972, § 501.04; Code 1982, § 28-2)


Sec. 42-3. - Taking or depositing material.

No person shall take from or deposit upon any street, alley or other public place or thoroughfare of the city, or from or upon any property not owned by him, any turf, loam, gravel, rock, earth or other material, unless such person has lawful authority to do so.

(Code 1972, § 305.11; Code 1982, § 28-3)


Sec. 42-4. - Utilities to move wires to permit moving of buildings, etc.

All electric and telephone companies, on the request of any person, shall remove or raise or lower their wires temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the party or parties requesting such raising or lowering of wires, and payment in advance may be required. Not less than 48 hours' advance notice shall be given to arrange for such temporary wire changes.

(Code 1972, § 604.03(B)(3); Code 1982, § 28-4; Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 5-11-1973)


Sec. 42-5. - Telephone company's right to trim trees.

The right is hereby granted to all telephone companies to trim trees, brush or hedges upon and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city, so as to prevent such foliage from coming in contact with telephone wires and cables; all of such trimming is to be under the supervision and direction of the governing body of the city or of any city official to whom such duties have been or may be delegated.

(Code 1972, § 604.03(B); Code 1982, § 28-5; Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 5-11-1973)


Secs. 42-6—42-28. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS



Sec. 42-29. - Permit—Required.

No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation in any public street, highway or alley without written permission of the director of public works. (Code 1972, § 505.01; Code 1982, § 28-21)

Sec. 42-30. - Same—Issuance; deposit; bond; fees.

 
(a)
 
Before a permit is issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant shall make a deposit and give a bond as required by this section:
 

(1)



(2)
 

The deposit of $200.00 shall be made with the city clerk. If this deposit is diminished in amount during the time the permit issued under the provisions of this article is in effect, the applicant or permittee shall deposit such additional amount as to bring the total deposit up to the amount of $200.00.
The bond shall be in the amount of $2,000.00 with two sureties, each of which shall certify that his net worth is at least double the amount of the bond in real estate in the county. This bond shall be for the protection of the city against loss or damage by reason of the carelessness or negligence of the permittee, in protecting any such person, or those under his supervision. Such bond may not be given until it is approved by the director of public works.
 
(b)
 
Before the permit is issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant shall state in writing the location, size and approximate date of commencing the excavation, and the director of public works shall satisfy himself that the excavation is necessary and proper.
 

(c)
 

The following fees shall be charged as a condition to the issuance of the permit in order to cover the cost of issuing the permit and making inspectio
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

For each excavation: $35.00;

For each excavation, trench type: 12 feet or greater in length, $50.00;

For each replacement of a utility main 50 feet or greater in length involving multiple excavations: $50.00.
 

(Code 1972, § 505.02; Code 1982, § 28-22; Ord. No. 4941, § X, 5-23-2000)


Sec. 42-31. - Same—Records.

The city clerk shall keep a full and complete account, in a book provided for that purpose, of all permits issued under this article, showing the date, party to whom issued, location of the excavation and money collected on account thereof.

(Code 1972, § 505.06; Code 1982, § 28-23)


Sec. 42-32. - Protection of public.

Every applicant for a permit under this article who shall make or cause to be made any excavation in or adjoining any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, highway, sidewalk or public easement shall cause the same to be barricaded, such barricade to be so placed as to prevent persons, animals or vehicles from falling into such excavations and every applicant making or causing to be made any such excavation shall cause two red lights to be securely and conspicuously posted on or near such excavation; provided, such excavation does not exceed ten feet in length, and if more than ten feet and less than 50 feet, three red lights, one at each end and one in the center shall be so placed, and one additional light for each additional 25 feet or part thereof, and shall keep such lights burning during the entire night.

(Code 1982, § 28-24)


Sec. 42-33. - Backfll, restoration and maintenance.

 
(a)


(b)
 
After he has completed the work of excavation, a permittee under this article shall refill any excavation and restore the surface of the area excavated with a temporary repair to such condition as will be safe for public use.
Backfill shall be made as directed by the director of public works.
 

(1)


(2)
 

All excavations must be thoroughly filled with clean, suitable materials free from rubbish, lumber or decomposable material that may cause excessive settlement by disintegrating.
Backfill materials shall be tamped, flushed or jetted into place to fill the excavation and prevent after settlement.
 

(c)
 

On the backfill, where the excavated portion of the street is ordinarily traveled, a temporary repair surface shall be placed.
 

(1)

(2)
 

The repair surface may be of brick set on edge or an asphalt surface.

The repair surface shall be built flush with the surrounding pavement area at the edges, and shall be crowned at the center not to exceed two inches above the plane of the edges of the excavation.
 
(d)
 
Any after settlement that may occur in temporary repair surfaces within six months after they have been made shall be remedied at once upon notice to do so from the director of public works. Upon failure to remedy the settlement, the director of public works shall cause the settlement to be remedied, and shall charge the cost of so doing against the permittee. The permittee shall not be liable for maintaining the temporary repair for more than a period of six months from the time such repair was completed, or after the surface has been restored by the director of public works, whichever is sooner.
 
(Code 1972, § 505.03; Code 1982, § 28-25)


Sec. 42-34. - Emergencies.

No permit need be issued before excavations are begun in case of public emergency, but a permit shall be applied for as soon as is practicable after the work has begun.

(Code 1972, § 505.05; Code 1982, § 28-26)


Sec. 42-35. - Enforcement.

 
(a)


(b)
 
The director of public works shall satisfy himself that an applicant for a permit under this article has complied with the law and ordinances applicable to the excavation, and shall inspect the excavation as often as necessary.
Within a reasonable time after the work is completed, the director shall cause the area so excavated to be restored and resurfaced in such a manner as to bring it to the same condition as it was before the excavation was made.
 
(Code 1972, § 505.04; Code 1982, § 28-27)
 

Secs. 42-36—42-58. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - IMPROVEMENTS



Sec. 42-59. - Cost of improvement, etc.; tax.

 
(a)





(b)



(c)
 
The cost of repairing, paving, macadamizing, guttering and curbing (where such curbing is set out in the street beyond the sidewalk) or otherwise improving all streets, alleys and highways in the city and for doing all excavation and grading necessary after the streets, alleys or highways or connections therewith have been brought to established grade, shall be levied as a special assessment upon all lots and pieces of ground upon either side of such street, alley or highway, along distances improved in proportion to the front or abutting foot, as provided in this article.
Whenever the city council shall determine by ordinance to open, widen or bring to grade any street, highway or alley or shall order the construction of any bridge, culvert or public sewer, or any foot-walk across any street, highway or alley, the cost of making such improvement shall be paid out of the city treasury in like manner as other expenses are paid.
The city council may include in the special assessment, under the provisions of this chapter, the cost of bringing to the established grade any street, alley, highway, square or area formed by the intersection or meeting of streets, or any part thereof when, in its judgment, the general revenue fund of the city is not in a condition to warrant an expenditure therefrom for such purpose.
 
(1)


(2)
 
The resolution declaring such work necessary to be done and published shall include and describe the work of bringing such street, avenue, alley or other highway, or square, or part thereof, to the established grade.
In all cases where such work is authorized and is contracted for, the bringing to grade as above described shall be included in the same contract with the other work provided for therein, and tax bills shall be issued in payment for all work as provided by this chapter.
 
(d)



(e)
 
Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the cost of making all street crossings, and the expense of keeping streets, avenues and alleys in repair after they have been constructed shall be paid out of the general revenue fund of the city, and all such work shall be done under the direct supervision of the director of public works.
The method of assessing the appropriate amount of tax to be paid by each person, and to be imposed as a lien upon each lot or other piece of land, shall be governed by the provisions of article VI of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided in this article.
 
(Code 1972, § 504.01; Code 1982, § 28-41)


Sec. 42-60. - City not liable.

Any person who shall agree with the city to be paid from special assessments for work done by him, shall have no claim upon the city in any event or contingency, and no work, the payment for which is to be made by special assessment, shall be awarded to any contractor who does not so agree.

(Code 1972, § 504.02; Code 1982, § 28-42)


Sec. 42-61. - Contracts for improvements, etc.—Generally.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Except as provided in article VI of this chapter, all work under the provisions of this article shall be done by contract let and entered into as provided by this article.
No contract shall be awarded by the city council for paving, macadamizing, grading, curbing or guttering any street, highway or alley, or for the construction of any bridge or culvert, until an estimate of the cost thereof has been made by the director of public works, or by some other person acting in his stead, and submitted to the city council.
 
(1)

(2)
 
No work shall be contracted for a price exceeding the estimate made hereunder. This subsection shall not apply to contracts for local or special repairs.
 
(c)
 
Whenever the city council, by ordinance, determines that the repair, paving, macadamizing, curbing, guttering or other improvement of any  street, highway or alley, or any part thereof, is necessary, the city clerk shall give public notice in some newspaper of general circulation in the city that sealed bids will be received by the council for the work so specified in the ordinance.
 
(1)

(2)
 
The notice shall be published for not less than one week before the day appointed on which the proposals are to be received. The notice shall state the following:
 
a.	The nature of the work to be done;

b.	The place where the plans and specifications for the work may be seen;

c.	The time up to which the bids will be received;

d.	The hour and place of opening the bids.
 

(d)
 

The sealed bids shall be made upon blanks supplied by the city clerk for that purpose. They shall be signed by the bidder and shall be accompanied by a certified check made payable to the order of the mayor, and equal in amount to ten percent of the amount bid for the work. Such check shall become the property of the city, if such bidder is awarded the work, but does not enter into a written contract with the city to do
 

the work bid according to the terms of his bid and the provisions of this article within ten days after the award is made, or if he fails to execute, within such period of time, the bond required by the provisions of this article.
 
(e)





(f)
 
Each bid and check shall be placed in a sealed envelope addressed to the mayor and on or across that envelope shall be written "Proposal for public work." Each such proposal shall be opened by the mayor at a regular or special meeting of the council, at the time and place specified in the notice published under the provisions of this section, and each such proposal shall be duly considered by and in open session of the council. Each proposal submitted shall be taken and considered subject to all of the provisions of this article.
All contracts shall be awarded to the best and lowest bidder or bidders who comply with the provisions of this article.
 

(1)

(2)
 

The council may nevertheless reject all bids if, in their judgment, such action is required by the best interest of the city.

If all bids are rejected, or if no bids are presented, the council may instruct the clerk, by resolution, to readvertise for bids under the provisions of this article.
 
(Code 1972, § 504.03; Code 1982, § 28-43)


Sec. 42-62. - Same—Terms.

All contracts entered into under the provisions of this article shall contain a clause that such contract is subject to the Charter and existing ordinances of the city, that all questions arising as to proper performance of the work shall be decided by the city officer in charge of the work, that in case of improper construction the city reserves the right to suspend, relet or order entire reconstruction of the work at any time or to declare such contract forfeited for failure to perform the contract within the time required in the contract or in the manner required by the contract. No action by the city under such clause shall affect the right of the city to recover all damages and penalties due by reason of the contractor's noncompliance with the contract or with any of the provisions of this Code. Time for completion may be extended for sufficient cause, by resolution or ordinance of the city council.

(Code 1972, § 504.04; Code 1982, § 28-44)


Sec. 42-63. - Same—Conditions; change.

No change shall be made in the plans or specifications of any work contracted to be done, the materials to be furnished, or the manner of executing the work unless the city council authorizes such a change by ordinance, and such change is agreed to by the contractor. The director of public works or other officer in charge of superintending the work is expressly prohibited from directing, consenting to or permitting any deviation from the terms, specifications and requirements of the contract.

(Code 1972, § 504.05; Code 1982, § 28-45)


Sec. 42-64. - Director of public works to make plans and speciications.

For making any improvement or doing any work under the provisions of this article, plans and specifications shall be prepared and furnished to the city by the director of public works.

(Code 1972, § 504.06; Code 1982, § 28-46)


Sec. 42-65. - Acceptance of work.

The director of public works, or some other person authorized by the city to supervise, shall supervise the work done under contracts entered into under the provisions of this article, and shall make a written report to the city council as to the character of the work and whether it is performed in strict compliance with the contract terms, conditions and requirements. If the council approves the report and finds the terms of the contract have been strictly complied with, it shall, by resolution, declare that the work as to which the report was made is accepted.

(Code 1972, § 504.07; Code 1982, § 28-47)


Sec. 42-66. - Speciications of work generally.

All work done under the provisions of this article shall be subject to specifications promulgated by the director of public works from time to time, subject to approval by the council.

(Code 1972, § 504.08; Code 1982, § 28-48)


Secs. 42-67—42-90. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IV. - OBSTRUCTIONS
 

Sec. 42-91. - Weeds, tree branches, etc.

No owner, occupant or manager of any property in the city shall allow any weeds or other growth or any tree branches to project over any street, highway or alley or any public place in the city, in such a way as to obstruct passage or free movement.

(Code 1972, § 302.03(A); Code 1982, § 28-61)


Sec. 42-92. - Boxes, goods or merchandise.

No person shall cause or allow any boxes, goods or merchandise to obstruct a sidewalk further than two feet from the front of a building, nor shall any person hang or suspend any boxes, goods or merchandise over the sidewalk.

(Code 1972, § 302.03(B); Code 1982, § 28-62)


Sec. 42-93. - Washing vehicles, animals on sidewalk.

No person shall wash any vehicle or animal on a public sidewalk. (Code 1972, § 302.03(C); Code 1982, § 28-63)

Sec. 42-94. - Mud, snow, ice, etc.

No person shall fail, neglect or refuse to keep the sidewalk and gutter in front of any building owned, managed or occupied by him, swept clean of mud, filth, dirt, snow and ice, or to keep that sidewalk clear and clean of weeds, grass and other substances.

(Code 1972, § 302.03(D); Code 1982, § 28-64)


Sec. 42-95. - Throwing or depositing dangerous objects or noxious substances on streets.

No person shall throw or place or allow or cause to be thrown or placed upon any street, highway or alley or any public place anything of any form or composition which is or may be injurious to persons or to vehicles or other property, or that is annoying, unsightly, nauseous or disagreeable.

(Code 1972, § 302.03(E); Code 1982, § 28-65)


Sec. 42-96. - Unguarded openings.

No person shall make, cause or permit to be made any opening in or near any public street, highway, alley or other public place which is left open and unguarded and therefore dangerous to persons upon such public street, highway, alley or other public place.

(Code 1972, § 302.03(F); Code 1982, § 28-66)


Sec. 42-97. - Awnings, signs and exhibits.

 
(a)
 
No person shall erect or cause to be erected, maintain or cause to be maintained, any awning, sign or exhibit which projects over a street, highway, alley or other public place unless the framework of such awning, sign or exhibit is not less than 7½ feet above the surface of the street, highway, alley or other public place and:
 
(1)

(2)
 
The director of public works has given his/her permission; or

The sign, awning or exhibit does not obstruct any street lamp or official traffic control device.
 

(b)
 

No person shall erect an awning having any vertical supports that are located in a city sidewalk unless:
 

(1)


(2)
 

A license agreement allowing such vertical supports to be located in the city sidewalk has been approved by a resolution adopted by the city council.
The license agreement shall be in form and substance approved by the city council and shall include: (i) execution by all parties holding any ownership or leasehold interest in the property to which such awning is attached, and such license agreement shall be binding on future owners or lessees of such property, (ii) indemnification of the city by the licensees and proof to the satisfaction of the City of Maplewood that the owners or lessees of such property shall maintain during the term of the license agreement comprehensive general liability insurance covering any and all claims of liability arising from the awning or vertical supports and naming the City of Maplewood as an additional insured, (iii) acknowledgement that neither the license agreement nor the location of the vertical supports in the sidewalk shall create any property right or interest; (iv) the absolute right of the city on 30 days' notice to revoke the license agreement for any reason or no reason at all, whereupon the vertical supports shall be removed from the sidewalk no later than 30 days after such notice of revocation.
 
(Code 1972, § 302.03(G); Code 1982, § 28-67; Ord. No. 5875, § I, 10-24-2017)


Sec. 42-98. - Outdoor dining.
 

The following standards address general provisions governing the placement of outdoor dining establishments associated with restaurants in which the restaurant is using public right-of-way or located on the sidewalk fronting the establishment:
 

(1)





(2)


(3)
 

Outdoor dining areas shall be arranged in such a way so as not to inhibit the safe movement of pedestrian traffic or handicapped access along such public sidewalks. A minimum sidewalk width shall maintain five feet of pedestrian clearance free of all obstacles including, but not limited to, tree wells, fire hydrants, newsboxes, for a clear path of travel. This five-foot clearance must be maintained on the sidewalks at all times.
Outdoor dining areas may not interfere with curbs, ramps or driveways and may not interfere with access to any building. This includes all means of ingress/egress. No element of outdoor dining can be placed below a fire escape or stairwell.
The permittee shall keep the outdoor dining areas and adjacent sidewalks clean and free of obstructions and refuse at all times.
 

a.	Food trays or carts, receptacles for dirty dishes, trays or carts for utensils and also cooking appliances shall not be placed or stored on any portion of the outdoor dining area.
b.	No service stations may be placed on any part of the outdoor dining area.
 

(4)
 

Outdoor dining areas that front a public right-of-way must have a pedestrian barrier completely enclosing the outdoor area, including all tables and chairs, except for ingress/egress to the restaurant.
 
a.	Pedestrian barriers must be sturdy and stable. They must have sufficient weight so that they cannot tip over or be blown over.

b.	Pedestrian barriers cannot be permanently attached to the sidewalk.

c.	Pedestrian barriers must be at least 30 inches high.
 

(5)



(6)
 

The outdoor dining season is from March 1 to November 30. All outdoor dining establishments must cease operation annually on November 30 and remove and store all pedestrian barriers, furniture and other related outside items (until at least March 1 of the following year). Barriers and other outdoor related dining furniture may not be stored on the exterior of the building.
Annual permit process.
 

a.	All participating restaurants require an outdoor dining permit subject to the review and approval of the city. The permit is renewable by the city on an annual basis. If the city chooses not to renew the permit, then a notice will be sent by February 1 of the outdoor dining season stating the reasons therefor.
b.	City staff will review all permit applications and supporting materials for conformance with the foregoing standards and aesthetic impact, and inform the applicant of any deficiencies and measures to correct. The staff has the discretion to require city council approval of any or all applications for permit. Staff has the right to accept or reject any permit applications. Any restaurant denied an outdoor dining permit by staff may appeal to the city council.

(Ord. No. 5156, § I, 2-10-2004)


Secs. 42-99—42-124. - Reserved.


ARTICLE V. - SIDEWALKS



Sec. 42-125. - Applicability of article.

This article shall apply to all sidewalks, including parkways and approaches. (Code 1972, § 503.02(A); Code 1982, § 28-81)

Sec. 42-126. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Approach or sidewalk approach means the extension of a sidewalk at a corner lot from the property line each way to the street curb line, and shall be the connection across the parkway or intervening space between the corner of the property and the crossing in the street.

(Code 1972, § 503.02(B); Code 1982, § 28-82)


Sec. 42-127. - Repair, etc.—Responsibility for; notice.

 
(a)
 
Whenever the city council shall, by ordinance, order the construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk or approach, including necessary grading, filling or parking, the director of public works or his delegate shall cause written notice of such order to be given the owner of the property adjacent to the sidewalk or space affected. Such notice may be served upon the owner or his representative, whether such person is
 

within or outside the city, and whether such person is or is not a resident of the city, in any manner that conforms to the provisions for service of process in the laws of the state.
 
(b)


(c)
 
No person who has received a notice as provided in this section shall fail or neglect to construct, reconstruct or repair such sidewalk as provided in the order and notice to which this section refers.
If the owner of the property referred to herein cannot be found or notified, or fails or refuses to begin the work specified in the order and notice provided herein, then, after 15 days from the date that notice was given or published has passed:
 
(1)



(2)


(3)

(4)
 
If the order and notice call for construction or reconstruction, and if there is a contractor with an annual contract with the city for the building of sidewalks, the director of public works or his delegate shall notify him and call upon him to do the work required in the notice and order provided herein;
If the order and notice call for construction or reconstruction and no such contractor with an annual contract with the city for the building of sidewalks exists, the director of public works or his delegate shall proceed according to the provisions of s e c t i o n 4 2 - 1 2 8 ;
If the order and notice call for repair, the director of public works or his delegate shall repair such sidewalk or approach;

The cost of such work shall be levied as a special assessment, and special tax bills shall issue therefor as provided in this chapter.
 

(Code 1972, § 503.03; Code 1982, § 28-83)


Sec. 42-128. - Same—Bids; estimates.

 
(a)






(b)






(c)


(d)


(e)
 
If there is no contractor with an annual contract with the city to build sidewalks, then after notice as provided in s e c t i o n 4 2 - 1 2 7 has been given and the period of 15 days provided for therein has elapsed, and the person to whom the notice was given has not begun or caused to be begun the work specified in the order and notice, then the director of public works or his delegate shall advertise for bids for the doing of the work required in such order and notice, in at least one issue of a weekly newspaper or at least two consecutive issues of a daily newspaper published in the city, or if there is no such newspaper, then in some newspaper published in the county.
The bids received under the provisions of this section shall not be opened until ten days have passed from the date of the first publication of the advertisement for bids, nor shall such bids be opened until the director of public works or any other proper person designated by the city council by ordinance, has prepared and filed an estimate of the quantities of grading and filling, of the various materials required for the sidewalk in  front of each separate lot, tract or parcel of land, of the cost of the work per cubic yard or square yard, and of the cost of the removal of any obstruction.
After the bids are opened by the city council, the contract shall be let to the lowest and best responsible bidder and, if no bids are received or if all bids are rejected, the city council may readvertise, or may order the director of public works or some person to do the work.
The cost of the work shall not exceed the estimate filed as provided in subsection (b) of this section, nor shall any bid be accepted for an amount in excess of that estimate.
The contractor shall keep an accurate account of the cost of the separate items involved in the work, and the city council shall pay for labor and material and for all other costs out of any funds then available for that purpose, and upon completion of the work, the city council shall levy the cost thereof as a special assessment and shall issue tax bills as provided for in this chapter.
 
(Code 1972, § 503.04; Code 1982, § 28-84)


Sec. 42-129. - Permit.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)
 
No contractor or owner shall construct, reconstruct or repair, or cause to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired, any sidewalk in the city without first obtaining a permit from the director of public works.
The application for a permit shall state the name of each owner of the property abutting the sidewalk or proposed sidewalk, the amount of the sidewalk to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired, and a description of the abutting property.
The permit shall be issued upon approval by the director of public works, and the payment of a fee as follows:
 

(1)

(2)
 

For the first 100 square feet or less: $5.00;

For each square foot over 100 square feet: $0.05.
 

(d)
 

The permit shall be issued only to the holder of a sidewalk layer's license issued by the city.
 

(Code 1972, § 503.05; Code 1982, § 28-85; Ord. No. 3896, § 1, 8-8-1977)


Sec. 42-130. - License required; bond; fee.

 
(a)


(b)

(c)
 
No person shall construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk upon or along any street or highway in the city unless he has a valid license as a sidewalk layer.
The application for a license shall be submitted to the city clerk.

The license shall be issued by the city clerk upon the payment of $50.00, after the applicant has shown to the satisfaction of the director of public works that he is qualified and experienced in doing that type of work.
 

(d)


(e)
 

The license shall be valid for one year beginning July 1 and ending June 30. The license may be revoked by the city council after a hearing of which d proper notice is given the licensee, for failure of the licensee to observe any of the provisions or specifications of the applicable provisions of this ch
The licensee hereunder shall give a bond to the city at the time the license is issued, in the sum of $1,500.00, with sufficient sureties and  approved by the mayor, contingent upon his observing all of the provisions of this Code relating to streets and sidewalks, maintaining signals and protecting exposed signals, and observing all laws and regulations relating to those engaged in the work for which he is licensed, and that bond shall be to indemnify and save harmless the city from all suits, claims and actions of any kind against the city for injuries or damages received or sustained from the acts of the licensee, his employees, servants or agents, in doing work of constructing, reconstructing or repairing any
sidewalk, or by reason of any act or omission of the licensee or his employees, servants or agents. The bond shall also be contingent upon the replacement or repair by the licensee of defective work caused by faulty construction, and prompt removal of all refuse, surplus earth or debris from the site of work.
 
(Code 1972, § 503.06; Code 1982, § 28-86)


Sec. 42-131. - Grade must be established.

No sidewalk shall be ordered constructed by the city council until the grade of the street has been established by ordinance. (Code 1972, § 503.07; Code 1982, § 28-87)

Sec. 42-132. - Work to be carried on with reasonable dispatch.

Every owner, his agent or contractor, who shall commence work under the provisions of this article shall carry on the work with reasonable dispatch, to avoid unreasonable obstruction to public use.

(Code 1972, § 503.08; Code 1982, § 28-88)


Sec. 42-133. - Liability for faulty work; one-year period.

If any sidewalk shall become out of repair within one year after the work has been accepted by the director of public works because of faulty construction, the contractor shall replace or repair the sidewalk when so ordered by the city council. If such contractor fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this section, and does not commence work within 15 days after such order is served upon him, the city shall cause such work to be done and the contractor and the sureties on his bond shall be liable for the cost. Refusal to comply with the order of the city council or failure to commence work within a period of 15 days after such order is served shall be grounds for revocation of that contractor's license issued under the provisions of this article. For the purposes of this section, notice shall be sufficient if it is served in accordance with the standards for service of process in the laws of the state.

(Code 1972, § 503.09; Code 1982, § 28-89)


Sec. 42-134. - Specifcations for work.

All work done under the provisions of this article by any licensee, his agents or employees, shall be subject to specifications as promulgated by the director of public works from time to time, subject to approval by the city council.

(Code 1972, § 503.10; Code 1982, § 28-90)


Secs. 42-135—42-151. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



Sec. 42-152. - Resolution and publication required.

 
(a)





(b)
 
No improvement shall be made for which a special tax is to be levied unless the city council shall declare by resolution that such work or improvement is necessary, shall cause plans and specifications for such work to be prepared by the director of public works or other proper officer and filed with the city clerk for public inspection, and shall cause the resolution provided for herein to be published in a newspaper with general circulation in the city, for two consecutive issues in a weekly paper or seven consecutive issues in a daily paper.
No improvements shall be made if a majority of the resident owners of the property liable to taxation therefor at the date of the passage of the resolution, who own a majority of the front feet owned by residents of the city abutting on the street, highway or alley to be improved, file a protest against such improvement with the city clerk.
 
(1)

(2)
 
No such protest may be filed after a period of ten days after the passage of the resolution.

A finding by ordinance that a majority of the resident owners of property liable to taxation therefor who also own a majority of the front feet owned by residents of the city abutting on the street, highway or alley to be improved have not filed the protest provided in this subsection,
 

shall be conclusive after the execution of the contract for the improvement, and no special tax bill shall be invalidated for the reason that a proper protest was timely filed under the provisions of this subsection.
 
(c)



(d)



(e)
 
If the improvement is properly authorized and no timely protest has been filed, the city council shall cause a contract for the work to be let to the lowest and best bidder, on the basis of the plans and specifications filed by the director of public works or other proper person as provided in subsection (a) of this section. Advertisement for such bids shall be made for at least one week in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
The requirements of this section shall not apply to the repair or other paving, macadamizing, curbing or guttering of any street or any part of any street. The proper officers may, with or without notice, as may be authorized by ordinance or by resolution, cause the work to be done, keep an account of the cost of such work, and report it to the council for assessment.
This section shall not apply to the repair, reconstruction or construction of sidewalks.
 

(Code 1972, § 502.01; Code 1982, § 28-101)


Sec. 42-153. - Public and other property liable to tax.

 
(a)


(b)



(c)
 
All county or other public property, and all cemeteries and railroad rights-of-way shall be subject to liens imposed under the provisions of this article in the same manner as is other property.
Any county or city owning property of any kind subject to the lien imposed under the provisions of this article shall pay its proportionate share of the cost of the work and improvement authorized by this chapter and a special tax bill shall be issued against such county or city. The city or county may be sued upon the tax bill by the holder or owner of that bill in case of default.
No property held for public use shall be sold to enforce a lien imposed under the provisions of this article, but the judgment on any tax bill shall be the same as any ordinary judgment at law against the city or county for recovery of money, and the enforcement of that judgment shall be in the same manner as the enforcement of money judgments against cities or counties.
 
(Code 1972, § 502.02; Code 1982, § 28-102)


Sec. 42-154. - Streets improved by city.

Whenever the council shall determine that paving, curbing, guttering, macadamizing or repairing on any street or part thereof is necessary, and that such work should be done by the city, the city council shall, by ordinance, require the director of public works to do the necessary work. The officer in charge of the work shall keep an accurate account of the cost of that work, and shall report the cost to the city council in order that the appropriate assessment may be made against each lot, in accordance with the provisions of this article.

(Code 1972, § 502.03; Code 1982, § 28-103)


Sec. 42-155. - Report of director of public works.

The following information shall be given the city council by the director of public works upon acceptance of work of a contractor as described in s e c t i o n 4 2 - 
 1 5 4 , or upon completion of the work done by the city under the supervision of the director of public works:

 
(1)

(2)


(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)
 
The name of each person owning any lot or piece of land fronting upon the sidewalk or street, or abutting on the alley under this article; The number of front feet owned by such person or the number of feet abutting upon the alley, street or sidewalk, and a description of the
property so fronting or abutting;

The distance of the improvement or construction;

The number of feet in each block fronting or abutting on the street, alley or sidewalk; The cost of the work for each block, stated separately;
The cost of improvement of each square or area formed by the crossing of streets.
 

(Code 1972, § 502.04; Code 1982, § 28-104)


Sec. 42-156. - Levy.

 
(a)
 
Whenever the improvement or work described in s e c t i o n 4 2 - 1 5 4 shall have been accepted or whenever such work shall have been completed by the city under the supervision of the director of public works, the council shall, by ordinance, levy a special assessment on each block separately against each lot or piece of ground abutting on the sidewalk or on either side of the street, alley or highway or part thereof, upon which such improvement has been completed or accepted.
 
(1)



(2)
 
In the case of streets, highways or alleys the levy shall include the cost of any improvement adjacent to any square or area thereon up to the center of the middle thereof, and shall be made against each owner of land fronting or abutting on either side of such street, highway or alley.
In the case of squares and areas formed by the crossing or meeting of streets and other highways, or connections therewith, the levy shall be made as follows: The area shall be divided into parts or portions by lines drawn lengthwise along the middle of each of the intersecting
 

streets or highways, and the cost of each such part or portion shall be levied as a special assessment against the block or square contiguous to it, and prorated against the lots or pieces of land in such block or square abutting on the improved street.
 
(3)



(4)
 
The levy against each owner shall be that proportion of the whole cost of the improvement or work assessed against each block which the number of feet fronting or abutting upon that street, highway, alley or sidewalk, bears to the whole number of feet fronting or abutting on such street, highway, alley or sidewalk.
When any owner of property fronting on any street, alley or highway where such improvements are made, with the consent of the city council or director of public works, has constructed guttering and curbing in front of his property in the manner provided in the contract or ordinance providing for such improvement, and in a manner approved by the director of public works, the cost of the curbing and guttering estimated at the same price per foot as that done under the contract or by the city in the rest of the block shall be added to the total cost of the work done, and the owner shall be credited with the amount so determined.
 
(b)
 
The ordinance levying the special assessment shall set forth the names of each of the owners of property which is assessed, an accurate description of each lot or piece of ground, the number of feet fronting or abutting on the street, highway, alley or sidewalk, the total cost of the improvement or work done assessed against each block separately, and the amount of special tax levied against each lot or piece of ground, for which amount each property owner is liable.
 
(Code 1972, § 502.05; Code 1982, § 28-105)


Sec. 42-157. - Special tax bills—Issuance; interest; lien.

 
(a)
 
The tax bills issued under this article shall be signed by the city clerk. They shall be sealed by the city clerk with the seal of the city.
 

(1)

(2)
 

The tax bills shall be issued in numerical order.

The tax bills shall contain the following information:
 

a.	An accurate description of the lot or piece of land assessed;

b.	The number of feet of the land that abut or front upon the street, alley, highway or sidewalk;

c.	The cost of the work per foot fronting or abutting;

d.	The amount of special tax assessed and levied hereunder against the owner.
 

(b)

(c)

(d)


(e)
 

Each tax bill shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per year after 30 days from its date and notice of its issuance, until paid. Each tax bill shall constitute a lien upon the lot or piece of ground described therein until it is paid.
Notice that the tax bill has been issued shall be delivered or mailed to each owner at his last known address, and shall state the amount of the tax bill and the rate of interest.
Tax bills shall be subject to any valid defense for mistake or error in any respect, and, in the case of work done by the city under the supervision of the director of public works, for the reason that the work was not done in a good and workmanlike manner.
 
(Code 1972, § 502.06; Code 1982, § 28-106)


Sec. 42-158. - Same—Assignable; collection.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Special tax bills shall be assignable and may be collected in a suit in any court of competent jurisdiction, instituted in the name of the city to the use of the holder. In no event shall the city be liable for costs arising out of such suits.
In any lawsuit to enforce collection of a tax bill, the tax bill shall be prima facie evidence of the regularity of the proceedings for the special assessment, of the validity of the tax bill, of the completion of the work and furnishing of materials charged for, and the liability of the lot or piece of ground against which the assessment is made for the amount of the tax in the tax bill.
 
(Code 1972, § 502.07; Code 1982, § 28-107)


Sec. 42-159. - Same—When payment in installments permitted.

 
(a)



(b)


(c)

(d)


(e)


(f)
 
The tax levied under the provisions of this article against any person may be paid in three annual installments if, within 20 days after the contract for such work is let or the city commences work, the owner notifies the city clerk in writing that he wishes to pay the tax in three annual installments.
After receiving the notice provided for in this section, and after the special assessment has been made, the city clerk shall make out three special tax bills, each of which bills shall be for one third of the special assessment.
Each tax bill shall bear interest at 12 percent from the date of issuance.

Such tax bills as are issued under the provisions of this section shall be delivered to the contractor for the work, if a contractor did the work, who shall give a receipt therefor to the mayor.
Each such tax bill shall be a lien upon the property therein described and such lien shall continue for one year from the maturity of the tax bill last becoming due, or until such tax bill is paid, or until the final determination of any legal proceeding to collect the bill, whichever is sooner.
No suit on a tax bill issued under the provisions of this section may be brought until all of the bills issued hereunder are matured.
 

(Code 1972, § 502.08; Code 1982, § 28-108)


Sec. 42-160. - Same—Abstracts; amendments; etc.

 
(a)





(b)
 
After issuance of any tax bill, the city council may amend or correct any tax bills issued under this article for any defect or imperfection of form or substance and in actions thereon no omissions or errors made by the council, city clerk or other officers in any of the proceedings on such tax bills, or relating to the improvements for which they were issued, and not affecting the substantial merits of action thereon shall constitute a defense.
After the issuance of the tax bills, the clerk shall enter in a book kept for that purpose, an abstract of those tax bills. The abstract shall state the date and amount of the tax bill, number of running front feet of the property levied on, and block and streets, name of the owner and rate of interest, and also the name of contractor, where the work is done under contract; but the omission of the clerk to make such abstract or any defect therein shall not in anywise affect or impair the validity of the tax bills.
 
(Code 1972, § 502.09; Code 1982, § 28-109)


Secs. 42-161—42-188. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VII. - TEMPORARY OCCUPATION



Sec. 42-189. - Permit.

 
(a)
 
Required. No person shall occupy or obstruct any street, highway, alley or sidewalk unless he has a valid permit issued by the director of public works.
 
(1)


(2)


(3)
 
The permit shall be issued only upon presentation of a building permit authorizing the work to be done in connection with which temporary occupation of the street, highway, alley or sidewalk is sought.
The permit may be issued only for temporary occupation of a street, highway, alley or sidewalk for any purpose in connection with the erection, removal, alteration or repair of any building or other structure.
The permit may be issued only upon a deposit by the applicant of the amount of $100.00, without regard to the number of permits sought or issued, from which deposit may be taken amounts to defray expenses caused by the failure of the person to whom the permit was issued to keep the public way clean and in an orderly condition during the time for which the permit was issued. The permittee shall be notified in case the amount of the deposit is diminished in any way, and that person shall be required to pay a sufficient amount to the city clerk to bring the deposit up to the original total of $100.00. Refusal to pay such amount to the clerk shall result in the immediate revocation of the permit, and further occupation of the street, highway, alley or sidewalk shall be unlawful and a public nuisance.
 
(b)


(c)



(d)
 
Scope. The permit shall not authorize occupation of any sidewalk, street, alley or highway directly in front of or in the rear of a building for which the permit is issued.
Extension. If the written consent of and a waiver of claims or damages against the city by the owners of the property abutting the side of the proposed building is obtained and filed with the city clerk, permission to occupy the roadway may be extended beyond the limits of the building upon the same terms and conditions fixed herein for streets, highways, alleys and sidewalks in front of or in the rear of building sites themselves.
Refund of deposit. The deposit provided for in this section may be withdrawn by the depositor after the director of public works has certified to the city clerk a voucher for the unexpended balance of the deposit, if the occupied area has been cleaned and restored as required by this article to the satisfaction of the director of public works. The depositor shall give a receipt to the city clerk for the amount returned.
 
(Code 1972, § 506.01; Code 1982, § 28-121)


Sec. 42-190. - Regulations.

 
(a)


(b)



(c)

(d)



(e)
 
A permittee under this article shall keep the street, highway, alley and sidewalk adjacent to the premises whereon the operations are carried on under the building permit in a clean and orderly condition during the time the permit is in effect.
After the expiration of the permit, or the completion of the work, whichever is sooner, or upon the request of the director of public works, the permittee shall remove all materials and rubbish from the street, highway, alley and sidewalk, so that such public way is in a clean and orderly condition.
No building materials, earth or rubbish may be placed outside the limits provided in the permit, nor within four feet of a fire hydrant.

During the progress of the operations under the building permit, not more than two-thirds of the sidewalk in front of the premises of the building for which the permit is issued may be obstructed at any time. If there are excavations on either side of such sidewalk, the sidewalk shall be protected by a substantial railing.
The occupation of the street, highway, alley or sidewalk for the temporary storage of building materials shall never exceed, in front of any one building, one-fourth the width of the roadway, and in streets containing railroad tracks, such occupation shall not exceed one-half the distance from the curb to the nearest rail.
 

 
(f)

(g)

(h)


(i)

(j)


(k)
 
The occupation of any public alley shall not exceed one-half the width of the alley.

Asphalt and bituminous pavements shall be protected with a covering before any material is placed upon it.

Earth taken from excavations and rubbish taken from buildings may not be stored upon sidewalks or roadways, and must be removed as rapidly as it is produced, from day to day.
Where dry rubbish that is apt to produce dust is handled, it must be kept wetted down to prevent it from being blown or scattered.

Red lanterns shall be displayed and maintained during the whole of every night from each end of every pile of material, and at each end of excavation.
The director of public works may clean the occupied area, and otherwise bring the area into compliance with the provisions of this article at the expense of the permittee.
 
(Code 1972, § 506.02; Code 1982, § 28-122)


Sec. 42-191. - Obstruction caused by burning of building.

Whenever the sidewalk is obstructed by debris or rubbish from the burning of any building, the owner of that building shall cause the debris or rubbish to be removed within 72 hours thereafter. All serviceable material collected after the burning of the building may be placed upon the street in front of the property except that the space occupied shall not exceed that permissible under a permit issued under the provisions of this article, and such occupation may not last for over one week unless a building permit is taken out for the reconstruction of the building and a permit under the provisions of this article is taken out.

(Code 1972, § 506.03; Code 1982, § 28-123)


Secs. 42-192—42-220. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VIII. - USE PERMITS



Sec. 42-221. - Required for wires, conduits, cables and poles.

 
(a)

(b)


(c)



(d)


(e)


(f)

(g)


(h)
 
No person shall lay or repair conduits or any appurtenances, or erect poles or string wires in the city unless he has a valid permit therefor.

A permit under the provisions of this section may be given by the director of public works for laying and repairing conduits and all necessary appurtenances and for the erection of poles and the stringing of wires for the purpose of transmitting electricity or communications of any kind.
The applicant shall submit an application in writing, together with a permit fee of $100.00, setting out the place where and purpose for which the wires, conduits or poles are to be placed or strung, and if practical, furnish drawings or sketches of the proposed plan of construction or laying of the proposed conduits or wires.
The director of public works may give permission to repair or change any conduit, wire or pole, or any of their appurtenances, upon such terms as may to him be reasonable.
The city council may at any time order, by resolution or ordinance, any person to alter, remove or change any wires, conduits or poles now in existence or hereafter constructed.
Disputes arising under this section may be presented to the city council for settlement.

Permits granted under the provisions of this article shall be in addition to any permit that may be required under the provisions of article II of this chapter relating to excavations in public streets, highways or alleys.
Any permit granted under this article is a license revocable by the city and the city reserves the right at anytime or from time to time to revoke the permit, change the conditions, or impose other obligations or limitations (including other or additional rental fees) on the permit holder. The permit holder, as a user fee for use of public property, shall pay an annual rental fee to the city of $1.70 per linear foot for all wires, conduits or cables or other equipment placed, laid or strung under, above or on the right-of-way or other public property of the city. Said fee is due and payable on July 1, as to all wires, conduits, cables or other equipment existing as of the immediately prior May 1. Permits granted under this article may not be assigned. The permit holder waives any claims against the city for damage to person or property, and agrees to indemnify and
hold the city harmless from and against any loss or damage (including attorney's fees) arising from the permit holder's location of wires, conduits, cables or other equipment pursuant to a permit under this chapter.
 
(Code 1972, § 507.01; Code 1982, § 28-136; Ord. No. 4959, §§ I, II, 9-26-2000)


Secs. 42-222—42-250. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IX. - NEWS BOXES



Sec. 42-251. - Deinitions.
 

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Distributor means any person, association of persons, firm, or corporation responsible, in whole or part, jointly or severally, for locating, placing, installing, stocking or maintaining a newspaper vending box or printed material distribution device in any public right-of-way or public place in the city.

News box means any self-service box, container, storage unit or other dispenser, either coin-operated or operated free of charge, placed, used or maintained for the display, free distribution or sale of newspapers, news periodicals, news magazines or other printed material.

Printed material means any printed reading material offered for distribution in a news box including, but not limited to, newspapers and publications used solely for the purpose of advertising goods, products, services, real estate for rent, sale or lease or information on employment.

Right-of-way means the area of any street, tree lawn and sidewalk dedicated for public use.

Sidewalk means any surface provided for the use of pedestrians within the public right-of-way.

Tree lawn means any lawn area located between the curb or street pavement and the sidewalk, or the lawn area between the street pavement and the limit of the public right-of-way.

(Code 1982, § 28-151; Ord. No. 5164, § I, 4-13-2004)


Sec. 42-252. - Violations.

 
(a)










(b)



(c)
 
The director of public works shall notify the distributor of any news box placed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article. Notification shall be made by placement of a notice of violation on the news box and by mailing said notice by first class mail to the distributor listing the date of the notice, the violation, an order to correct the violation, the penalty for failure to correct the violation, and the right to appeal the determination of violation. If the violation is not corrected or the notice is not appealed within ten days of the date of the notice, the director of public works shall cause the impoundment of the news box and placement in a place of safe storage for 30 days. Within three days after impoundment of a news box, the director of public works shall send notice by first class mail to the distributor advising the distributor of the violation and the whereabouts of the news box. Any news box that has been impounded and has not been retrieved by the distributor within 30 days shall be remanded to the custody of the chief of police, who shall dispose of it in accordance with the regulations set forth in s e c t i o n 3 2 - 2 1 .
If the distributor wishes to appeal a notice of violation, a hearing shall be conducted by the city manager, or his designee. The city manager, or his designee, after hearing the statements of all interested parties, shall issue an order supported by the information presented at the hearing. The decision of the city manager or his designee shall be the final decision of the city.
Violation of any provision of this article may be prosecuted in municipal court, and shall be punishable upon conviction with any penalty set forth in s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 .
 
(Code 1982, § 28-158; Ord. No. 5164, § I, 4-13-2004)


Sec. 42-253. - Permit for placement required; procedure for processing.

 
(a)


(b)

(c)
 
No news box shall be located or placed within any public right-of-way within the city unless a permit has been issued therefor by the city in conformance with the provisions of this article.
Applications for a permit under this section shall be made available by the city clerk.

Within seven days of receipt of an application for a permit under this section, the city clerk shall cause the director of public works to inspect the public right-of-way at the proposed location of the news box. If the proposed location of the news box complies with regulations contained in
 s e c t i o n 4 2 - 2 5 7 , the director of public works shall transmit this information to the city clerk who shall issue a permit after payment of the appropriate fees. If the proposed location of the news box does not comply with the regulations contained in s e c t i o n 4 2 - 2 5 7 , the director of public works shall, within seven days of the receipt of the application for a permit, deny the application and state the reasons in writing for such denial.
 
(Code 1982, § 28-152; Ord. No. 5164, § I, 4-13-2004)


Sec. 42-254. - Placed prior to efective date of ordinance.

All news boxes located within the public right-of-way prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall comply with the provisions of this article or be removed by the distributor within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived.

(Code 1982, § 28-153; Ord. No. 5164, § I, 4-13-2004)


Sec. 42-255. - Permit fee.
 

The fee for use of the public right-of-way for placement of a news box at any location as permitted herein shall be $25.00 per year per news box. This fee shall be separate from any fee assessed for coin-operated vending machines or for an occupation license as set forth in s e c t i o n 1 4 - 2 1 . The permittee shall make payment of this fee to the city clerk at the time of the initial approval of a news box permit, and shall make payment of the permit fee annually  before July 1 for the 12-month period beginning July 1.

(Code 1982, § 28-154; Ord. No. 5164, § I, 4-13-2004)


Sec. 42-256. - Permit conditions.

Issuance of the new box permit by the city clerk shall be subject to and granted upon compliance by the distributor with the following conditions, restrictions and requirements:
 

(1)


(2)

(3)



(4)







(5)


(6)

(7)
 

The permittee shall utilize a news box not exceeding 50 inches in height, and with sufficient weight as to prevent the news box from being moved or blown down by windstorms.
The permittee shall place and maintain the news box in conformity with s e c t i o n 4 2 - 2 5 7 .

The permittee shall post his name, address and business telephone number in a conspicuous place on the news box so that the public may report a malfunction or secure a refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin return mechanism or to report damage or destruction of the news box.
The permittee shall maintain the news box in good working order; reasonably free of dirt, grease and graffiti; reasonably free of chipped, cracked, peeling or faded paint; reasonably free of rust or corrosion; the clear plastic parts thereof, if any, through which the printed materials therein are viewed, shall be clear, unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration; the door through which the newspapers or printed materials are obtained shall be constructed so that it automatically closes securely after opening to prevent printed materials from falling or blowing onto the right-of-way; and the structural parts thereof shall not be broken or unduly misshapen.
The permittee shall not place or allow to be placed any advertising or publicity on the news box except the name of the printed material distributed therein.
The permittee shall locate the news box only at the location described and approved in the application for the permit. The permittee shall pay all fees due to the city within the specified time period.
 

(Code 1982, § 28-155; Ord. No. 5164, § I, 4-13-2004)


Sec. 42-257. - Location and placement.

No news box shall be placed, installed, located, used or maintained:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)



(7)


(8)

(9)
 
Within 1½ feet of the face of any curb; Within five feet of any fire hydrant; Within five feet of any marked crosswalk;
Within 12 feet of the intersection of the property lines at any street corner as required by s e c t i o n 5 6 - 3 5 ;

At any location where the width of the paved clear space in any direction for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet;

On any tree lawn, except where a building permit is issued for construction of a concrete walk in the tree lawn area for the placement of a news box, so that the news box is placed and is accessed by the public on the concrete walk, provided written approval is obtained from the owner of the property immediately adjacent to the tree lawn;
That is chained or otherwise secured to any tree, utility pole, light standard, traffic control device, street sign post or other public property or private property;
Within the right-of-way surrounding any city park; or

Within 500 feet of another news box or group of news boxes located in the same street block and on the same side of the street; and in those situations where a street block is less than 500 feet in length, within 500 feet of another news box or group of news boxes on the same side of the street; unless in each case such news box is to be placed, installed, located, used and maintained immediately adjacent to such other news box or group of news boxes.
 

(Code 1982, § 28-156; Ord. No. 5164, § I, 4-13-2004)


Sec. 42-258. - Multiple news box locations.

 
(a)
 
Where two or more distributors make application for a permit to place a news box at the same location on the following street rights-of-way, the distributors shall be required to place the news boxes behind a screen designed and constructed for that purpose by the city, so as to reduce the
 

negative effects of multiple news boxes on the various city projects and programs designed to enhance the streetscape appearance in such areas. The streets are Manchester Avenue and Manchester Road, Big Bend Boulevard, between Folk Avenue and Flora Avenue, and Sutton Boulevard, south of Manchester Avenue, and on all streets intersecting with the above referenced streets within 100 feet of the street intersections.
 
(b)
 
The screen, which shall be property of the city and maintained by the city, shall be three-sided with the sidewalk side open, uniform in design throughout the city, and aesthetically pleasing. The design of the news box screen shall be approved by the design and review board employing the criteria set forth in  s e c t i o n  1 2 - 7 0 .
 
(Code 1982, § 28-157; Ord. No. 5164, § I, 4-13-2004)


Sec. 42-259. - Abandonment.

If, for a period of 30 consecutive days, a news box remains empty or the printed material is not changed in accordance with its publishing schedule, said news box shall be deemed abandoned and may be removed in accordance with the provisions of  s e c t i o n  4 2 - 2 5 2 .

(Code 1982, § 28-159; Ord. No. 5164, § I, 4-13-2004)


Sec. 42-260. - Revocation of permit.

 
(a)
 
A news box permit may be revoked for a period of time not to exceed one year for any of the following occurrences:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement contained in the application for a permit;

More than three violations of any provision of the permit granted to the permittee over a period of one or more years; or More than three violations of any provision of this article over a period of one or more years.
 
(b)
 
A news box permit may be revoked only after a hearing is conducted by city manager, or his designee. The distributor shall be given written  notice of the hearing at least 15 days prior. The city manager, or his designee, after hearing all interested parties, shall make a determination that one or more of the above referenced conditions has occurred and issue an order supported by the information presented at the hearing. If the news box permit is revoked, the permittee may reapply after the expiration of the revocation time period. The decision of the city manager, or his designee, shall be appealable to the circuit court.
 
(Code 1982, § 28-160; Ord. No. 5164, § I, 4-13-2004)


Chapter 44 - SUBDIVISIONS


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Sec. 44-1. - Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to control the division of land within the corporate area of the city in order to promote the public health, safety and general welfare; to further the orderly development of land; to establish accurate records of land subdivisions; to facilitate adequate and coordinated provisions for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; and to preserve natural features and historic landmarks.

(Code 1982, § 28.5-2; Ord. No. 4447, § 2, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-2. - Approval of plats.

Every subdivision of land within the corporate area of the city shall be shown on a plat and submitted to the city for its approval or disapproval in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No plat shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds, and no lots shall be sold from such plat unless and until it is approved as provided for in this chapter.

(Code 1982, § 28.5-3; Ord. No. 4447, § 3, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-3. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Accepted public street means any street duly accepted by the city, the county or the state for maintenance. Approved street means any street, whether public or private, meeting standards and specifications of the city. Building line means a line on a plat between which the line and the street no buildings or structures may be erected.
 

Collector street means a street intended to move traffic from minor streets to the major highway system.

Commission means the plan and zoning commission of the city.

Condominium plat means a plat prepared in accordance with the provisions of RSMo ch. 448.

Council means the city council of the city.

Expressway or freeway means a street intended to carry through traffic and to which owners or occupants of abutting lands have no right of access except at such points and such manner as designated by the public authority controlling such facility.

Frontage means all the property abutting on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street; or if the street is dead ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.

Frontage road means a publicly or privately maintained roadway contiguous to and generally paralleling an accepted public street and established for the purposes of reducing points of access to or eliminating the parking of vehicles on the accepted public street.

Major highway means a street intended to carry through traffic to and from major traffic generators such as large shopping areas and major employment centers.

Metes and bounds means a system of describing and identifying land by measure (metes) and directions (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference such as a survey monument, the corner of intersecting streets or other permanent feature.

Minor street means any street which is not an expressway or freeway, major highway or collector street.

Plat means a map or drawing on which the plan of a subdivision is presented and which is intended to be submitted for approval and recordation in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.

Private street means any street that is under the jurisdiction of a private board of trustees or any street that is privately owned.

Roadway means the paved area existing on the street right-of-way. The width of such paved area is measured at right angles to the centerline of the street.

Street means a public or private right-of-way that affords the principal means of access to abutting property. The width of a street is the distance between property lines measured at right angles to the centerline of the right-of-way.

Subdivision means the division of any land, vacant or improved, into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, transfer of ownership, lease or development either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and conditions, including resubdivision. The term "subdivision" includes the division or development of residential and nonresidential zoned land, whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map, plat or other recorded instrument. The term "subdivision" further includes the dedication or establishment of a public or private street through a tract of land.

Subdivision, minor, means a subdivision that establishes not more than four lots and which meets all of the following requirements:

 
(1)


(2)

(3)

(4)
 
The proposed subdivision does not include and this chapter does not require any improvement other than sidewalks. (A right-of-way dedication for the widening of an accepted public street shall not be considered an improvement for this purpose.)
The proposed subdivision does not include a provision for common land or recreation facilities.

The proposed subdivision does not adversely affect the development of the parcel proposed for subdivision or of adjoining property. The proposed subdivision is not in conflict with any provision of this chapter, the zoning ordinance or any other ordinance of the city.
 

(Code 1982, § 28.5-4; Ord. No. 4447, § 4, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-4. - Enforcement.

 
(a)


(b)





(c)



(d)
 
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded by the county recorder of deeds or have any validity until it shall have been approved in the manner prescribed herein.
The building official shall not issue building or repair permits for any structure located on a lot in any subdivision, the plat of which has been prepared after April 25, 1990, but which has not been approved in accordance with the provisions contained herein; neither shall any building or repair permit be issued for a structure located on a lot which has been created, sold or transferred after April 25, 1990, in violation of this chapter.
The council shall not permit any public improvements over which it has any control to be made or any money expended for improvements in any area that has been subdivided or upon any street that has been platted after April 25, 1990, unless such subdivision or street has been approved in accordance with the provisions contained herein.
Any person who sells or attempts to sell a lot in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in
 c h a p t e r 3 4 for each sale or attempted sale.
 

(Code 1982, § 28.5-22; Ord. No. 4447, § 22, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-5. - Preliminary plan—Generally.

 
(a)
 
Prior to subdividing or resubdividing any tract or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city, the owner or his authorized agent shall submit to the plan and zoning commission an application, together with copies of a preliminary plan of the proposed subdivision in the quantity designated by the commission. (See s e c t i o n 4 4 - 1 5 for a minor subdivision.) A copy of the preliminary plan will be sent by the developer to each of the following offices for review and comment:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)


(10)

(11)

(12)
 
Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District. St. Louis County Health Department. Union Electric Company.
Laclede Gas Company.

St. Louis County Water Company. United States Postal Service. Southwestern Bell Telephone Company.
Maplewood-Richmond Heights School Board, Board of Education.

St. Louis County Department of Highway and Traffic or the Missouri Highway and Transportation Commission if access to the proposed subdivision is from a county or state road.
City fire and police departments.

City department of parks and recreation. Continental Cablevision, Incorporated.
 
(b)







(c)


(d)
 
The commission shall study the preliminary plan with respect to the minimum standards and requirements of the ordinances and in compliance with the city's comprehensive plan, as well as comments received from the above offices, and shall recommend approval, approval with conditions or rejection of such a plan to the city council within 60 days after the day of submission thereof unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time. If the commission does not act within such period of time, the preliminary plan shall be deemed approved; but such approval does not constitute acceptance of the subdivision final plat by the commission or the council. Preliminary plans that do not contain all required information will not be approved by the commission.
Preliminary plans approved by the commission shall be signed by the chairperson. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the commission's action on a preliminary plan.
The commission's approval of the preliminary plan shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of approval or such longer period as the director of public works with the approval of the plan and zoning commission based on the following criteria:
 
(1)


(2)
 
The extension is imperative for the developer to adequately coordinate compliance with transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds or other public requirements.
The extension is reasonable and necessary as determined by the plan and zoning commission.
 

(e)
 

If no final plat is submitted and approved within said two-year period or such longer period as approved by the plan and zoning commission and authorized by the director of public works, the approval of the preliminary plan shall expire.
 
(Code 1982, § 28.5-5; Ord. No. 4447, § 5, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-6. - Same—Scale and content.

The preliminary plan shall be drawn at any scale from one inch equals 20 feet through one inch equals 100 feet, so long as the scale is an increment of ten feet and shall contain the following information:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)


(4)
 

A key map showing the tract and its relation to the surrounding area. A north arrow and graphic scale.
The name proposed for the tract to be subdivided that shall be original and not a duplication of the name of any previously recorded subdivision or development in the county.
The date of submission to the city and the following names and addresses:
 

a.	The record owner or owners of the tract.

b.	The party who prepared the plan.

c.	The party for whom the plan was prepared.

d.	The engineer or land surveyor who will design any required improvements.
 

(5)

(6)
 

The approximate area of the tract stated in tenths of an acre.

Sufficient contour data to indicate the slope and drainage of the tract and the high and low points thereof. Contour data shall extend 150
 

feet beyond the limits of the subdivision boundaries. USGS data are acceptable.
 

(7)





(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)
 

The location of existing and proposed property lines and streets, watercourses, sink holes, areas within the tract subject to inundation by stormwater or within an area of special flood hazards as delineated by article III of c h a p t e r 2 2 , railroads, bridges, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, easements of record, existing buildings or other improvements that are to remain and significant natural features, such as wooded areas and rock formations.
The results of any tests made to ascertain subsurface rock and soil conditions and the water table.

U.S.	Survey township, range and section lines as well as zoning district, school district and other special districts in which the tract is located. Any proposed alteration, adjustment or change in the elevation or topography of any area.
Lot lines and approximate minimum and maximum size of lots into which the tract is proposed to be subdivided. Proposed type of treatment or method of sewage disposal.
If the developer intends to subdivide any portion of the parcel for use of multiple-dwelling units, then the preliminary plat shall, in addition, include the following data:
 
a.	Gross area of tract.

b.	Area in street.

c.	Net area of tract.

d.	Maximum number of units allowed.

e.	Maximum number of units proposed.

f.	Parking spaces per dwelling unit.

g.	Distance between structures.
 

(14)

(15)
 

A certification by the party who prepared the plan that the plan is a correct and an accurate representation of the matters shown thereon. An environmental impact statement on the area to be subdivided, including any area that is to be dedicated to the city.
 

(Code 1982, § 28.5-6; Ord. No. 4447, § 6, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-7. - Improvement plans and speciications.

 
(a)
 
Upon receipt of notification of approval of the preliminary plan by the commission, the applicant may proceed with the preparation of detailed plans and specifications for the improvements required in article II of this chapter. Such plans and specifications shall be prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor. The applicant shall submit completed plans and specifications to the agencies, office or companies having jurisdiction over such improvements and secure written approvals thereof. Improvement plans shall be prepared on an exhibit 24 inches by 36 inches and shall contain the following information:
 
(1)


(2)

(3)


(4)


(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)
 
Title page that shall include key map showing the relationship of the area to be subdivided to the tract and which shall reflect any areas of the tract previously subdivided plus adjacent streets.
North arrow and graphic scale.

Title block showing the name and address of the developer and the name, address and seal of the registered engineer or land surveyor preparing the plans.
One or more benchmarks in or near the subdivision to which the subdivision is referenced. The identity and elevation shall be based on the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
A list of the standards and specifications followed, citing the volume, section, page or other references. Paving details conforming to St. Louis County Standard Specifications for Highway Construction.
Details of streets, existing and proposed sanitary sewers, drainage channels, swales and storm sewers.

Plans and profiles of streets and sewers on a scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet horizontal and one inch equals ten feet vertical. Existing and proposed survey monuments on street plans or on a submitted copy of plans to be on the proposed record plat.
 
(b)







(c)
 
Prior to constructing such improvements, the applicant shall submit to the commission copies of the written approvals from all necessary agencies, offices or companies and obtain authorization from the commission to proceed with such construction. The commission shall review the approvals to ascertain that the requirements for improvements contained in article II of this chapter are being complied with. The commission shall either find that such requirements are being complied with and authorize the applicant to proceed with construction or find that such requirements are not being complied with and identify deficiencies which must be corrected before the authorization to proceed is given. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the commission's findings.
Approval by the commission of the improvement plans shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of approval or for such longer period as the director of public works may authorize, in writing, to facilitate adequate and coordinated provisions for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds or other public requirements. If the construction of the improvements shall not have been completed within the two-
 

year period or such longer period as the director of public works authorized, a resubmission and review of the improvement plans by the commission shall be required.
 
(d)
 
In the event that the applicant elects to submit a bond or escrow in lieu of constructing improvements as provided in  s e c t i o n  4 4 - 8 , the copies of approvals of the plans and specifications may be submitted with the final plat.
 
(Code 1982, § 28.5-7; Ord. No. 4447, § 7, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-8. - Improvement installation; required performance bond or escrow agreement.

 
(a)







(b)
 
Before the final plat of any subdivided area shall be approved and recorded, the subdivider shall make and install the improvements described in this chapter. In lieu of final completion of the minimum improvements before the plat is finally approved, the subdivider may post a performance bond or enter into an escrow agreement with the city in a form satisfactory to the city manager and the director of public works, which performance bond or escrow agreement will ensure to the city that the improvements described in this chapter shall be completed by the subdivider within two years after final approval of the plat. The amount of such performance bond or escrow agreement shall not be less than  the estimated cost of completing the improvements described in this chapter as such amount is estimated by the director of public works.
The amount of any such performance bond or escrow agreement shall be increased from time to time by such additional amounts as the director of public works shall determine are necessary to complete the improvements described in this chapter. In the event that the subdivider does not deposit, within ten days after notification, such additional sum as the director of public works may determine to be necessary to be required to complete said improvements or shall cease work on the subdivision improvements or shall fail to complete the subdivision improvements in accordance with the approved plans therefor within two years from the date hereof, the city, in addition to any other legal remedies available, may pursue any or all of the following remedies:
 
(1)


(2)


(3)

(4)


(5)
 
The city may complete or have completed the improvements described in this chapter, and the escrowee shall disburse the escrowed amount for building permits issued for that particular subdivision as directed by the city engineer.
The city may revoke all building permits issued to the subdivider in the city and may refuse to issue any further building permits to the subdivider for the subdivision in question.
The city may order the termination of any further building permit work by the subdivider in the city.

The city may deny an occupancy permit for any building in the subdivision for which an occupancy permit was not heretofore issued and may file with the recorder of deeds of the county a notice that no occupancy permits will be issued for any building in the subdivision.
The city may sue the subdivider for any additional cost of completing the subdivision improvements not recovered from the escrowed amount.
 
(c)
 
All such performance bonds or escrow agreements shall be signed or accepted on behalf of the city by the city manager.
 

(Code 1982, § 28.5-8; Ord. No. 4447, § 8, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-9. - Final plat—Generally.

 
(a)






(b)






(c)



(d)


(e)
 
Upon completion of the construction of required improvements, including final inspections and approvals by the responsible agencies, officials and companies, or the submission to the city of either a performance bond or escrow agreement in accordance with s e c t i o n 4 4 - 8 , together with approvals of detailed improvement plans and specifications, the applicant may submit a final plat for all or a portion of the lands covered by the preliminary plan. Such submission shall consist of an original drawing on reproducible mylar and copies thereof in the quantity designated by the commission.
If the final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plan and if matters relating to required improvements are found in order, the commission shall recommend to the city council the approval of the final plat. If such is not the case, the commission shall recommend to the council that the final plat not be approved; and the applicant shall be informed in writing as to the reasons therefor. The commission shall act upon a final plat within 60 days of its submission unless the applicant agrees to an extension of the time. A copy of the final plat recommended for approval by the commission shall be signed by its chairperson.
The recommendation of the commission shall be presented to the council for its approval or rejection. If the final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plan and if matters relating to required improvements are found in order, the council shall approve the final plat. If such is not the case, the final plat shall not be approved. The applicant shall be informed in writing of the action of the council.
If the commission has not approved the final plat of the subdivision, the council may approve said plat only by the affirmative vote of four- sevenths of all of the members.
Upon approval of the final plat by the city council, the mayor and city clerk shall place their signatures on the plat with the date of such approval. The applicant shall file the final plat with the county recorder of deeds within 60 days after approval by the city council. If any final plat is not filed within this period, the approval shall expire. Upon recording, the subdivider shall file with the director of public works one copy of the recorded plat, showing the book and page of recording. Approval of the final plat does not constitute acceptance of dedications or improvements. (See
 s e c t i o n 4 4 - 5 7 .)
 

(Code 1982, § 28.5-9; Ord. No. 4447, § 9, 4-10-1990)
 

Sec. 44-10. - Same—Scale and content.

The final plat shall be prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor and shall be drawn at any scale from one inch equals 20 feet to one inch equals 100 feet in any increment of ten feet on one or more sheets whose maximum dimensions are 24 inches by 36 inches. In certain unusual instances where the subdivided area is of unusual size or shape, the city engineer may permit a variation in the scale or size of the final plat. If more than one sheet is required, a key map on sheet number one showing the entire subdivision at reduced scale shall be provided. The final plat shall show and be accompanied by the following information:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)


(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)



(14)



(15)
 

North arrow, graphic scale and name of owner or owners. All U.S. Survey section, township and range lines.
All lines of all proposed streets with their widths and names.

An accurate delineation of any property offered for dedication to public use. The line of departure of one street from another.
The boundary lines of all adjoining lands and the right-of-way lines of adjacent streets with their widths and names. All lot lines, including their dimensions, and an identification system for all lots and blocks.
Building lines and easements for right-of-way provided for public use, services or utilities with figures showing their dimensions.

All dimensions and bearings, both linear and angular, radii and arcs necessary for locating the boundaries of the subdivision, blocks, lots, streets, alleys, easements, building lines and of any other areas for public or private use.
All survey monuments together with their descriptions.

Area in square feet for each lot or parcel on the plat or a supplemental sheet showing same.

Name of the subdivision and a description of the property subdivided, showing its location and area.

Certification by the engineer or land surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him and that the locations of all required survey monuments, installed or to be installed, are correctly shown thereon. The month and year during which the survey was made shall also be shown.
Private restrictions or trust indentures where required by ordinance and their periods of existence. Should such restrictions and trusteeships be of such length as to make the lettering of the same on the plat impracticable and thus necessitate the preparation of a separate instrument, reference to such instrument shall be made on the plat.
A certificate by county tax officials showing that there are not delinquent taxes outstanding.
 

(Code 1982, § 28.5-10; Ord. No. 4447, § 10, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-11. - Examination of plans, plats by director of public works.

The director of public works shall assist the commission in the discharge of its responsibilities under this chapter by examining preliminary plans, improvement plans and final plats and by coordinating with other officials and agencies as necessary in order to provide the commission with the professional and technical input appropriate to facilitating its review and decision on each application.

(Code 1982, § 28.5-11; Ord. No. 4447, § 11, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-12. - Responsibility of developer's engineer.

The registered professional engineer or land surveyor employed by the developer to design the improvement plans shall be responsible for the submission of improvement design details and specifications as well as the staking out and supervision of the installation of said improvements.

(Code 1982, § 28.5-12; Ord. No. 4447, § 12, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-13. - Inspections.

Periodic inspections by the director of public works shall be made of the subdivision area during the planning stages and as construction progresses. Final inspection shall be made before improvements are accepted by the city for maintenance.

(Code 1982, § 28.5-13; Ord. No. 4447, § 13, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-14. - As-built improvement plans and aidavit.

Upon completion of all improvements and installations as required, the developer's engineer shall file with the director of public works an affidavit stating that all construction, improvements, work and materials fully comply with applicable specifications and designs. At the same time, he shall file with the director of public works detailed plans, certified by him, showing all improvements and installations as built.
 

Sec. 44-15. - Minor subdivisions.

If the director of public works finds that a subdivision meets all of the requirements for a minor subdivision as defined in this chapter, he shall waive the requirement of submission of all plans except the final plat.

(Code 1982, § 28.5-15; Ord. No. 4447, § 15, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-16. - Minor boundary adjustments.

 
(a)






(b)
 
In the case of the sale or exchange of parcels of land not exceeding 7,500 square feet in area to or between adjoining property owners where such sale or exchange does not create additional lots and where the original lots are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by the zoning ordinance and where, to the extent physically possible, other requirements of the zoning ordinance are complied with, such owners shall submit to the director of public works a plat showing the proposed adjustment of lot lines together with buildings and other improvements on the properties. The information shown on the plat shall be attested to as to correctness by a registered engineer or land surveyor.
If the director of public works finds such plat and adjustment in property lines to be in order and in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the zoning ordinance, he shall approve the plat by signing it on behalf of the city. The owners shall file the plat with the county recorder of deeds within 60 days after approval by the director of public works. If any such plat is not filed within this period, the approval shall expire. The owners shall provide the city with a copy of the recorded plat, showing the book and page of recording, as evidence of compliance with the above requirements.
 
(Code 1982, § 28.5-16; Ord. No. 4447, § 16, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-17. - Display house plat.

The developer of a proposed subdivision containing at least 20 lots may, after approval of the preliminary plan by the commission, submit a display house plat to the director of public works for review and approval. There may be one display house for every 20 houses proposed, not to exceed ten display houses. The display house plat shall include a complete out boundary survey of the proposed subdivision and the location of each display house in relation to the proposed lots. The script of the display house plat shall contain terms and conditions as required by the director of public works, including the following:
 

(1)

(2)


(3)


(4)


(5)
 

The display house plat shall be recorded with the county recorder of deeds prior to the issuance of a building permit for a display house; The display house plat shall become null and void upon the recording of a final plat that establishes that each display house is on an
approved lot;

No part of the proposed subdivision may be conveyed or an occupancy permit issued for any structure thereon until the display houses have been located on approved lots;
If the initial construction of a display house has not commenced within 60 days after the city engineer's approval of the display house plat, such approval shall lapse, and the plat shall be null and void; and
The display house plat fee shall be $200.00.
 

(Code 1982, § 28.5-17; Ord. No. 4447, § 17, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-18. - Fees.

 
(a)












(b)



(c)
 
At the time of filing a preliminary plan of a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall pay a filing fee based on the following schedule:












At the time of filing a final plat, the subdivider shall pay a fee of $20.00 per lot but not less than $50.00. The fees thus collected shall be in lieu of the fees for city permits and inspections during the installation by the subdivider of required improvements, such as paving, storm drainage facilities and other improvements to rights-of-way.
At the time of filing the plat for a minor subdivision, the subdivider shall pay a filing fee of $150.00. At the time of filing a minor boundary adjustment plat, the owner of the land shall pay a filing fee of $100.00. For a minor subdivision or a minor boundary adjustment plat, the final plat fee of $20.00 per lot is not required.
 

(Code 1982, § 28.5-18; Ord. No. 4447, § 18, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-19. - Variations and exceptions.

 
(a)







(b)
 
Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict application of the requirements contained in this chapter would result in real difficulties and substantial hardships or injustices, the commission may vary or modify such requirements so that the subdivider is allowed to develop his property in a reasonable manner, but so that, at the same time, the public welfare and interest of the city are protected and the general intent and spirit of this chapter are preserved; provided that where construction standards or requirements are to be varied, the director of public works concurs that the resultant construction will be adequate to provide the required service or meet the anticipated need.
Whenever a subdivision is developed under the planned development provision of the zoning ordinance, wherein public open space as well as traffic and access requirements are being provided as part of an overall plan, the commission may vary the requirements of this chapter in any respect; provided that where construction standards or requirements are to be varied, the director of public works concurs that the resultant construction will be adequate to provide the required service or meet the anticipated need, and further provided that the overall dwelling unit density in the development is not greater than that permitted under the zoning ordinance.
 
(Code 1982, § 28.5-19; Ord. No. 4447, § 19, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-20. - Parcels or lots of land created or subdivided in violation of this chapter.

 
(a)
 
The owner of a lot or a parcel of land created or subdivided in violation of or without compliance with the provisions of this chapter may apply to the director of public works for the approval of a subdivision plat of said lot or parcel. The owner shall submit a plat for the proposed subdivision alone with the application and a filing fee of $300.00. The director of public works shall make an investigation of the facts and circumstances of the original illegal subdivision and the present status of the illegally subdivided lot or parcel of land and shall make a recommendation as to whether the application shall be approved or rejected, taking into consideration conditions that should be imposed and the following factors:
 
(1)





(2)


(3)


(4)


(5)
 
Whether it is impossible, impractical or infeasible to require the owner of the illegally subdivided lot or parcel of land (either alone or in conjunction with other owners of lots or parcels of land which were created or subdivided without compliance with the provisions of this chapter in conjunction with the illegal subdivision of the applicant's parcel of land) to make boundary adjustments, dedications or other changes so as to make the lot or parcel of land conform to the requirements of this chapter;
Whether the illegal subdivision was made in justifiable ignorance of the requirements of this chapter and without an intent to evade the requirements of this chapter;
Whether the lot or parcel of land was acquired by the present owner, or his predecessor in interest, in ignorance of the illegality of such lot or parcel;
Whether the failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter has materially impaired or hindered the ability of the owner of the lot or parcel of land to develop his property in a reasonable manner; and
Whether the public welfare and interest of the city will be protected and the general intent and purpose of this chapter will be preserved if the application is granted.
 
(b)








(c)


(d)
 
The director of public works shall forward his findings and his recommendations to the commission that shall review the application and forward its recommendation thereon to the council. The council may by ordinance approve the plat of the subdivision of the property upon such terms and conditions as the council determines will most equitably preserve the general intent and purpose of this chapter. The council may condition its approval upon the making of such boundary adjustments, dedications or other changes or conditions as the council deems necessary to preserve the purpose and intent of this chapter; and the council shall not enact an ordinance approving any such plat until the applicant has posted bond or other security satisfactory to the city engineer in an amount approved by the city engineer to assure to the city completion of any subdivision improvements required under the proposed ordinance for such property.
The enactment of an ordinance approving a plat of a lot or parcel of land created or subdivided in violation of or without compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall, with respect to approval of that plat, be in lieu of any other proceedings otherwise required under this chapter.
The owner shall file the plat with the county recorder of deeds within 60 days after council approval. If any such plat is not filed within this period, the approval shall expire. The owners shall provide the city with a copy of the recorded plat showing the book and page of recording as evidence of compliance with the requirements of this section.
 
(Code 1982, § 28.5-20; Ord. No. 4447, § 20, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-21. - Vacation of subdivisions.

 
(a)



(b)
 
The owner of lands included within a recorded plat or portion thereof may apply for the vacation of such plat or portion thereof by filing with the commission an application giving a specific legal description of the property affected, the reasons why such vacation is necessary and the anticipated impact of such vacation on adjacent lands, together with a filing fee of $300.00.
The owners of property within 185 feet of the land involved in the proposed vacation shall be notified by certified mail of the date and time of the meeting at which the commission will review the application and shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard at such meeting.
 

 
(c)
 
The commission shall study the proposal and its possible impacts and shall forward its recommendations thereon to the council. If the city council finds that the public welfare and interest of the city will be protected and that the general intent and purpose of this chapter will be preserved if the vacation is granted, the council may vacate the plat or portion thereof with such restrictions as it deems appropriate to protect the public interest. If the commission recommends against the vacation or if a protest against it is presented in writing to the city clerk duly signed and acknowledged by ten percent or more of the owners of land within 185 feet of the property involved in the proposal, the vacation shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of four-sevenths of all of the members of the council.
 
(Code 1982, § 28.5-21; Ord. No. 4447, § 21, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-22. - Study and report before amending chapter.

Any regulations or provisions of this chapter may be changed and amended from time to time by the council; provided, however, such changes or amendments shall not become effective until after study and report by the commission and after a public hearing thereon held by the council. If the commission submits no report within 60 days or such longer period as agreed to by council, it shall be considered to have made a report favoring the proposed changes or amendments.

(Code 1982, § 28.5-23; Ord. No. 4447, § 23, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-23. - Condominium plat.

 
(a)






(b)






(c)






(d)






(e)






(f)



(g)
 
An owner or his authorized agent of a tract of land within the corporate limits of the city desiring to file a condominium plat for the subdivision of such tract shall prepare and obtain approval of a preliminary plat of the subdivision in accordance with sections 4 4 - 5 and 4 4 - 6 and improvement plans and installation in accordance with sections 4 4 - 7 and 4 4 - 8 . The preliminary plan shall, in addition to the information prescribed in s e c t i o n 
 4 4 - 6 , provide locations of proposed buildings, the proposed property division within the existing or proposed buildings, the means of ingress/egress to the development, proposed easements and proposals with respect to trust indentures and public dedications.
Upon completion of the construction of required improvements, including final inspections and approvals by the responsible agencies, officials and companies, or the submission to the city of either a performance bond or escrow agreement in accordance with s e c t i o n 4 4 - 8 , together with approvals of detailed improvement plans and specifications, the applicant may submit a condominium plat for all or a portion of the lands covered by the preliminary plan. Such submission shall consist of an original drawing on reproducible Mylar and copies thereof in the quantity designated by the commission and shall conform to the requirements of RSMo ch. 448.
If the condominium plat conforms to the approved preliminary plan and if matters relating to required improvements are found in order, the commission shall recommend to the city council the approval of the condominium plat. If such is not the case, the commission shall recommend to the council that the condominium plat not be approved, and the applicant shall be informed in writing as to the reasons therefor. The commission shall act upon a condominium plat within 60 days of its submission unless the applicant agrees to an extension of the time. A copy of the condominium plat recommended for approval by the commission shall be signed by the chairperson.
The recommendation of the commission shall be presented to the council for its approval or rejection. If the condominium plat conforms to the approved preliminary plan and if matters relating to required improvements are found in order, the council shall approve the condominium plat. If such is not the case, the condominium plat shall not be approved. The applicant shall be informed in writing of the action of the council. If the commission has not approved the condominium plat, the council may approve said plat only by the affirmative vote of four-sevenths of all of the members.
Upon approval of the condominium plat by the city council, the mayor and city clerk shall place their signatures on the plat with the date of such approval. The applicant shall file the condominium plat with the county recorder of deeds within 60 days after approval by the city council. If any condominium plat is not filed within this period, the approval shall expire. Upon recording, the subdivider shall file with the director of public works one copy of the recorded plat showing the book and page of recording. Approval of the condominium plat does not constitute acceptance of dedications or improvements.
The subdivider of a condominium plat shall be subject to the requirements of sections 4 4 - 1 1 through 4 4 - 1 4 , inclusive. The condominium plat shall conform with the requirements of article II of this chapter, inclusive, except when a variance is granted in accordance with the provisions of
 s e c t i o n 4 4 - 1 9 .

At the time of filing the preliminary plan, the subdivider shall pay a fee of $600.00. At the time of filing the condominium plat, the subdivider shall pay an additional fee of $600.00. Such fees shall be in lieu of fees for city permits and inspections during the installation by the subdivider, or improvements required under this chapter.
 
(Code 1982, § 28.5-24; Ord. No. 4447, § 24, 4-10-1990)


Secs. 44-24—44-49. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - MINIMUM DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 

Sec. 44-50. - Conformance prior to approval.

No subdivision plat shall be approved by either the commission or the council unless it conforms to the minimum standards and requirements of this chapter.

(Code 1982, § 28.5-30; Ord. No. 4447, § 30, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-51. - Streets.

 
(a)



(b)



(c)

(d)



(e)



(f)







(g)


(h)



(i)






(j)

(k)

(l)


(m)

(n)



(o)


(p)


(q)

(r)


(s)
 
The arrangement of streets shall reasonably conform as nearly as possible to the major street plan, and the developer shall make provision for the extension of major, collector and minor streets. Except for dead-end streets, streets normally shall connect with streets already established or provide for future connection to adjoining unsubdivided tracts or shall be a reasonable projection of streets in the nearest subdivision tracts.
Whenever there are indications that an area being subdivided will eventually be resubdivided into smaller building plots, consideration shall be given in the street and lot arrangement of the subdivision to the need for future minor streets that will permit a logical arrangement of smaller lots.
The requirements of this section shall apply to all streets whether dedicated to the public or retained as private streets.

The minimum right-of-way width shall be 80 feet for major highways, 60 feet for a collector street and 50 feet for a minor street; provided that the minimum for a permanent dead-end street less than 250 feet in length shall be 40 feet and further provided that right-of-way widths greater than the minimums may be required when needed to accommodate anticipated traffic volumes.
Whenever a street adjoins unsubdivided property for a distance in excess of 100 feet, a half street having a right-of-way width of not less than 30 feet may be permitted. When every property adjoining a half street is proposed to be subdivided, the remainder of the right-of-way shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this chapter for the class of street involved.
Where a subdivision abuts an existing accepted public street that does not meet the standards of this chapter, the commission shall require the additional right-of-way or construction improvement necessary to meeting such standards on the half of the right-of-way adjacent to the subdivision; provided that where the director of public works finds that, due to circumstances beyond the control of the subdivider, construction on only half of the right-of-way is not feasible, the commission may waive the required construction improvements, but only if the subdivider deposits with the city a sum equal to the cost of such improvements as estimated by the director of public works. The city will retain such funds for future street construction as approved by the city council.
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major highway, the commission may require frontage streets parallel and adjacent to such highway or double-frontage lots with screen planting and nonaccess strips at the rear of such lots (adjacent to such highway).
Where topography or other construction make it desirable, a subdivision may include permanent dead-end streets; provided that if more than 150 feet in length, such streets shall terminate in a circular open space having a minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet and further provided that such streets shall normally not exceed 1,000 feet in length.
The minimum roadway width shall be 48 feet for major highways, 38 feet for collector streets and 26 feet for minor streets, provided that roadway widths greater than the minimums may be required when needed to accommodate anticipated traffic conditions. All streets shall be designed in acceptance with design criteria for the preparation of improvement plans, published by the county department of highways and traffic, and constructed in accordance with St. Louis County Standard Specifications for Highway Construction and shall include storm drainage facilities meeting the requirements of the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District.
Minor street intersection jogs or discontinuities with centerline offsets of less than 100 feet shall be avoided. Reserved strips of land which control or limit access at the terminus of streets are prohibited.
A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on major highways and collector streets and the minimum radius for curves on such highways and streets shall be 130 feet.
A subdivision entrance street shall intersect the major highway or collector street with an interior angle between 70 degrees and 90 degrees.

A minimum radius of 20 feet at the street right-of-way intersection and a minimum radius of 32 feet at the back of curb shall be required. Greater radii may be required at the intersection and at the back of the curb of a street intersecting with a major street. The commission may permit comparable cutoffs or cords in lieu of rounded corners.
All streets intersecting on major highways or collector streets shall be directly opposite existing or other proposed streets or shall be a minimum of 300 feet distant as measured between street centerlines.
Where a collector street enters or connects with a major highway, the city engineer must approve the entrance plan. Additional traffic lanes or other traffic safety improvements may be required.
All stub streets in excess of 150 feet in length shall be provided with a temporary turnaround.

Signs bearing the name of the street as designated on the final plat and meeting the size, height and style specifications of the city shall be placed at all street intersections, as well as at all points where the name of the street changes.
The subdivider shall pay for the installation of streetlights in accordance with the plan for lighting developed and installation work performed by Union Electric Company.
 

(t)
 

Such plan and installation work is subject to the approval of the city engineer.
 

(Code 1982, § 28.5-31; Ord. No. 4447, § 31, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-52. - Easements.

Easements shall be provided as requested by the director of public works and the several utility companies and agencies providing service to the area for the purposes of:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
 

Installing and maintaining utility services and facilities;

Providing proper surface drainage within and through the subdivision;

Permitting the construction and maintenance of slopes for street cuts and fills which extend beyond the limits of the right-of-way; or Providing adequate area to contain facilities or improvements necessary to take care of flooding or erosion along any stream or surface
drainage course within the subdivision.
 

(Code 1982, § 28.5-32; Ord. No. 4447, § 32, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-53. - Blocks; lots and building lines.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)


(d)



(e)


(f)
 
Except as the commission deems necessary to secure the efficient use of land or desired features of street layout, block lengths shall not exceed 2,000 feet.
All side lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to street lines unless the commission deems a variation will provide a better street and lot plan. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, lots with double frontage shall be avoided.
Lots shall have an area and lot width at the building line that conform with the requirements of the zoning districts in which the lots are located. The area of street rights-of-way, whether dedicated to the public or retained as private streets, shall not be included in calculating the area of lots.
Lots larger than the minimum required by zoning regulations are desirable. Lots shall have a width and depth entirely adequate to meet the yard requirements of zoning regulations. Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the establishment of front building lines on both the front and street side of the lot.
Where lots front upon a circular terminus of a dead-end street or upon a curve of a street having a radius of 200 feet or less, the minimum lot width at the right-of-way line shall be not less than 50 percent of the width required at the building line.
Building lines shall be shown on all lots intended for residential use and may be required by the commission for other lots when deemed necessary to secure a desirable pattern of development. Building lines shall provide for setbacks not less than required by ordinances of the city. Restrictions requiring buildings to be built at or behind the building line shall be either shown on the plat or contained in a separately recorded instrument referred to on the final plat.
 
(Code 1982, § 28.5-33; Ord. No. 4447, § 33, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-54. - Utilities and drainage.

 
(a)


(b)








(c)
 
The subdivider shall contract with and deposit the necessary funds with the county water company for waterlines and fire hydrants to serve all the lots in the subdivision and shall sign the contract provided, agreeing not to request said contract to be cancelled after the final plat is filed.
Where a public sanitary trunk sewer is reasonably accessible or where plans for the installation of such sanitary trunk sewer have been prepared and approved by the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District, the subdivider shall connect with such sanitary trunk sewer and provide adequate sanitary sewer lines accessible to each lot, all in compliance with the ordinances of said district and under the supervision of said district. In the event that the connection with a planned trunk sewer line is not immediately practicable, the use of temporary disposal facilities will be permitted provided that such facilities are constructed in compliance with the standards and requirements of the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District and the county department of health, and further provided that covenant provisions requiring owners to make such connection when it becomes practicable are either shown on the plat or contained in a separately recorded instrument referred to on the plat.
Adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of stormwater, including, as may be necessary, improvement of channels, construction or reconstruction of bridges and the installation of enclosed pipes or conduits. In this connection the subdivider shall comply with the provisions of city ordinances regarding stormwater retention. Plans developed for the purpose of complying with these provisions shall comply with the requirements of the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District.
 
(Code 1982, § 28.5-34; Ord. No. 4447, § 34, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-55. - Sidewalks.

Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of major highways where deemed essential for the public safety by the commission and shall be required along both sides of collector streets and both sides of minor streets. The minimum thickness of sidewalks shall be four inches except that such minimum shall be six inches at driveways. The minimum width of sidewalks shall be four feet. Plans for sidewalks shall conform in other respects to city standards.
 

(Code 1982, § 28.5-35; Ord. No. 4447, § 35, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-56. - Permanent markers.

All subdivision boundary corners and all other points deemed necessary by the director of public works shall be definitely marked with permanent monuments. A permanent marker shall be constructed of concrete extending a minimum of four inches below the front line of steel pipe firmly imbedded in concrete that so extends below the frost line. Should conditions prohibit the placing of monuments on line, offset marking will be permitted provided that exact offset courses and distances are shown on the final plat. A permanent benchmark shall be accessibly placed, the elevation of which shall be based on the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, and the location and elevation of which shall be accurately noted on the final plat.

(Code 1982, § 28.5-36; Ord. No. 4447, § 36, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-57. - Dedications.

 
(a)



(b)






(c)
 
Where private streets are established, adequate provision shall be made in the deed restrictions accompanying the plat to dedicate such area to a subdivision board of trustees and to make proper provision for said board of trustees to have the power of assessment of property owners in the subdivision for the supervision, maintenance and construction or reconstruction of improvements in such streets.
Whenever any sanitary sewers, storm sewers, drainage channels or other improvements are required under this chapter or provided for or installed in any property, the subdivider shall provide, in a form and manner satisfactory to the city attorney, for the dedication for public use forever, to the city or the private company or other public agency responsible for the maintenance of such improvements, of all easements and installations for sanitary sewers or stormwater sewers or other drainage facilities, which easements and installations shall be subject to acceptance by the director of public works or such private company or other public agency.
Whenever a subdivider elects to dedicate streets to the city, he shall provide for the same in a form and manner satisfactory to the city attorney; and such dedication and improvement thereon shall be subject to acceptance by the director of public works.
 
(Code 1982, § 28.5-37; Ord. No. 4447, § 37, 4-10-1990)


Sec. 44-58. - Deed restrictions.

 
(a)






(b)






(c)
 
The commission or its staff shall confer with the subdivider regarding the type and character of development that will be permitted in the subdivision and may agree with the subdivider as to certain minimum restrictions to be placed upon the property to prevent the construction of substandard buildings and control the type of structures or the use of the lots which, unless so controlled, would clearly depreciate the character and value of the proposed subdivision and of adjoining property. Deed restrictions or covenants should be included to provide for the creation of a property owners' association or board of trustees for the proper protection and maintenance of the development in the future.
Where the subdivision contains private streets, sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply systems, storm drainage areas or facilities, park areas or other physical facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare and benefit of the area which are not or cannot be satisfactorily maintained by any existing public agency, provisions shall be made by trust agreement and made a part of the deed restrictions, acceptable to any agency having jurisdiction over the location and improvement of such facilities, for the proper and continuous maintenance and supervision of such facilities.
All deed restrictions shall be shown on the plat or contained in a separately recorded instrument referred to on the final plat. In no event shall any deed restrictions or covenants contain reversionary clauses pursuant to which title to any lot shall revert to the subdivider as the result of a violation of the terms of any such deed restrictions or covenants where the reversion to the subdivider would serve no purpose beneficial to the subdivision and would be confiscatory in nature.
 
(Code 1982, § 28.5-38; Ord. No. 4447, § 38, 4-10-1990)


Chapter 46 - TAXATION


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Secs. 46-1—46-18. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - UTILITIES TAX



Sec. 46-19. - Applicability.

This article shall cover every supplier or furnisher of gas or gas service, electricity, electrical power or electric service, water or water service, and telephone service.
 

(Code 1972, § 604.01; Code 1982, § 29-16)


Sec. 46-20. - Defnitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Gross receipts means the aggregate amount of all sales or charges, and shall include the receipt of cash, credits and property of all kinds and of any nature without deduction therefrom on account of the cost of items sold, of materials sold, of materials used or of labor, services or interest or any losses or expenses whatsoever. Taxes levied by state and federal government may be excluded from gross receipts if the books of account segregate the amounts so as to reflect such exclusions, receipts of taxes so levied and collected by the seller. Reductions may be allowed for discounts, credits, refunds, sales taxes and uncollectible accounts actually charged off.

(Code 1972, § 604.02; Code 1982, § 29-17; Ord. No. 4119, § 1, 7-13-1982)


Sec. 46-21. - Tax imposed.

 
(a)






(b)
 
Every person within the coverage of this article except a supplier or furnisher of telephone service, shall pay to the city collector as a license fee an amount equal to nine percent of the gross receipts derived from such business within the city. Every such person shall file with the city clerk, at the time of tendering any payment of the license fee, a verified statement of gross receipts of such person, derived from utility service for the period of the tendered payment. Payment of such license fee so stated shall be made monthly on or before the last day of each month. Such payment shall be for a license to operate for the calendar month in which the payment is made.
Every person now or hereafter engaged in the business of supplying or furnishing exchange telephone service in the city shall pay to the city collector as a license fee an amount equal to nine percent of the gross receipts derived from such business within the city. All such persons shall file with the city clerk, at the time of tendering any payment of the license fee, a verified statement of gross receipts of such persons, derived from exchange telephone service for the period of the tendered payment. Payment of such license fee so stated shall be made monthly on or before the last day of each month. Such payment shall be for a license to operate for the calendar month in which the payment is made.
 
(Code 1972, § 604.03; Code 1982, § 29-18; Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 5-11-1973; Ord. No. 3990, § 1, 5-22-1979; Ord. No. 4490, § 1, 4-23-1991)


Sec. 46-22. - No automatic adjustments.

Pursuant to Section 393.275 RSMo., and any and all other applicable authority, the city shall maintain the tax rate of its business license tax (which is also sometimes referred to as a license fee) on the gross receipts of all utilities without reduction notwithstanding any periodic fluctuations in the tariffs of such utility corporations or any notice thereof including, but not limited to, notice sent under Section 393.275 RSMo.

(Ord. No. 5633, § I, 9-27-2011)


Chapter 48 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS



Sec. 48-1. - Defnitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Broadband telecommunications network (BTN) means all or any part of the component physical operational and programming elements of any network of cables, optical, electrical or electronic equipment, including cable television, located in, on or over streets in the city and used for the purpose of transmission of electrical impulses of television, radio and other intelligences, either analog or digital for sale or use by the inhabitants of the city.

Street means and includes each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or shall hereafter be dedicated to the public and located within the city limits: Streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public ways and extensions and additions
thereto, together with such other public property and areas that the city shall permit to be included within the definition of "street" from time to time; provided, however, "street" shall not include any of the foregoing which may not legally be used for the purpose of constructing or operating a BTN.

(Code 1982, § 6.5-1; Ord. No. 4169, § 1(32-1), 1-24-1984)


Sec. 48-2. - Penalty.

Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be an unlawful act punishable by fine of not more than $500.00, or imprisonment for not more than 90 days or both; and each such violation shall constitute a separate offense.

(Code 1982, § 6.5-4; Ord. No. 4169, § 1(32-4), 1-24-1984)
 

Sec. 48-3. - Franchise required.

No person shall operate a BTN or any part thereof within the city limits unless he shall have been granted a franchise therefor by the city council, and such franchise shall be in full force and effect in accordance with its terms.

(Code 1982, § 6.5-2; Ord. No. 4169, § 1(32-2), 1-24-1984)


Sec. 48-4. - Interfering with or intercepting transmission or damage prohibited.

No person shall knowingly interfere with the distribution or transmission over a BTN or the reception of signals by its subscribers from a BTN in the city; nor shall any person knowingly cut, interfere with, damage, destroy or tape any cable or other equipment used in the distribution or transmission over a BTN or the reception by a subscriber of signals from a BTN. No person knowingly shall obtain any BTN services from any BTN by installing, rearranging or tampering with the facilities of a BTN unless the same is done with the knowledge and permission of the BTN franchisee.

(Code 1982, § 6.5-3; Ord. No. 4169, § 1(32-3), 1-24-1984)


Chapter 50 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Sec. 50-1. - Model ordinance adopted.

RSMo ch. 300, except for sections 300.015 through 300.070, known as the "Model Traffic Ordinance," is hereby adopted as the traffic code for the city with like effect as if recited at length herein, with all additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, as the state may, from time to time, so provide.

(Code 1982, § 19-1)


Sec. 50-2. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Commercial vehicle means a motor vehicle designed for regular use for carrying freight and merchandise in excess of one ton or more than eight passengers or any vehicle designed primarily for commercial purposes such as tow trucks and dump trucks but not including vanpools.

Parking lots means areas on private or public property providing for parking automobiles or other vehicles and which are regularly used by the public incident to commercial, industrial or institutional purposes of the owner or occupant of the property, whether provided for hire or gratuitously.

Private way means all privately owned streets, public service drives, alleys, parking lots and driveways open for public travel and for the use of patrons on any real property used for commercial, institutional or multifamily residential use. Private ways shall include private streets and those areas designated or appearing as driveways on private property, when either the private street or driveway is utilized to provide a flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon or providing access to or from parking lots, commercial or industrial buildings to which the public is invited, or institutional buildings.

Recreational motor vehicle means any motor vehicle designed, constructed or substantially modified so that it may be used and is used for the purpose of temporary housing quarters, including therein sleeping and eating facilities which are either permanently attached to the motor vehicle or attached to a unit which is securely attached to the motor vehicle.

(Code 1972, § 401.01(A)(6), (A)(34)(b); Code 1982, § 19-1.1; Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 6-23-1981; Ord. No. 4672, § 1, 1-10-1995)


Secs. 50-3—50-22. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - LICENSING


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 50-23. - State registration and license required.

All motor vehicles being operated by any person within the city shall be validly registered, licensed and display current license plates issued by the state or any other appropriate state authority. All license plates shall be kept reasonably clean, unobstructed and securely fastened so as not to swing.

(Code 1972, § 414.06; Code 1982, § 19-118; Ord. No. 3733, § 2, 6-11-1973)
 


Sec. 50-24. - Motor vehicle insurance required.

 
(a)



(b)


(c)
 
All motor vehicles licensed by the state shall be required to have the minimum amount of motor vehicle insurance as determined by the state department of revenue when operating within the corporate limits of the city, and said operator must provide evidence of said insurance coverage upon request of a police officer of this city.
Failure to have the required insurance or produce evidence of the same shall result, upon conviction, in a minimum fine of $100.00 and up to the fine of $500.00 or 90 days in jail.
The request for the required insurance by a police officer can only be made in conjunction with a motor vehicle or operator violation or as a result of a motor vehicle accident.
 
(Code 1982, § 19-119; Ord. No. 4313, § 1, 8-11-1987)


Sec. 50-25. - Driving while license or driving privilege is cancelled, suspended or revoked.

Any person whose operator's or chauffeur's license and driving privilege as a resident or nonresident has been cancelled, suspended or revoked under the provisions of RSMo 302.010 to 302.340, RSMo 302.500 to 302.540, RSMo 544.046, or RSMo ch. 577, and who drives any motor vehicle upon the streets or highways of the city while such license and privilege is cancelled, suspended or revoked, and before an official reinstatement notice or termination notice is issued by the director, is guilty of a violation of this section. The Maplewood Municipal Court shall not suspend the imposition of sentence as to such a person nor sentence such person to pay a fine in lieu of a term of imprisonment, nor shall such person be eligible for probation until he has served a minimum of 48 consecutive hours of imprisonment.

(Code 1982, § 19-21.1; Ord. No. 4315, § 1, 8-11-1987)


Secs. 50-26—50-53. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - LICENSING AND INSURANCE



Sec. 50-54. - Required.

 
(a)


(b)



(c)
 
Every person residing in the city that owns or has in his custody or control a motor vehicle that is operated or stored within the city shall pay a license fee to the city.
A resident who has reached the age of 65 years and owns a motor vehicle may have a license fee refunded for such vehicle upon showing the proof of age, ownership of the motor vehicle and a paid receipt showing the license fee has been paid by presentation in person with the above- stated documents.
City motor vehicle licenses will be available December 1 of each year for individuals wishing to display one on the windshield of their motor vehicle or, in the case of a motorcycle, in a conspicuous location.
 
(Code 1972, § 414.01; Code 1982, § 19-126; Ord. No. 3741, § 1, 9-24-1973; Ord. No. 3782, § 1, 10-14-1974; Ord. No. 4069, § 1, 11-25-1980; Ord. No. 4091, § 1, 5-26-
1981; Ord. No. 4294, § 1, 4-14-1987)


Sec. 50-55. - Authorized fee collection.

The county is authorized to collect the city motor vehicle license fees. (Code 1972, § 414.02; Code 1982, § 19-127; Ord. No. 4294, § 2, 4-14-1987)

Sec. 50-56. - Fees.

The following fees shall be paid to the city under the provisions of this division:


Motor vehicles	
$6.00

Motorcycles	
2.00

Dealer tags	
3.00
 

(Code 1972, § 414.03; Code 1982, § 19-128; Ord. No. 4018, § 1, 11-13-1979; Ord. No. 4091A, § 1, 6-9-1981; Ord. No. 4093, § 1, 6-9-1981; Ord. No. 4294, § 3, 4-14-
1987)


Sec. 50-57. - State operator's license required.

Every person that operates a motor vehicle within the city shall have on his possession a valid operator's or other appropriate license issued by the state or any other appropriate state authority.

(Code 1972, § 414.05; Code 1982, § 19-21; Ord. No. 3733, § 1, 6-11-1973)


Sec. 50-58. - Invalid insurance documents.

It shall be unlawful for a person to present, display, use, advertise, prepare, manufacture, distribute, offer for sale or barter, sell or trade, or possess with an intent to misrepresent, any card or document which is represented to be a valid motor vehicle insurance certificate issued to the person, persons, or legal entity therein named which has been prepared with false information, is expired, is invalid due to nonpayment of premium, or any card or document which the information thereon has in any way been altered, and therefore is not a valid motor vehicle insurance certificate issued to the person, persons, or legal entity therein named.

(Ord. No. 5443, § I, 1-8-2008)


Secs. 50-59—50-76. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - ADDITIONAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Sec. 50-77. - Pedestrians soliciting rides.

It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the operator of any vehicle not engaged as a public conveyance for the transportation of passengers for hire.

(Code 1972, § 408.17; Code 1982, § 19-2)


Sec. 50-78. - Vehicle watchers.

It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit the privilege of watching or guarding a vehicle while it is parked on the streets of this city. (Code 1972, § 408.18; Code 1982, § 19-3)

Sec. 50-79. - Throwing things on the street.

No person shall throw or place or cause to be thrown or placed on or upon any street of this city any tacks, nails, wire, scrap metal, glass, crockery, sharp stones or other substances injurious to the feet of persons or to the tires or wheels of vehicles. Any person who has dropped any such substance upon the street shall immediately make all reasonable efforts to remove it from the street.

(Code 1972, § 408.20; Code 1982, § 19-4)


Sec. 50-80. - Operating and parking vehicles on private ways.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)
 
Code applicable to private ways. All regulations pertaining to the operation and parking of vehicles contained in this chapter shall be applicable and in full force and effect on all private ways, as herein defined, within the city.
Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful to operate and park any vehicle in violation of regulations contained in this chapter on private ways within the city.
Authority of police to enforce regulations. The police department shall have the authority to enforce all regulations pertaining to the operation and parking of vehicles on private ways.
 
(Code 1982, § 19-6; Ord. No. 5290, § I, 10-11-2005)


Sec. 50-81. - Careful and prudent operation.

Every person operating a motor vehicle in the city shall drive in a careful and prudent manner, and at such a rate of speed so as not to endanger the property of another or the life or limb of any person, and shall exercise the highest degree of care.

(Code 1972, § 405.01; Code 1982, § 19-22)
 

Sec. 50-82. - Driving while intoxicated.

A person commits the offense of driving while intoxicated if he operates a motor vehicle while in an intoxicated or drugged condition. (Code 1972, § 405.04; Code 1982, § 19-23; Ord. No. 4321, § 1, 9-8-1987)

Sec. 50-83. - Operation of motor vehicle with excessive blood alcohol content.

A person commits the offense of driving with excessive blood alcohol content if he operates a motor vehicle in this city with 0.08 of one percent or more by weight of alcohol in his blood. As used in this section, percent by weight of alcohol in the blood shall be based upon grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood and may be shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath, saliva or urine.

(Code 1972, § 405.04B; Code 1982, § 19-24; Ord. No. 3742, § 1, 9-24-1973; Ord. No. 3989, § 1, 5-22-1979; Ord. No. 4322, § 1, 9-8-1987; Ord. No. 5014, § I, 10-9-
2001)


Sec. 50-84. - Obstructed view.

 
(a)


(b)
 
No person shall drive a motor vehicle when it is loaded in such a way, or when there are passengers so placed or in such number as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or to the side, or as to interfere with the driver's control over the motor vehicle.
No passenger in a motor vehicle shall ride in such a position as to interfere with the driver's view to the front or side, or with the driver's control over the motor vehicle.
 
(Code 1972, § 405.04A; Code 1982, § 19-25)


Sec. 50-85. - Driving on right side of road; lanes.

 
(a)


(b)
 
All vehicles not in motion shall be placed with their right side as near the right-hand side of the highway as practicable, except on streets where vehicles are obliged to move in one direction only or the parking of motor vehicles is regulated by ordinance.
Upon all public roads or highways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
 

(1)

(2)


(3)

(4)
 

When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement;

When placing a vehicle in position for and when such vehicle is lawfully making a left turn in compliance with the provisions of RSMo
304.14	to 304.026, or traffic regulations thereunder or of the city;

When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair;

Upon a roadway designated by ordinance as a one-way street and marked or signed for one-way traffic.
 

(c)



(d)

(e)
 

It is unlawful to drive any vehicle upon any highway or road which has been divided into two or more roadways by means of a physical barrier or by means of a dividing section or delineated by curbs, lines or other markings on the roadway, except to the right of such barrier or dividing section, or to make any left turn or semicircular turn or U-turn on any such divided highway, except in a crossover or intersection.
When authorized signs have been erected designating off-center traffic lanes, no person shall disobey the instructions given by such signs. Whenever any roadway has been divided into three or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent
herewith shall apply:
 

(1)


(2)





(3)


(4)
 

A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety;
Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway ahead is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation;
Upon all highways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic thereon shall be driven in the right-hand lane for traffic or as close as practicable to the right-hand edge or curb, except as otherwise provided in RSMo 304.014 to 304.026;
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and except when a roadway has been divided into traffic lanes, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway whenever possible.
 
(f)



(g)
 
All vehicles in motion upon a highway having two or more lanes of traffic proceeding in the same direction shall be driven in the right-hand lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or when preparing to make a proper left turn or when otherwise directed by traffic markings, signs or signals.
All vehicles proceeding around a circular cul-de-sac must stay to the right before executing any turns into side street or driveways.
 

(Code 1982, § 19-26; Ord. No. 3743, § 1, 9-24-1973; Ord. No. 4983, § I, 4-24-2001)


Sec. 50-86. - Riding on handle bars.
 

It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle or motorcycle, when upon the street, to carry any other person upon the handle bar, frame or tank of any such vehicle, or for any person to so ride upon any such vehicle.

(Code 1972, § 408.11; Code 1982, § 19-27)


Sec. 50-87. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles.

No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while the vehicle is in motion. (Code 1972, § 408.15; Code 1982, § 19-28)

Sec. 50-88. - Mulers; noises.

Muffler cutouts shall not be used and no vehicle shall be driven in such manner or condition that excessive and unnecessary noises shall be made by its machinery, motor, signaling device, or other parts, or by any improperly loaded cargo. The motors of all motor vehicles shall be fitted with properly attached mufflers of such capacity or construction as to quiet the maximum possible exhaust noise. Any cutout or opening in the exhaust pipe, between the motor and the muffler on any motor vehicle, shall be completely closed and disconnected from its operating lever, and shall be so arranged that it cannot automatically open or be opened or operated while such vehicle is in motion.

(Code 1972, § 405.09; Code 1982, § 19-29; Ord. No. 3732, § 1, 6-11-1973)


Sec. 50-89. - Unlawful riding.

No person shall ride on any portion of a vehicle which portion is not designed or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion. This section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.

(Code 1972, § 408.16; Code 1982, § 19-30)


Sec. 50-90. - Tampering with motor vehicles.

 
(a)

(b)



(c)



(d)
 
No person shall drive, operate, use or tamper with a motor vehicle or trailer without the permission of the owner thereof.

No person shall, without the permission of the owner or person in charge thereof, climb upon or into, or swing upon any motor vehicle or trailer, or sound its horn or other sound-producing device, or attempt to manipulate any of its levers, starting device, brakes or machinery, or set the machinery in motion.
The provisions of this section shall apply to any person employed by the owner of the motor vehicle as a chauffeur or registered operator if the motor vehicle is driven or operated, used or tampered with without the owner's knowledge or expressed consent, or in violation of his instructions.
No person shall knowingly ride in a motor vehicle that has been stolen or is being operated without the consent of the owner.
 

(Code 1972, § 408.19; Code 1982, § 19-31)


Sec. 50-91. - Lights on motor vehicles.

No person shall operate a four or more wheel motor vehicle within the city unless such vehicle shall display at least two lighted lamps of white or yellow  light on the front and two lighted lamps of red lights on the rear, with one on each side of the front and rear having a light source of equal power, which shall be visible from a distance of at least 500 feet from the vehicle; and which shall shine upon or illuminate all license plates in such a manner to render the numerals thereon visible from a distance of at least 50 feet from the vehicle. No person shall operate any motor vehicle with less than four wheels within the city unless such vehicle shall display one lighted lamp on the front of white or yellow light and one light lamp of red light on the rear, which shall be visible from a distance of at least 500 feet from the vehicle and which shall shine upon or illuminate all license plates in such a manner to render the numerals thereon visible from a distance of at least 50 feet from the vehicle.

(Code 1972, § 408.23; Code 1982, § 19-36; Ord. No. 3744, § 1, 9-24-1973)


Sec. 50-92. - Unnecessary noise.

No person shall operate or cause a motor vehicle to race its engine, peel its tires, sound its horn or any other warning device except for warning purposes or do any other act causing loud and unnecessary noise.

(Code 1972, § 408.24; Code 1982, § 19-37; Ord. No. 3745, § 1, 9-24-1973)


Sec. 50-93. - Aggressive driving.
 

(a)
 

It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle intentionally to harass or alarm another person who is inside a motor vehicle by intentiona knowingly:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
 
Increasing or decreasing the speed of his vehicle; Changing lanes;
Following the other person's vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent under the totality of the circumstances; Impeding or obstructing the operation of the other person's motor vehicle; or
Operating his vehicle in a manner that endangers or would be likely to endanger any person or property.
 

(b)
 

Every person convicted of violating this provision shall be punished by a fine of not less that $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or by detention in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
 
(Code 1982, § 19-38; Ord. No. 4943, § I, 6-13-2000)


Sec. 50-94. - Helmet required for users of bicycles and certain other devices.

 
(a)


(b)
 
The regulations in this section apply to persons operating or riding upon bicycles, scooters, inline skates, roller skates, or skateboards when such devices are operated upon any highway, roadway, alleyway, sidewalk or upon any path available for the use of such devices.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
Bicycle means a vehicle with two wheels tandem, handlebars for steering, a saddle seat, and pedals by which it is propelled.

Helmet means a piece of headgear which meets or exceeds the impact standard for protective bicycle helmets set by the U.S. Consumer Products Safety Commission federal safety standards, those developed by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the Snell Memorial Foundation, or the American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM).

Scooter means a device that typically has one front and one rear wheel with a low footboard between, is steered by a handlebar, and is propelled either by pushing one foot against the ground while resting the other foot on the footboard or by a motor. A scooter may have more than two wheels.
 

(c)


(d)



(e)


(f)


(g)





(h)



(i)
 

Every person under the age of 17 years operating or being a passenger on a bicycle, or using a scooter, inline skates, roller skates or a skateboard shall wear a bicycle helmet of good fit, fastened securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet.
No person operating a bicycle shall allow anyone under the age of 17 years to ride as a passenger unless the passenger is wearing a bicycle helmet; or else is in an enclosed trailer or other device which meets or exceeds current nationally recognized standards of design and manufacture for the protection of the passengers head from impacts in an accident without the need for a helmet.
No parent, custodian or legal guardian of a person under the age of 17 years shall knowingly permit said person to operate or be a passenger on a bicycle, or to use a scooter, inline skates, roller skates and skateboards without wearing a bicycle helmet.
No person operating a bicycle shall allow anyone who is either four years old or younger or weighing 40 pounds or less, to ride as a passenger on the bicycle other than in a seat, which shall adequately retain the passenger in place, and protect the passenger from the bicycles moving parts.
Any operator of or passenger on equipment described in this section found to be in violation of this section may be issued an equipment
violation notice as prescribed on a Missouri Uniform Complaint and Summons. The person responsible for payment of the violation may have the violation dismissed, if the person submits a receipt for a proof of purchase of a bicycle helmet along with the helmet, to the city police  department within five calendar days of the date of the violation notice.
Fines assessed to juvenile violators (under the age of 17 years) will be the legal responsibility of the violators parent, custodian or legal guardian; therefore, any summons issued as a result of a violation committed by such a juvenile shall be issued to said violators parent, custodian or legal guardian.
This section shall not apply to bicycles, scooters, inline skates, roller skates or skateboards operated on private residential property.
 

(Ord. No. 5510, § I, 4-14-2009)


Sec. 50-95. - Height, length and weight limits; permit to exceed.

 
(a)






(b)
 
The city traffic engineer, with the approval of the mayor, may issue permits for the operation of vehicles exceeding the height, length and weight limits specified by law. The permit shall specify the terms and conditions under which such vehicles may be operated, and designate the street or streets over which such vehicle may be operated and the hours of the day between which such operation shall be permitted. Each applicant for a permit as herein provided shall first pay to the collector a fee of $1.00, receipt for which shall be presented to the city traffic engineer before such permit is issued.
The city traffic engineer, with the approval of the manager, shall have the right to post notices on each end of any bridge in this city stating the maximum load that may be permitted on such bridge, and whenever by reason of thawing or frost, or rains, new construction or other reason, any street in this city shall be in a soft condition, the maximum gross weights of all vehicles to be operated on such street may be limited by the
 

city traffic engineer to such an amount and in such manner as will preserve the street; and the city traffic engineer shall give or cause to be given due notice thereof by posting notices at convenient and public places along and near such street subject to such regulations.
 
(c)
 
Any person violating the provisions of this section, whether operating under a permit or not, or who shall willfully or negligently damage a highway of this city, shall be liable for the amount of such damage caused to any highway, street, bridge, culvert or sewer, and any vehicle causing such damage shall be subject to a lien for the full amount of such damage; provided, however, that such lien shall not be superior to any duly recorded or filed chattel mortgage or other lien previously attached to such vehicle.
 
(Code 1972, § 408.21; Code 1982, § 19-32)


Secs. 50-96—50-118. - Reserved.


ARTICLE IV. - REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO CERTAIN STREETS


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 50-119. - Streets closed to commercial vehicles.

 
(a)



(b)
 
Streets closed to commercial vehicles and streets closed to commercial vehicles for specified periods of time shall be designated by ordinance and set forth in subsection (b) of this section. The city traffic engineer shall place signs at sufficient intervals and at such places on the streets so designated as to give adequate notice that they are closed.
The following streets are closed to commercial vehicles not making or taking deliveries at addresses on that street:
 


Street	
Restrictions

Anna Avenue	
None

Bellevue Avenue	
None

Bruno Avenue	
None

Comfort Avenue, between Big Bend and Oakland	
None

Edgar Avenue	
None

Elm Avenue	
None

Flora Avenue, between Big Bend and Laclede Station Road	
None

Flora Boulevard, between Arbor and Big Bend	
None

Gayola Avenue	
None

James Avenue	
None

James Street	
None

Jerome Avenue, between Bredell and Laclede Station Road	
None

Laclede Station Road, between Manchester and Flora	
None

Laclede Station Road, between Manchester and Rannels Avenue and Folk Avenue to city limits	
Semi-tractor Trailer

Maple Avenue, between Big Bend and Sutton	
None

Maple Avenue, between Sutton and Marshall	
None
 


Marshall Boulevard	
None

Myrtle Avenue	
None

Oakland Avenue	
None

Sarah Street	
None

Sutton Avenue north of Manchester	
None

Vine Avenue	
None

Walter Avenue	
None

Weaver Avenue	
None

West Bruno	
None



(Code 1972, § 408.22, (Sched. I); Code 1982, § 19-33; Ord. No. 3833, § 1, 9-9-1975; Ord. No. 4236, §§ 1, 2, 10-8-1985; Ord. No. 4239, § 1, 10-22-1985; Ord. No.
4546, § 1, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 4822, § I, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 4828, § I, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 4831, § I, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 4896, § I, 7-27-1999; Ord. No. 5486, § I,
10-14-2008)


Sec. 50-120. - Left turns restricted.

At the following intersections, left turns shall be prohibited as indicated:


Intersection	
Limitation

Big Bend and Cambridge Avenue	
At any time for southbound traic at Big Bend

Big Bend Boulevard and Comfort Avenue	
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. for northbound traic on Big Bend Boulevard

Big Bend and Lohmeyer	
Monday through Friday, 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. for southbound Big Bend traic

Big Bend and Lyndover	
Monday through Friday, 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. for southbound Big Bend traic

Big Bend Boulevard and Woodland Avenue	
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. for northbound traic on Big Bend Boulevard

Big Bend and Zephyr	
Monday through Friday, 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. for southbound Big Bend traic

Burgess Avenue and the Early Childhood Center	
Parking lot exit at anytime

Hanley Road and Folk Avenue	
From Folk Avenue to Hanley Road at any time

Lyndover Place and Big Bend Boulevard	
From Lyndover to Big Bend Boulevard

Manchester and Martini	
Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. for southbound Martini Avenue traic

Manchester Avenue and Shop 'N Save supermarket	
West driveway of Shop N' Save from westbound Manchester at any time

Manchester Avenue and Southwest Avenue	
From westbound Manchester onto Southwest Avenue

West Bruno Avenue and Big Bend Boulevard	
From Zephyr Place to Big Bend Boulevard
 

Zephyr Place and Big Bend Boulevard	From Zephyr Place to Big Bend Boulevard




(Code 1972, Scheds. IV, X; Code 1982, § 19-34; Ord. No. 3775, § 1, 7-22-1974; Ord. No. 3791, § 1, 12-13-1974; Ord. No. 3829, § 1, 8-11-1975; Ord. No. 3903, § 1, 9-
26-1977; Ord. No. 4241, § 1, 10-22-1985; Ord. No. 4603, § 1, 6-8-1993; Ord. No. 4685, § 1, 4-11-1995; Ord. No. 4824, § I, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 4827, § I, 4-28-1998;
Ord. No. 5181, §§ I, II, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5225, § I, 12-14-2004)


Sec. 50-121. - Right turns prohibited.

At the following intersections, right turns shall be prohibited as indicated:


Street (from)	
Street (onto)

Bernard Drive, west bound, on red	
Hanley Road

Southwest Avenue, west bound	
Manchester Avenue



(Code 1982, § 19-34.1; Ord. No. 4874, § III, 2-23-1999; Ord. No. 5181, § III, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5240, § I, 1-25-2005; Ord. No. 5623, § I, 9-13-2011)


Sec. 50-122. - Electric signal intersections and locations.

Electric traffic control signals shall be placed at the following intersections and locations to control traffic as indicated:


Trafc Signals

Streets	
Conditions

Big Bend and Flora Avenue	
4-way

Big Bend and Folk Avenue	
4-way

Big Bend and Oxford Avenue	
4-way

Big Bend and Rannells	
3-way

Hanley Road and Hanley Industrial Court/Bernard Drive	
4-way

Hanley Road and Litzinger	
3-way

Hanley Road at West Bruno Avenue/Strassner Drive	
4-way

Hanley Road at Corcoran Drive	
3-way

Manchester Avenue and Bellevue Avenue	
4-way

Manchester Avenue and Big Bend Boulevard	
4-way

Manchester and Hanley Road	
4-way

Manchester Avenue and Oakview Terrace/Marshall Avenue	
4-way

Manchester and Old Laclede Station Road	
4-way
 


Manchester Avenue and Roseland Terrace/Southwest Avenue	
4-way

Manchester and Sutton	
4-way

New Laclede Station Road and Old Laclede Station and Hanley	
3-way






School and Pedestrian Signals

Streets	
Conditions

Big Bend, approximately 70 feet south of Lyndover	
School crosswalk

Hanley Road, approximately 130 feet north of Caroline	
3-way

Manchester and Oakland	
School crosswalk

7178 Manchester	
2-way crosswalk



(Code 1972, Sched. IX; Code 1982, § 19-35; Ord. No. 3796, § 1, 1-27-1975; Ord. No. 4240, § 1, 10-22-1985; Ord. No. 4243, § 1, 11-26-1985; Ord. No. 5180, § I, 6-22-
2004; Ord. No. 5292, § I, 10-11-2005)


Secs. 50-123—50-142. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS



Sec. 50-143. - Established.

 
(a)
 
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys set forth in this section, vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated:
 


Street	
Direction

Alley, adjacent to Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of Block 1, of the E.W. Davis Addition, beginning at the east line of Bredell Avenue and running eastwardly approximately 200 feet	
West

Alley, north of Flora Street and south of Comfort Street, between Big Bend Boulevard and Oakland Avenue	
West

Cambridge Avenue, from Picadilly to St. Elmo	
West

Circle Drive, from a point 315 feet north of Manchester to Rannells Avenue	
North

Ebrent Avenue, between Rannells and Lohmeyer	
South

Ellis Avenue, between Oakland Avenue and Big Bend Boulevard	
East

Elm Avenue, between Big Bend Boulevard and Sutton Boulevard	
East

Florent Avenue, between Rannells and Lohmeyer	
South
 


Hazel Avenue, 7300 block	
East

Hazel Avenue, 7400 block, 155 feet west of Sutton Boulevard to Big Bend	
West

Lohmeyer Avenue, 7500 block between Bredell and 200 feet east	
West

Lyndover Place, between Bellevue and Yale	
East

Maple Avenue, 7300 block, 239 feet east of Sutton Boulevard	
East

Maple Avenue , from Sutton Boulevard to 68 feet east of Big Bend Boulevard	
West

Martini Drive , 2600 block, southbound lane from the northernmost intersection of the QuikTrip property line with Martini Drive, south to the intersection of Manchester Road, approximately 446 feet	
South

Myrtle Avenue, between Hazel and Marshall	
East

Williams Avenue, between Bredell and 165 feet west of Big Bend	
East



 
(b)


(c)
 
The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice of the required directions of traffic. Such signs shall be placed at every intersection where the movement of traffic is so regulated.
No regulation under the provisions of this section shall be effective unless such signs as are required under subsection (b) of this section are in place.
 
(Code 1972, § 406.01; Code 1982, § 19-46; Ord. No. 3803, § 1, 2-10-1975; Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-27-1976; Ord. No. 3935, § 1, 5-8-1978; Ord. No. 4237, §§ 1, 2, 10-22-
1985; Ord. No. 4292, § 1, 4-14-1987; Ord. No. 4825, § I, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 4826, § I, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 4832, § I, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 4874, §§ I, II, 2-23-1999;
Ord. No. 4969, § I, 1-9-2001; Ord. No. 4999, § I, 7-24-2001; Ord. No. 5636, § I, 10-11-2011; Ord. No. 5721, § I, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 5736, § I, 6-10-2014)


Sec. 50-144. - Leaving the scene of a motor vehicle accident.

 
(a)






(b)


(c)
 
A person commits the crime of leaving the scene of a motor vehicle accident when being the operator or driver of a vehicle on the highway or on any publicly owned parking lot or parking facility generally open for use by the public and knowing that an injury has been caused to a person or damage has been caused to property, due to his or her culpability or to accident, he or she leaves the place of injury, damage or accident without stopping and giving his or her name, residence, including city and street number, motor vehicle number and driver's license number, if any, to the injured party or to a police officer, or if no police officer is in the vicinity, then to the nearest police station or judicial officer.
For the purposes of this section, all peace officers shall have jurisdiction, when invited by an injured person, to enter the premises of any privately owned parking lot or parking facility for the purpose of investigating an accident and performing all necessary duties regarding such accident.
Leaving the scene of a motor vehicle accident is a class A misdemeanor, except that it shall be a class D felony if the accident resulted in:
 

(1)

(2)
 

Physical injury to another party; or Property damage in excess of $1,000.00.
 
(Code 1982, § 19-47; Ord. No. 4584, § 1, 3-9-1993; Ord. No. 5705, § I, 6-11-2013)


Secs. 50-145—50-171. - Reserved.


DIVISION 3. - SPEED



Sec. 50-172. - Oicial maximum limits.

 
(a)


(b)
 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street or highway in the city in excess of 25 miles per hour unless a higher speed is made applicable under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section.
Those portions of streets or highways in the city set out in this subsection are those to which a higher or lower maximum speed is made applicable and shall be marked with signs at reasonable intervals setting forth the speed limit and with a sign showing the limits of those portions of streets or highways so designated:
 


Street Names	
Limit Maximum (mph)

Alicia Avenue (7500 and 7600 blocks)	
20

Alicia Avenue (7800 block)	
15

Alley beginning at the west side of the 2900 block of Sutton Avenue running westwardly to the east side of the 2900 block of Big Bend that borders the rear property lines on the south side of the 7400 block of Maple and the north side of the 7400 block of Flora	
15

Big Bend Boulevard, south of Manchester	
35

Big Bend Boulevard, north of Manchester	
30

Burgess Avenue	
20

Cherry Street	
15

Comfort Avenue, between Big Bend Boulevard and Oakland Avenue	
20

Comfort Avenue, between Oakland Avenue and Laclede Station Road	
20

Ellis Avenue, between Big Bend Boulevard and Oakland Avenue	
20

Elm Street	
20

Florent (2500 block)	
20

Gerhard (2500 block)	
20

Hanley Road, from West Bruno to Manchester	
35

Hanley Road, to the junction of Hanley Road and Laclede Station Road	
35

Jerome Avenue (7800 block)	
15

Lohmeyer (Martini to Bredell)	
20

Manchester Avenue	
30

Maple Avenue (east of Sutton)	
20

Maple Avenue (west of Sutton)	
15

Martini (between Manchester and Rannells)	
20

Oakland (2500 block)	
20

Oakland Avenue, south from Manchester Road	
20

Parking garage, north side of Manchester between Sutton and Oakview Terrace, upper and lower levels	
10

Parking lot, north side of Marietta Avenue between Sutton and Marshall Avenue	
10
 


Rannells Avenue, Big Bend to Hanley	
20

Sunnen Drive	
25

West Bruno Avenue	
20

Williams Avenue (7900 block and 7800 block)	
15

Woodland Avenue, between Big Bend Boulevard and Oakland	
20



 
(c)
 
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the following maximum speed limits shall apply to the following vehicles:
 

(1)


(2)
 

Commercial motor vehicles with a rated live load capacity of over two tons: 15 miles per hour, unless a lower speed limit is posted; in which case, that lower speed limit shall apply.
Motor vehicles equipped with metal tires: Six miles per hour.
 

(Code 1972, § 405.02; Code 1982, § 19-56; Ord. No. 3753, § 1, 11-26-1973; Ord. No. 3794, § 1, 1-27-1975; Ord. No. 3854, § 1, 6-28-1976; Ord. No. 4052, § 1, 7-8-
1980; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 3-24-1981; Ord. No. 4104, § 1, 9-21-1981; Ord. No. 4254, § 1, 5-13-1986; Ord. No. 4305, § 1, 6-23-1987; Ord. No. 4334, § 1, 11-10-1987;
Ord. No. 4525, § 1, 3-24-1992; Ord. No. 4548, §§ 1, 2, 8-11-1992; Ord. No. 4634, § 1, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 4983, § II, 4-24-2001; Ord. No. 5101, § I, 5-13-2003)


Sec. 50-173. - Minimum speed.

 
(a)





(b)
 
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. Peace officers may enforce the provisions of this section by directions to drivers; and in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and refusal to comply with direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the continued slow operation by a driver is a misdemeanor.
No person shall drive a vehicle used primarily for advertising or display purposes at a rate of speed less than six miles per hour, nor shall such person stop the vehicle except when required to by lawful order of a police officer, obedience to an official traffic control device, or a condition which would make continued movement dangerous.
 
(Code 1972, §§ 304.011, 405.02A; Code 1982, § 19-57)


Sec. 50-174. - Excessive acceleration.

No person shall accelerate his motor vehicle from any stop, official traffic control device, or driveway, at such excessive rate as to endanger pedestrians and other traffic present.

(Code 1972, § 405.03; Code 1982, § 19-58)


Secs. 50-175—50-201. - Reserved.


DIVISION 4. - STOP STREETS, ETC.



Sec. 50-202. - Through streets or boulevards.

Those streets and parts of streets described below and indicated as through streets or boulevards are through streets for purposes of this chapter, except as indicated:


Street	
Limitations

Bellevue Avenue	
None

Big Bend Boulevard	
None

Bruno Boulevard	
None

Folk Boulevard, between Big Bend Boulevard and Hanley Road	
None
 


Greenwood Boulevard, from Big Bend Boulevard to Canterbury Avenue	
None

Kensington Avenue, from Greenwood Boulevard to Leamington Boulevard	
None

Lyndover (Place) Boulevard, from Big Bend Boulevard to Bellevue Avenue	
None

Manchester Boulevard (Avenue)	
None

Marshall Avenue (Boulevard), from Manchester to Greenwood Boulevard	
None

Picadilly (Avenue) Boulevard, from Greenwood Boulevard to Commonwealth Avenue	
None

Sutton Avenue, from north city limits to Greenwood Boulevard	
None

Venture Drive	
No thru trafc in either direction

Yale Boulevard, from Manchester to north city limit	
None



(Code 1972, § 407.01, Sched. IV; Code 1982, § 19-66; Ord. No. 3902, § 1, 9-26-1977)


Sec. 50-203. - Stop intersections; signs.

 
(a)
 
In addition to intersections at which signs are authorized by RSMo 300.260 and 300.265, intersections designated by ordinance as "Stop" intersections, and so indicated in this section, shall be deemed "Stop" intersections. The city traffic engineer shall place stop signs at such intersections as indicated below:
(When the designation "school" appears under the conditions to the stop sign's placement, the stop sign shall be effective only between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m.)
 


Street Intersection	
Conditions


(Controls Trafc)

Alley, west from rear of City Hall at Bredell Avenue	
Entering Bredell Avenue

Alameda Avenue at Bruno Avenue	
4-way stop

Alameda at Richmond	
Going south

Alicia Avenue at Bredell Avenue	
Going west

Alicia Avenue at Big Bend Boulevard	
Going east

Arbor Avenue at Maple Avenue	
Going northeast

Bartold Avenue at Hanley Road	
Going north

Bartold Avenue at Manchester	
Going north and south
 


Bellevue and Bruno Avenue	
4-way stop

Bellevue and Zephyr Place	
Entering Bellevue

Big Bend and Lyndover Place	
Entering Big Bend

Bland and West Bruno	
Entering West Bruno

Bredell Avenue and Folk Avenue	
4-way stop

Bredell Avenue at Manchester	
Going south

Bredell Avenue at West Bruno	
Going north

Bredell Avenue at Rannells Avenue	
4-way stop

Bredell Avenue and West Bruno	
Eastbound

Bruno Avenue at Alameda Avenue	
4-way stop

Bruno Avenue and Yale Street	
4-way stop

Burgess Lane at Laclede Station Road	
Going west

Cambridge Avenue and Commonwealth Avenue	
Entering Commonwealth Avenue

Cambridge Avenue at Big Bend	
Going west

Cambridge Avenue at Kensington	
4-way stop

Cambridge Avenue at Picadilly Avenue	
4-way stop

Cambridge Avenue at St. Elmo Avenue	
4-way stop

Cambridge Avenue at Sussex Avenue	
4-way stop

Canterbury Avenue at Greenwood Boulevard	
3-way stop

Caroline Avenue at Hanley Road	
Going east

Circle Drive at Manchester Road	
Going south

Coleman Avenue at Flora Avenue	
Going north and south

Comfort Avenue at Big Bend	
Going east

Comfort Avenue and Oakland	
Entering Oakland

Commonwealth Avenue and St. Elmo	
4-way stop

Commonwealth Avenue at Sussex	
Going east and west

Edgar Avenue and James	
Going north and south

Edgebrook Lane at Laclede Station Road	
Going east
 


Ellis Avenue at Big Bend Boulevard	
Going east

Flora Avenue at Arbor Avenue	
Going east

Flora Avenue and Bartold Avenue	
4-way stop

Flora Avenue at Hanley Road	
Going west

Flora Avenue and Laclede Station Road	
4-way stop

Flora Avenue and Sutton Boulevard	
4-way stop

Florent Avenue at Lohmeyer Avenue	
Going south

Florent Avenue and Rannells Avenue	
Going south

Folk Avenue at Hanley Road	
Going west

Folk Avenue and Laclede Station Road	
4-way stop

Gayola Place at Bellevue Avenue	
Going east

Gayola Place at Big Bend Boulevard	
Going west

Gayola Place at Oakview Terrace	
4-way stop

Gayola Place at Sutton Avenue	
4-way stop

Gerhard at Rannells	
Going north

Greenwood Boulevard at Canterbury Avenue	
North and south and east (3-way)

Greenwood Boulevard and Commonwealth Avenue	
Entering Greenwood

Greenwood Boulevard and Picadilly	
Entering Greenwood

Hazel Avenue at Big Bend Boulevard	
Going west

Hazel at Maple	
Going south

Hazel Avenue and Sutton Boulevard	
Going east

Hazel Avenue at Sutton Avenue	
Going west

High Street and Bellevue	
Entering Bellevue Avenue

High Street at Yale Avenue	
Going east

James and Edgar Avenue	
4-way stop

James Street at Big Bend Boulevard	
Going west

James Street at Sutton Avenue	
Going east

James and Walter Avenue	
4-way stop
 


Jerome Avenue at Bredell Avenue	
Going east and west

Jerome Avenue at Laclede Station Road	
Going west

Kensington Avenue at Commonwealth Avenue	
4-way stop

Kensington Avenue at Greenwood	
Going north

Kensington Avenue and Oxford Boulevard	
4-way stop

Kerens Avenue at Laclede Station Road	
Going east

Laclede Station Road and Comfort Avenue	
Entering Laclede Station Road

Laclede Station Road and Rannells Avenue	
4-way stop

Laclede Station Road and West Bruno Avenue	
4-way stop

Laclede Forrest Drive at Laclede Station Road	
Going east

Lanham at Manchester	
Going north

Lindbergh Drive at Bredell Avenue	
Going northeast

Lohmeyer Avenue at Big Bend Boulevard	
Going west

Lohmeyer Avenue at Bredell Avenue	
Going east and west

Lohmeyer Avenue at Gerherd Avenue	
3-way stop

Lohmeyer Avenue at Laclede Station Road	
Going west

Lohmeyer Avenue at Martini Drive	
Going east

Lohmeyer Avenue and Oakview Terrace	
Entering Oakview Terrace

Lohmeyer Avenue at Sutton Avenue	
Going east and west

Lohmeyer Avenue at Valley Avenue	
Going east and west

Lyle Avenue at Manchester Avenue	
Going south

Lyndover Place at Bellevue Avenue	
Going east

Lyndover Place and Oakview Terrace	
4-way stop

Lyndover Place at Roseland Terrace	
4-way stop

Lyndover Place at Sutton Avenue	
4-way stop

Lyndover Place at Yale Avenue	
Going east

Manhattan Avenue at Kensington	
Going east and west

Maple Avenue at Arbor Avenue	
Going east
 


Maple at Hazel, going north and south	
3-way stop

Maple Avenue and Marshall Boulevard	
Entering Maple Avenue

Maple Avenue at Sutton Avenue	
Going east and west

Maplewood Commons Drive at Bernard Drive	
3-way stop

Maplewood Commons Drive at Corcoran Drive	
3-way stop

Maplewood Commons Drive at Folk Avenue	
Going north and south

Maplewood Commons Drive at West Bruno Avenue	
Going north

Margaretta Avenue at Manchester Avenue	
Going south

Marietta Avenue at Marshall Avenue	
Going east

Marietta Avenue at Sutton Avenue	
Going west

Marshall Boulevard at Anna Avenue	
Entering Marshall Boulevard

Martini Drive at Lohmeyer	
Going north and south

Martini Drive at Manchester	
Going south

Martini Drive at Rannells Avenue	
Going north

Moller Avenue at Marshall Avenue	
Going west

Myrtle Avenue at Marshall Avenue	
Going east

Oakland Avenue at Ellis Avenue	
Going north and south, school stop sign

Oakview Terrace at Gayola Place	
4-way stop

Oakview Terrace at Lyndover Place	
4-way stop

Oakview Terrace at Richmond Place	
4-way stop

Oakview Terrace and Zephyr Place	
4-way stop

Oxford Boulevard at Picadilly Avenue	
4-way stop

Oxford Boulevard and St. Elmo Avenue	
4-way stop

Oxford Boulevard and Sussex	
4-way stop

Pacifc Avenue at Sutton Avenue	
Going east and west

Picadilly Avenue and Oxford Avenue	
4-way stop

Richmond Place at Bellevue Avenue	
Going east

Richmond Place at Big Bend Boulevard	
Going west
 


Richmond Place at Sutton Avenue	
Going east and west

Roseland Terrace at Gayola Place	
4-way stop

Roseland Terrace at Manchester Avenue	
Entering Manchester

Roseland Terrace at Richmond Place	
Going north

Roseland Terrace at Zephyr Place	
4-way stop

Rule Avenue at Marshall Avenue	
Going west

St. Elmo Avenue at Greenwood Boulevard	
Going north

St. Elmo Avenue and Manhattan Avenue	
Entering Manhattan Avenue

Sarah Street at Limit Avenue	
Going east

Sarah Street at Marshall Avenue	
Going west

South Street and Bellevue Avenue	
East and west

South Street at Yale Avenue	
Going east

Southwest Avenue and Bellevue Avenue	
3-way stop

Southwest Avenue at Manchester Road	
Going northwest

Stanley Avenue at Bellevue Avenue	
Going west

Stanley Avenue at Yale Avenue	
Going east

Sunnen Drive, south extension, at Sunnen Drive, east side of business park	
Going north

Sunnen Drive, south extension, at Sunnen Drive, west side of business park	
Going north

Sutton at Lohmeyer	
4-way stop

Sutton Avenue at Gayola Place	
4-way stop

Sutton Avenue and Zephyr Avenue	
4-way stop

Sutton Boulevard at Elm	
4-way stop

Sutton Boulevard and Greenwood Boulevard	
East and west

Sutton Boulevard and Lyndover Place	
4-way stop

Sutton Boulevard at Marietta Avenue	
Going north

Sussex Avenue at Greenwood Boulevard	
Going north

Sussex Avenue at Oxford Boulevard	
4-way stop

Valley Avenue at Bredell Avenue	
Going east
 


Valley Avenue at Rannells Avenue	
Going north

Vine Avenue at Marshall Avenue	
Going east

Walter Avenue and James Street	
North and south

Weaver Avenue at Bredell Avenue	
Going east and west

Weaver Avenue at Big Bend Boulevard	
Going east

Weaver Avenue at Laclede Station Road	
Going west

West Bruno at Big Bend	
Going east

West Bruno Avenue and Hiawatha	
Going east

West Bruno Avenue and McCready	
Entering West Bruno

Westield Court at West Bruno	
Entering West Bruno

Williams Avenue at Big Bend	
Going east

Williams Avenue and Bredell Avenue	
Going west

Williams Court at Laclede Station Road	
Going west

Woodland Avenue at Big Bend Boulevard	
Going east

Woodland Avenue at Oakland Avenue	
Going west

Yale Avenue and High Street	
Going south

Yale at Manchester	
Going south

Zephyr Place and Oakview Terrace	
4-way stop

Zephyr Place at Big Bend Boulevard	
Going west

Zephyr Place at Sutton Avenue	
4-way stop



 
(b)



(c)



(d)
 
The driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop at the clearly marked stop line; or if there is no stop line, then at the point nearest the intersection roadway where the driver has view of approaching traffic on that roadway, before entering the intersection.
Every driver approaching the stop sign and stopping as required by this section shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another street or highway or which is approaching so closely on that street or highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is crossing the intersection.
The provisions of this section are subject to contrary directions given by a police officer or official traffic control device.
 

(Code 1972, § 407.04, Sched. V; Code 1982, § 19-67; Ord. No. 3711, §§ 1, 2, 9-25-1972; Ord. No. 3755, § 1, 12-10-1973; Ord. No. 3795, § 1, 1-27-1975; Ord. No.
3802, § 1, 2-10-1975; Ord. No. 3806, § 1, 3-24-1975; Ord. No. 3826, § 1, 7-28-1975; Ord. No. 3920, § 1, 1-9-1978; Ord. No. 3983, § 1, 4-24-1979; Ord. No. 3992, § 1,
6-26-1979; Ord. No. 4008, § 1, 10-9-1979; Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 12-20-1979; Ord. No. 4160, § 1, 1-10-1984; Ord. No. 4171, § 1, 2-14-1984; Ord. No. 4226, § 1, 8-27-
1985; Ord. No. 4242, § 1, 11-26-1985; Ord. No. 4247, § 1, 1-28-1986; Ord. No. 4273, § 1, 11-25-1986; Ord. No. 4335, § 1, 11-10-1987; Ord. No. 4340, § 1, 1-26-1988;
Ord. No. 4360, § 1, 8-23-1988; Ord. No. 4396, § I, 9-12-1989; Ord. No. 4540, § 1, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 4841, § I, 9-8-1998; Ord. No. 4861, §§ I, II, 11-24-1998; Ord.
 

No. 5093, § I, 3-25-2003; Ord. No. 5180, § II, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5224, §§ I, II, 12-14-2004; Ord. No. 5276, § I, 8-9-2005; Ord. No. 5291, §§ I, II, 10-11-2005; Ord. No.
5343, §§ I, II, 5-23-2006; Ord. No. 5354, § I, 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 5501, § I, 2-10-2009; Ord. No. 5576, § I, 8-10-2010; Ord. No. 5643, § I, 11-8-2011; Ord. No. 5728, § I,
3-11-2014; Ord. No. 5742, § I, 9-9-2014)


Sec. 50-204. - Yield intersections; signs.

 
(a)



(b)



(c)
 
In addition to intersections at which signs are authorized by RSMo 300.260 and 300.265, and s e c t i o n 5 0 - 2 0 3 , intersections designated as "Yield" intersections in this section shall be deemed "Yield" intersections, and the city traffic engineer shall place yield signs in such intersections as indicated.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line but, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection. If a driver is involved in a collision with another vehicle in the intersection after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield the right-of-way.
 
(Code 1972, § 407.05; Code 1982, § 19-68)


Sec. 50-205. - Public conveyances approaching railroad crossings.

Notwithstanding and in addition to any other provisions of the city's ordinances, any person operating a vehicle as a public conveyance for transportation of passengers for hire, before crossing any railroad tracks in the city, shall bring the vehicle to a complete stop at such a distance from the tracks as will allow the driver a clear view of the track so that he may see if any train or engine is approaching the place where he is to cross. If such train or engine is sighted, he shall remain standing until the train or engine is passed.

(Code 1972, § 407.18; Code 1982, § 19-69)


Sec. 50-206. - Circumventing intersections prohibited.

Operating a vehicle over, through, or across private property for the purpose of avoiding, circumventing, or contravening lawfully established traffic control regulations, signs, and signals is prohibited. Driving upon private property without stopping to do business thereupon shall be prima facie evidence of the operator's intent to violate this section.

(Code 1982, § 19-70; Ord. No. 4915, § I, 12-14-1999)


Secs. 50-207—50-235. - Reserved.


ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Sec. 50-236. - Application of article; signs required.

Whenever, by this article, parking is limited or prohibited on any designated street or highway, the city traffic engineer shall erect appropriate signs sufficient to give notice of such limit or prohibition. In the absence of such sign, the regulations of parking in this chapter shall be ineffective.

(Code 1972, § 410.27; Code 1982, § 19-81)


Sec. 50-237. - Parking of recreational vehicles or trailers.

 
(a)



(b)
 
No person shall park any recreational vehicle or trailer used or designed for use as a temporary or permanent dwelling or sleeping quarters, upon any street, alley, highway or other public place between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., for a period of continuous time greater than one hour.
No person shall store, park, use or occupy a recreational vehicle or trailer described in subsection (a) of this section, nor may he authorize or permit any person to do so, on any parcel of land in the city; provided, however, that a recreational vehicle or trailer may be stored or parked while not used or occupied if:
 
(1)


(2)

(3)
 
The recreational vehicle or trailer is parked or stored on the parcel of land at a distance of not less than 50 feet from the front property line and not less than five feet from the side property lines;
The recreational vehicle or trailer is no more than 35 feet long and no more than 15 feet high; and

The recreational vehicle or trailer is not stored or parked in such a manner as to be unsightly or otherwise to create a nuisance.
 

(c)
 

This section shall not apply to recreational vehicles or trailers of any kind parked for the purpose of resale by licensed and authorized dealers on th their business.
 
(Code 1972, § 410.09; Code 1982, § 19-82; Ord. No. 4719, § 1, 2-27-1996)


Sec. 50-238. - Commercial vehicles.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)





(d)


(e)
 
No commercial vehicle, trailer or tractor shall stand or be parked, when not being unloaded or loaded, on any public street or highway or alley within an SR, LR and MR district as such districts are defined in the zoning ordinance of the city.
No commercial vehicle, trailer or tractor shall stand or be parked on any street or highway when not being unloaded or loaded, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
No commercial vehicle shall stand, or be parked or stored, when not being unloaded or loaded, on any parcel of land in the city within an SR, LR and MR district as such districts are defined in the zoning ordinance of the city, except that a commercial vehicle may be parked in the driveway
or other off-street parking area of the residence of the driver of such commercial vehicle for a period not to exceed two hours, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
This section shall not apply to trucks used in street construction work and maintenance, laying of water pipe and sewer pipe, street lighting, fire and police alarm systems work and maintenance, or trucks of any other public utility company while engaged in work.
No commercial vehicle, trailer or tractor weighing over five tons shall be allowed to stand or to be parked, when not being unloaded or loaded, on any city-owned parking facility or lot in the city.
 
(Code 1972, § 410.18; Code 1982, § 19-83; Ord. No. 3725, § 1, 5-30-1973; Ord. No. 4152, § 1, 11-8-1983; Ord. No. 4168, § 1, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 4672, § 2, 1-10-
1995)


Sec. 50-239. - Handicapped parking.

 
(a)


(b)



(c)


(d)
 
In any parking lot, drive-in or private way, where parking spaces are reserved for handicapped persons, no vehicle other than that of a handicapped person shall be permitted to utilize such parking spaces.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which the spaces reserved for handicapped parking are located to erect at each such space a pole sign which states "HANDICAPPED PARKING ONLY, Violators will be Prosecuted," or "HANDICAPPED PARKING ONLY," or which displays the logo emblem of the handicapped which is the wheel chair with figure.
"Handicapped person" is defined, for the purpose of this section, to be a person who is permanently disabled and is incapable of walking in the normal manner or confined to the use of a wheelchair for mobility.
Handicapped persons shall be identified by means of two stickers provided by the city and affixed to the front and rear bumpers of the motor vehicle, or a sticker or windshield card provided for that purpose by another authority, or by a license plate of this state which indicates the vehicle is that of a handicapped person.
 
(Code 1972, § 410.30; Code 1982, § 19-84; Ord. No. 4077, § 1, 2-10-1981; Ord. No. 4081, § 1, 3-10-1981)


Sec. 50-240. - Fire lanes.

 
(a)





(b)


(c)


(d)


(e)
 
The fire chief shall designate any area as a fire lane on any street, alley, parking lot or private way which shall be kept clear at all times for the fire department's use in extinguishing fires. It shall be the duty of the owner and the occupant of the property to place signs on such areas designating such areas as fire lanes, under direction of the fire chief. It shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to erect signs with the legend "no parking fire lane" on any street or alley so designated by the fire chief.
No person shall park or leave unattended a motor vehicle on any portion of a fire lane or on any portion of a parking lot or private way not properly designated as a parking space.
A person in the act of loading or unloading a vehicle shall be permitted to park only in those areas, if any, set aside by the owner or occupant of the property for the purposes of loading or unloading. All other stopping or parking of vehicles shall be in designated parking areas only.
Any owner or occupant of property who is required to erect and maintain fire lane signs under the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if he fails to do so.
Any person who parks or permits the parking of a vehicle in, or who otherwise obstructs a fire lane, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
 

(Code 1982, § 19-85; Ord. No. 4075, §§ 1—6, 1-13-1981; Ord. No. 5306, § I, 1-10-2006)


Sec. 50-241. - Parking over seven days prohibited.

No person shall park or leave standing or cause to be parked or left standing any vehicle upon any public street in the city continuously for a period of seven days or longer.

(Code 1982, § 19-86; Ord. No. 4630, § 1, 12-14-1993)
 

Sec. 50-242. - General prohibitions on stopping, standing or parking.

 
(a)
 
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)
 
On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; On a sidewalk;
Within 25 feet of an intersection; On a crosswalk;
Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway;

At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking.
 

(b)
 

Except as noted in this section, no person shall stand or park a vehicle whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)


(6)

(7)
 
In front of a public or private driveway; Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;

Within 30 feet upon an approach flashing signal, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;

Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance;
At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking; Within ten feet of a public mailbox.
 
(c)


(d)


(e)
 
Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within 18 inches of the right hand curb.
Except as noted in this section, no person shall park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaging in, loading merchandise or passengers, any place where official signs prohibit parking.
No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful.
 

(Ord. No. 5532, § I, 8-11-2009)


Sec. 50-243. - Other prohibitions on parking.

 
(a)






(b)
 
When, by ordinance, parking is prohibited or restricted on any street or highway or any portion of any street or highway at any time or for any length of time, such street or highway or portion of street or highway and the applicable conditions to the prohibition or restriction of parking shall be as set forth in schedule in subsection (b) of this section. The public works director shall erect signs giving notice of the indicated prohibition or restriction of parking and the conditions applicable to such prohibition or restriction, on each block of the following streets or highways or portions of streets or highways.
Code. The following numbers under the column "Times and Conditions" shall mean the following:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)
 

Parking is allowed for pickup or delivery at specific addresses on that street. Parking is not allowed only if for a continuous period of over one hour.
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays (January 1, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, December 25) excepted. Parking is prohibited at any time.
Parking is prohibited except for patrons and public employees. Parking for compact vehicle only.
 


Alicia Avenue	
7500 block—Two-hour parking on the south side of the street from approximately 95 feet west of Big Bend Boulevard to 198 feet west of Big Bend Boulevard	
(4)

Alicia Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking on the south side of the street, from Big Bend Boulevard to 95 feet west	
(4)

Alicia Avenue	
7900 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, 30 feet east from intersection of Hanley	
(4)

Alicia Court	
7700 Block—No parking around cul-de-sac perimeter	
(4)

Anna Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, 50 feet east from intersection of Marshall	
(4)

Anna Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to driveway, north side of street, from approximately 140 feet east of Marshall to approximately 150 feet east of Marshall	
(4)

Anna Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking on south side of street (entire length of block)	
(4)

Anna Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking anytime, north side of street, from intersection of Marshall Avenue to 84 feet east	
(4)

Arbor Avenue	
3200 and 3300 Blocks—No parking on east side of street	
(4)

Bartold Avenue	
2700 Block—No parking either side of street, from intersection of Manchester to the 2800 Block of Bartold	
(4)

Bartold Avenue	
2800 Block—No parking on west side of street	
(4)

Bartold Avenue	
2800 Block—No parking on east side of street, from north end of 2800 Block to approximately 210 feet south	
(4)

Bartold Avenue	
3000 and 3100 Blocks—No parking on west side of street, from Hanley to approximately 95 feet south	
(4)

Bartold Avenue	
3000 and 3100 Blocks—No parking on east side, from Hanley to approximately 57 feet south	
(4)

Bartold Avenue	
7700 Block—No parking, from Laclede Station Road to approximately 50 feet south	
(4)

Bellevue Avenue	
2000 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, 25 feet south from intersection of High Street	
(4)

Bellevue Avenue	
2000 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, 25 feet north from intersection of Stanley	
(4)

Bellevue Avenue	
2100 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, 25 feet south from Stanley	
(4)

Bellevue Avenue	
2100 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, 35 feet north from intersection of South Street	
(4)

Bellevue Avenue	
2100 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, 25 feet north from intersection of South Street	
(4)
 


Bellevue Avenue	
2200 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, 25 feet north from intersection of Richmond	
(4)

Bellevue Avenue	
2300 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, 25 feet south from intersection of Richmond	
(4)

Bellevue Avenue	
2300 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, 25 feet north from intersection of Gayola	
(4)

Bellevue Avenue	
2400 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, 25 feet north from intersection of Zephyr	
(4)

Bellevue Avenue	
2500 Block—No parking on west side of street, 136 feet north of Lyndover to 160 feet north of Lyndover	
(4)

Bellevue Avenue	
2600 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, 100 feet north from intersection of Manchester	
(4)

Bellevue Avenue	
2600 block—East side of street, from the north curb line of Manchester Avenue to 100 feet north	
(4)

Bellevue Avenue	
2700 Block—No parking on west side of street	
(4)

Bellevue Avenue	
2700 block—East side of street, from the south curb line of Manchester Avenue to 166 feet south	
(4)

Bellevue Avenue	
2700 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, 15 feet north from intersection of Southwest Avenue	
(4)

Bernard Drive	
7900 Block—No parking any time, north and south sides of street	
(4)


East Side

Big Bend Boulevard	
2300 Block—No parking on east side of street, from Richmond Place to the city limits	
(4)

Big Bend Boulevard	
2400, 2500 Block—No parking on east side of street	
(4)

Big Bend Boulevard	
2600 Block—No parking on east side of street	
(4)

West Side

Big Bend Boulevard	
2000 Block—One-hour parking on the west side of the street, from a point 112 feet south of the centerline of West Bruno Avenue, southwardly 252 feet (roughly from 60 feet south of the curb at West Bruno to the southern end of the block)	
(2)

Big Bend Boulevard	
2100, 2200, 2300, 2400 Blocks—No parking on the west side of the street	
(4)

Big Bend Boulevard	
2500 Block—No parking on the west side of the street, from the intersection of Rannells Avenue south to 79 feet south of the centerline of Lyndover Place (roughly to the northern edge of 2531 Big Bend)	
(4)
 


Big Bend Boulevard	
2500 Block—One-hour parking on the west side of the street, from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00

p.m. from a point 79 feet south of the centerline of Lyndover Place southwardly 45 feet (roughly in front of 2531 Big Bend)	
(2)

Big Bend Boulevard	
2500 Block—Fulltime parking on the west side of the street, from a point 124 feet south of the centerline of Lyndover Place southwardly 48 feet (roughly in front of 2533 Big Bend)	
(4)

Big Bend Boulevard	
2500, 2600 Blocks—No parking on the west side of the street, from a point 172 feet south of the centerline of Lyndover Place southwardly to Manchester Road (roughly from the southern end of 2533 Big Bend to Manchester Road)	
(4)

Bredell Avenue	
2000, 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400, 2500 and 2600 Blocks—No parking east side of street	
(4)

Brendell Avenue	
2400 Block—No parking west side of the street, 155 feet north of the intersection of Rannels Avenue to 195 feet north of the intersection of Rannels Avenue	
(4)

Bredell Avenue	
2600 Block—No parking here to corner, west side, from intersection of Manchester to 60 feet north	
(4)

Bredell Avenue	
2600 Block—No parking any time, west side of street, from Lohmeyer Avenue to 33 feet south of the south curb line of Lohmeyer Avenue	
(4)

Bruno Avenue	
7100 Block—No parking south side of street, entire length of block	
(4)

Bruno Avenue	
7100 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Bellevue to 60 feet east	
(4)

Bruno Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking, north side of street, from intersection of Bellevue Avenue to western city limits	
(4)

Bruno Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking, south side of street, from intersection of Bellevue Avenue to western city limits	
(4)

Burgess Avenue	
2800 Block—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Burgess Avenue	
7700 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Burgess Avenue	
No parking here to corner, east side of the street, from the intersection of Comfort to 20 feet north	
(4)

Cambridge Avenue	
3400 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Cambridge Avenue	
3400 Block—No parking south side of street, here to corner from 40 feet west of intersection of Picadilly	
(4)

Cambridge Avenue	
3700 Block—No parking south side of street, 50 feet from intersection of Big Bend	
(4)

Caroline Avenue	
7900 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)
 


Cherry Street	
3100 Block—No parking east side of street, from intersection of Paciic to 100 feet north	
(4)

Circle Drive	
2500 Block—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Circle Drive	
2600 Block—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Circle Drive	
2600 Block—No parking east side of street	
(4)

Coleman Avenue	
3000 Block—No parking on the east side of the street, from the north curb line of Kerens Avenue to 35 feet north	
(4)

Coleman Avenue	
3000 Block—No parking here to corner, west side, from intersection of Kerens to 80 feet north	
(4)

Comfort Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Comfort Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Oakland 30 feet east	
(4)

Comfort Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Big Bend to 50 feet west	
(4)

Comfort Avenue	
7600 and 7700 Blocks—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Commonwealth Avenue	
3700 Block—No parking south side of street 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, from 160 feet west of intersection of Sussex to 246 feet west of intersection of Sussex	
(3)

Corcoran Drive	
7900 Block—No parking any time, north and south sides of street	
(4)

Edgar Avenue	
3100 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of Elm to 25 feet south	
(4)

Edgar Avenue	
3100 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Elm to 25 feet south	
(4)

Edgebrook Lane	
7800 block—No parking 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday from 53 feet west of the west curb of Laclede Station Road to 82 feet west of the west curb of Laclede Station Road	
(4)

Edgebrook Lane	
No parking south side of street from the west curb of Laclede Station Road to 53 feet west	
(4)

Ellis Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Ellis Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Big Bend to 100 feet west	
(4)

Ellis Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Oakland to 30 feet east	
(4)

Elm Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)
 


Elm Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Sutton to 45 feet east	
(4)

Elm Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Elm Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Big Bend to 70 feet east	
(4)

Elm Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Sutton to 30 feet west	
(4)

Flora Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Flora Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Sutton to 30 feet east	
(4)

Flora Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking, south side of street, from intersection of Big Bend to 250 feet east	
(4)

Flora Avenue	
7800 Block—No parking, north side of street, from the intersection of Laclede Station Road to 57 feet west	
(4)

Flora Avenue	
7800 Block—No parking, south side of street, from the intersection of Laclede Station Road to 43 feet west	
(4)

Flora Avenue	
7800 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Bartold to 35 feet west	
(4)

Florent Avenue	
2400 Block—No parking east side of street	
(4)

Florent Avenue	
2500 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Lohmeyer to 40 feet north	
(4)

Florent Avenue	
2550 Block—No parking, north side of Florent Avenue from 2550 Florent Avenue southeast 135 feet to Martini Avenue	
(4)

Folk Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of the street from the intersection of Big Bend to 50 feet west of Big Bend	
(4)

Folk Avenue	
7900 Block—No parking any time, north and south sides of street, from east curb line of Hanley Road to 200 feet east	
(4)

Gayola Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Gayola Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Bellevue to 25 feet west	
(4)

Gayola Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Gayola Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Gayola Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking north side of street from intersection with Big Bend east 55 feet	
(4)
 


Gerhard Avenue	
2500 Block—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Gerhard Avenue	
2500 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Lohmeyer to 40 feet north	
(4)

Greenwood Avenue	
3400 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of St. Elmo to 30 feet east	
(4)

Greenwood Avenue	
3500 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Sutton to 45 feet west	
(4)

Greenwood Boulevard	
3500 Block—No parking any time, south side of street, from the west curb line of St. Elmo Avenue to 42 feet west of the west curb line of St. Elmo Avenue	
(4)

Greenwood Boulevard	
3500 Block—No parking anytime, south side of street, from intersection of St. Elmo to 58 feet west	
(4)

Greenwood Boulevard	
From Canterbury Avenue to Big Bend Boulevard from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Tuesdays, from April 1 through October 31	
(4)

Hanley Road	
2000, 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400, 2500, 2600, 2700, 2800, 2900, 3000 Blocks—No parking

east side of street	
(4)

Hanley Road	
2000, 2100, 2200, 2800, 2900, 3000 Blocks—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Hazel Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Hazel Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Hazel Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Sutton to 40 feet west	
(4)

High Street	
7100 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

High Street	
7200 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

High Street	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Bellevue to 25 feet east	
(4)

High Street	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Yale to 30 feet west	
(4)

Hope Street	
2600 Block—No parking west side of street, from dead end to 80 feet south	
(4)

James Street	
7400 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Big Bend to 75 feet east	
(4)

James Street	
7400 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Big Bend to 100 feet east	
(4)

Jerome Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street from the intersection of Florent Avenue to 30 feet west	
(4)

Jerome Avenue	
7500, 7600, 7700 Blocks—No parking north side of street	
(4)
 


Jerome Avenue	
7700 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Bredell to 50 feet west	
(4)

Kensington Avenue	
7300, 7400 and 7500 Blocks—No parking east side of street	
(4)

Kerens	
7700 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
2200 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of West Bruno to 50 feet south	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
2400 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of Rannells to 50 feet north	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
2500 Block—No parking, from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., east side of street	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
2500, 2600, 2700, 2800 and 3000 Blocks—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
2600 Block—No parking, east side of street, from intersection of Manchester to 240 feet north	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
2600 Block—No parking, west side of street, from intersection of Manchester to 240 feet north	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
2600 Block—No parking, 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., except Saturday and Sunday, east side of street, from 140 feet north of Manchester to intersection of Lohmeyer	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
3000 Block—No parking, 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., east side street	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
3000 block—No parking on east side of street	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
3100 block—No parking on east side of street	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
3200 Block—No parking, east side of street to city limits	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
3200 Block—No parking, west side of street to city limits	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
3200 Block—No parking on sidewalk, west side of street, from intersection of Edgebrook to 125 feet north	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
3200-3266 Blocks (Shopping Center) No parking ire lane	
(4)

Laclede Station Road	
No parking here to corner, east side of street, from 40 feet north of the north curb line of Williams Court and 40 feet south of the south curb line of Williams Court, from 40 feet north of the north curb line of Alicia Court and 40 feet south of the south curb line of Alicia Court, and from 77 feet north of the north curb line of Folk Avenue	
(4)

Lanham Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking east side of street	
(4)

Leamington	
3500 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Lindbergh Drive	
7700 Block—No parking east side of street	
(4)
 


Linden Place	
7100 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Lohmeyer Avenue	
7300 and 7400 Blocks—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Lohmeyer Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Sutton to 100 feet east	
(4)

Lohmeyer Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking north side of street, from intersection of Oakview to 90 feet west	
(4)

Lohmeyer Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Big Bend to 75 feet east	
(4)

Lohmeyer Avenue	
7500 and 7600 Blocks—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Lohmeyer Avenue	
7600 Block—No parking south side of street, from intersection of Bredell to 175 feet east	
(4)

Lohmeyer Avenue	
7600 Block—No parking between signs, south side of street, from intersection of Oakland to 25 feet east	
(4)

Lohmeyer Avenue	
7700 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Laclede Station Road to 60 feet east	
(4)

Lohmeyer Avenue	
7700 Block—No parking, north side of street	
(4)

Lohmeyer Avenue	
7750 Lohmeyer Avenue—Two-hour limit in front of Maplewood Public Library, 9:00

a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, south side of street, from parking lot entrance eastward for a distance of 265 feet.	

Lohmeyer Avenue	
7750 Lohmeyer Avenue—Two-hour limit in front of Maplewood Public Library, 9:00

a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, in west parking lot.	

Lowry	
3000 Block—No parking east side of street	
(4)

Lyle Avenue	
2600 Block—No parking east side of street	
(4)

Lyle Avenue	
2600 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of Manchester to 80 feet north	
(4)

Lyle Avenue	
2600 Block—No parking west side of street, from 135 feet south of the north dead end of Lyle to 120 feet south of the north dead end of Lyle	
(4)

Lyndover Place	
7100 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Lyndover Place	
7100 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Bellevue to 50 feet east	
(4)

Lyndover Place	
7100 Block—One-hour parking, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., north side of street, from 50 feet west of Yale to 115 feet west of Yale	
(2)
 


Lyndover Place	
7200, 7300, 7400 Blocks—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Lyndover Place	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Bellevue to 75 feet west	
(4)

Lyndover Place	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Oakview to 25 feet east	
(4)

Lyndover Place	
7300 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Oakview to 25 feet west	
(4)

Lyndover Place	
7300 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Sutton to 50 feet east	
(4)

Lyndover Place	
7400 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Big Bend to 25 feet east	
(4)

Madge Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Madge Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Margarette to 30 feet west	
(4)

Madge Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Lyle to 30 feet east	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7100, 7200, 7300, and 7400 Blocks—No parking 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, north side of street and 7400 block, south side of street	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7100 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Yale to 20 feet east	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7100 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Bellevue to 30 feet east	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7100 Block—Two-hour parking, south side and north side of street, unless otherwise prohibited	
(2)

Manchester Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Bellevue to 40 feet west	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7200 Block—Two-hour parking, south side of street, from 20 feet east of Marshall to 195 feet east of Marshall	
(2)

Manchester Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Marshall to 20 feet east	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Oakview to 30 feet east	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Roseland Terrace to 25 feet west	
(4)
 


Manchester Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Hope to 15 feet west of Hope	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Hope to 10 feet east	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection to 20 feet west	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7200 Block—Two-hour parking, north side of street, unless otherwise prohibited	
(2)

Manchester Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking, south side of street, from intersection of Sutton to 135 feet east	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking south side of street, from intersection of Sutton to 135 feet east	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7300 Block—Two-hour parking, south side of street, from 135 feet east of Sutton to 585 feet east of Sutton	
(2)

Manchester Avenue	
7300 Block—Two-hour parking, north side of street	
(2)

Manchester Avenue	
7300 block—15 minute parking on the south side of the street for purposes of loading and unloading for all vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of one ton or greater	
(1)

Manchester Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Margarette to 20 feet east	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking, north side of street, from the intersection of Lyle to Big Bend	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking, north side of street, from 50 feet west of the west curb line of Sutton Boulevard to 98 feet west of the west curb line of Sutton Boulevard, except ten- minute valet parking only between 5:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. in the above described area	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking south side of street, from 315 feet east of Big Bend to 510 feet east of Big Bend	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7400 Block—Two-hour parking, south side and north side of street, unless otherwise prohibited	
(2)

Manchester Avenue	
7500, 7600, 7700, 7800, 7900 Blocks—No parking south side	
(4)

Manchester Avenue	
7500, 7600, 7700, 7800, 7900 Blocks—No parking north side	
(4)

Manhattan Avenue	
3400 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of St. Elmo to 30 feet east	
(4)
 


Manhattan Avenue	
3500 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of St. Elmo to 30 feet west	
(4)

Manhattan Avenue	
3500 Block—No parking between signs, south side of street, at intersection of St. Elmo (approximately 50 feet between signs)	
(4)

Maple Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Maple Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Maple Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Big Bend to 65 feet east	
(4)

Maple Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Sutton to 50 feet west	
(4)

Maplewood Commons Drive	
1900—2300 Blocks—No parking any time, east and west sides of street	
(4)

Marietta Alley	
No parking anytime, from Marietta Avenue south to dead end	
(4)

Marietta Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Marietta Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Sutton to 50 feet east	
(4)

Marietta Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Marshall to 50 feet west	
(4)

Marietta Avenue	
7300 Block—Two-hour parking, south side of street, from 61 feet east of the east curb line of Sutton Boulevard to 135 feet east of the east curb line of Sutton Boulevard, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday only. No prohibitions at other times	
(4)

Marietta Avenue	
Residents-only parking in front of 7366, 7362, and 7360 Marietta Ave	
(4)

Margarette Avenue	
2600 Block—No parking east side of street	
(4)

Margarette Avenue	
2600 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of Manchester to 40 feet north	
(4)

Marion Court	
7600 and 7700 Blocks—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Marshall Avenue	
2700, 2800, 2900, 3000 Blocks—No parking east side of street	
(4)

Marshall Avenue	
2700, 2800, 2900, 3000 Blocks—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Marshall Avenue	
2700 Block—Handicap parking only, Saturday 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m., Sunday 7:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m., east side, from a point 10 feet north of Sarah Avenue intersection to 60 feet  north	
(4)

Martini Drive	
2500 Block—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Martini Drive	
2600 Block—No parking west side of street	
(4)
 


Martini Drive	
2600 Block—No parking here to corner, east side, from intersection of Manchester to 50 feet north	
(4)

Martini Drive	
2600 Block—No parking east side, from a point 50 feet north of Manchester to a point 150 feet north	
(1)

Martini Drive	
2600 Block—No parking between signs, east side of street, from 50 feet south of Lohmeyer to 50 feet north of Lohmeyer	
(4)

McCready Avenue	
No parking east side McCready from West Bruno south 110 feet west of 7558 West Bruno	
(4)

McCready Avenue	
2000 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of West Bruno to 40 feet south	
(4)

McKinley Avenue	
2100 Block—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Moller Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Moller Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Marshall to 75 feet east	
(4)

Myrtle Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Myrtle Avenue	
No parking south side of street from east curb of Hazel Avenue to 43 feet east	
(4)

Oakland Avenue	
2500 Block—No parking east side of street	
(4)

Oakland Avenue	
2500 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of Rannells to 30 feet south	
(4)

Oakland Avenue	
2700 Block—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Oakland Avenue	
2700 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Manchester to 85 feet south	
(4)

Oakland Avenue	
2800 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from the intersection of Comfort Avenue to the intersection of Martion Court	
(4)

Oakland Avenue	
2800 Block—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Oakland Avenue	
2800 Block—No parking, east side of street, 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00

p.m. on all days when school is in session from 142 feet north of the north curb line of Ellis Avenue to 155 feet south of the south curb line of Ellis Avenue	
(4)

Oakview Terrace	
2400 Block—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Oakview Terrace	
2500 Block—No parking here to corner east side of street from intersection of Zephyr 25 feet north	
(4)

Oakview Terrace	
2500 Block—No parking east side of street	
(4)

Oakview Terrace	
2500 Block—No parking here to corner west side of street from intersection of Lyndover to 25 feet south	
(4)
 


Oakview Terrace	
2600 Block—15 minute parking, 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., west side of street, from 35 feet north of Manchester to 100 feet north of Manchester	
(1)

Oakview Terrace	
2600 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of Manchester to 35 feet north	
(4)

Oakview Terrace	
2600 Block—No parking west side of street from a point 160 feet north of Manchester to a point 254 feet north of Manchester	
(4)

Oxford Avenue	
3400 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Oxford Avenue	
3500 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Oxford Avenue	
3500 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Kensington to 45 feet east	
(4)

Oxford Avenue	
3600 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Oxford Avenue	
3600 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Kensington to 25 feet north	
(4)

Oxford Avenue	
3700 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Oxford Avenue	
3700 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Pacifc Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Picadilly Avenue	
7300, 7400, 7500 Blocks—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Picadilly Avenue	
7400 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from the intersection of Oxford to 40 feet north	
(4)

Picadilly Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Greenwood to 8 feet south	
(4)

Picadilly Avenue	
7500 Block—One-hour parking, east side of street, from 8 feet south of Greenwood to 35 feet south of Greenwood	
(2)

Rannells Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking north side of street, from intersection of Big Bend west to intersection of Martini	
(4)

Rannells Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking north side of street, from intersection of Martini west to intersection of Gerhard	
(4)

Rannells Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Oakland to 25 feet east	
(4)

Rannells Avenue	
7600 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Rannells Avenue	
7700 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Rannells Avenue	
7800 Block (between Laclede Station Road and Circle Drive)—No parking north side of street	
(4)
 


Richmond Place	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Bellevue to 25 feet west	
(4)

Richmond Place	
7200, 7300, 7400 Blocks—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Roseland Terrace	
2600 Block—No parking east side of street	
(4)

Rule Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Marshall to 30 feet east	
(4)

Rule Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Marshall to 30 feet east	
(4)

Sarah Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

South Street	
7100 and 7200 Blocks—No parking north side of street	
(4)

South Street	
7100 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Bellevue to 30 feet east	
(4)

South Street	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Bellevue to 25 feet west	
(4)

Southwest Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street from intersection of Manchester to 100 feet east	
(4)

Southwest Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street from intersection of Bellevue Avenue to 50 feet east	
(4)

Southwest Avenue	
7200 Block—One-hour parking, 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., south side of street, from intersection of Manchester to 155 feet east	
(2)

Southwest Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Manchester to 45 feet east	
(4)

Southwest Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Limit to 33 feet west	
(4)

Southwest Avenue	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Bellevue to 35 feet east	
(4)

Stanley Avenue	
7200 Block (between Bellevue and Yale)—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Stanley Avenue	
7200 Block (between Bellevue and Yale)—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Bellevue to 25 feet east	
(4)

Stanley Avenue	
7200 Block (between Bellevue and Yale)—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Yale to 25 feet west	
(4)

Stanley Avenue	
7200 Block (between Alameda and Bellevue)—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Stanley Avenue	
7200 Block (between Alameda and Bellevue)—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Bellevue to 25 feet west	
(4)
 


Sunnen Drive	
MetroLink Tracks—No parking, north and south sides of street, from the MetroLink tracks to 50 feet east and from the MetroLink tracks to 50 feet west	
(4)

Sussex Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Sussex Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking here to corner east side of street from intersection of Greenwood to 35 feet south	
(4)

Sussex Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking between signs, from 85 feet south of intersection of Greenwood to 165 feet south of Greenwood (to a point south of Sporland Valve Co. driveway)	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2300 and 2400 Blocks—No parking east side of street	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2400 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of Lyndover to 25 feet north	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2500 Block—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2500 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Lohmeyer to 25 feet north	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2600 Block—No parking east side of street	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2600 Block—No parking on the west side of the street from the north curb line of Manchester Avenue to 85 feet north	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2600 Block—No parking on the west side of the street from 85 feet north of the north curb line of Manchester Avenue to 125 feet north of the north curb line of Manchester Avenue except ten-minute valet parking only between 5:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. within the described area	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
Resident only parking zone in front of 2635 and 2639 Sutton Boulevard	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
Residents-only parking on the west side of street, in front of 2645, 2643 and 2641 Sutton Boulevard	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2700 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Manchester to 90 feet south	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2700 Block—Two-hour parking, 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., east side of street, from 90 feet south of Manchester to 165 feet south	
(2)

Sutton Boulevard	
2700 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Marietta to 25 feet north	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2700 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Marietta to 20 feet south	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2700 Block—Two-hour parking, 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., east side of street, from 20 feet south of Marietta to 265 feet south	
(2)
 


Sutton Boulevard	
2700 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Hazel to 25 feet north	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2700 Block—Two-hour parking on the west side of the street, from 60 feet south of intersection of Manchester to 110 feet south	
(2)

Sutton Boulevard	
2700 Block—Handicapped parking only, west side of street, from intersection of Flora to 35 feet north	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2700 Block—No parking west side of street, from 150 feet south of Manchester to 275 feet south	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2700 Block—Two-hour parking, from intersection of Hazel to 200 feet north	
(2)

Sutton Boulevard	
2700 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of Hazel to 21 feet north	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2720 Block—Compact vehicle parking only on Sutton Boulevard in front of 2720 Sutton Boulevard/7372 Marietta Avenue	
(6)

Sutton Boulevard	
2800 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of Maple to 110 feet north	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2800 Block—Two-hour parking, east side of street, from 20 feet south of Hazel to 20 feet north of Maple	
(2)

Sutton Boulevard	
2800 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Hazel to 20 feet south	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2800 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Maple to 20 feet north	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2900 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Maple to 20 feet south	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
2900 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of Maple to 25 feet south	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
3100 Block—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
3100 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Elm to 50 feet south	
(4)

Sutton Boulevard	
3100 Block—Two-hour parking, east side of street, from 47 feet south of the south curb line at the intersection of Elm Avenue to 85 feet south of the south curb line at the intersection of Elm Avenue	
(2)

Sutton Boulevard	
3200 Block—No parking west side of street	
(4)

St. Elmo Avenue	
7200, 7300, 7400, 7500 Blocks—No parking west side of street	
(4)

Swimming pool	
Swimming pool—15-minute loading and unloading zone on east side of swimming pool parking lot from pump room doors 30 feet south to concession stand doors	
(1)
 


Valley Drive	
2600 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Bredell to 50 feet west	
(4)

Valley Avenue	
2500 Block—No parking on the west side of the street	
(4)

Vine Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Vine Avenue	
7300 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Marshall to 45 feet west	
(4)

Walter Avenue	
3100 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Elm to 20 feet south	
(4)

Walter Avenue	
3100 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of Elm to 30 feet south	
(4)

Walter Avenue	
3100 Block—No SUV, truck or van parking on the west side	
(4)

Walter Avenue	
3200 Block—No parking east side of street	

Weaver Avenue	
7500 block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Weaver Avenue	
7600 block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Weaver Avenue	
7700 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

Weaver Avenue	
7700 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Laclede Station Road to 40 feet east	
(4)

Weaver Avenue	
7800 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Laclede Station Road to 30 feet west	
(4)

Weaver Avenue	
7800 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Laclede Station Road to 40 feet west	
(4)

West Bruno Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking any time, south side of street, from the west curb line of Big Bend Boulevard to 79 feet west of the west curb line of Big Bend Boulevard	
(4)

West Bruno Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded, south side of street, from 165 feet west of the west curb line of Big Bend Boulevard to 268 feet west of the west curb line of Big Bend Boulevard	
(3)

West Bruno Avenue	
7900 Block—No parking any time, south side of street	
(4)

Westield Court	
2000 Block—No parking north side, from a point beginning at east corner to a point 35 feet west	
(4)

Westield Court	
2000 Block—No parking on west side, from a point beginning at south corner to a point 35 feet north	
(4)

West Point Drive	
2500 Block—No parking north side of street	
(4)

West Point Drive	
2500 Block—No parking east side of street	
(4)
 


Williams Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking north side of street from Big Bend Boulevard west to Creasy Avenue	
(4)

Williams Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking here to corner, south side of street, from intersection of Big Bend to 100 feet west	
(4)

Williams Avenue	
No parking on the south side of the street, from 156 feet west of the west curb line of Big Bend Boulevard to 195 feet west of the west curb line of Big Bend Boulevard	
(4)

Woodland Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Woodland Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Oakland to 40 feet east	
(4)

Woodland Avenue	
7500 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of street, from intersection of Big Bend to 40 feet west	
(4)

Woodmont Avenue	
7800 Block—West end of street, no parking between signs, south side of street	
(4)

Woodmont Avenue	
7800 Block—West end of street, no parking between signs, north side of street	
(4)

Yale Avenue	
2000 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of High Street to 25 feet north	
(4)

Yale Avenue	
2000 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of High Street to 25 feet south	
(4)

Yale Avenue	
2000 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of Stanley to 30 feet north	
(4)

Yale Avenue	
2100 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of South Street to 25 feet north	
(4)

Yale Avenue	
2100 Block—No parking here to corner, west side of street, from intersection of South Street to 25 feet south	
(4)

Yale Avenue	
2200 Block—No parking here to corner, east side of street, from intersection of Manchester to 25 feet north	
(4)

Yale Avenue	
2100 Block—Handicapped parking only, 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon and 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m., Sundays, and 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m., Wednesdays, east side of street, from 70 feet north of the north curb line of Bruno Avenue to 110 feet north of the north curb line of Bruno Avenue	
(4)

Zephyr Place	
7200, 7300, 7400 Blocks—No parking south side of street	
(4)

Zephyr Place	
7200 Block—No parking here to corner, north side of the street, from intersection of Bellevue to 25 feet west	
(4)
 

(Code 1972, § 410.26, Sched. VII; Code 1982, § 19-87; Ord. No. 3714, § 1, 11-27-1972; Ord. No. 3756, § 1, 12-10-1973; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 10-10-1977; Ord. No.
3914, § 1, 11-14-1977; Ord. No. 3915, § 1, 11-14-1977; Ord. No. 3917, § 1, 11-28-1977; Ord. No. 3929, § 1, 2-27-1978; Ord. No. 3930, § 1, 2-27-1978; Ord. No. 3944,
§ 1, 8-28-1978; Ord. No. 3957, § 1, 9-25-1978; Ord. No. 3958, § 1, 10-9-1978; Ord. No. 3984, § 1, 4-24-1979; Ord. No. 3986, § 1, 5-8-1979; Ord. No. 3997, § 1, 8-28-
1979; Ord. No. 4009, § 1, 10-9-1978; Ord. No. 4012, § 1, 10-23-1979; Ord. No. 4154, § 1, 12-13-1983; Ord. No. 4155, § 1, 12-13-1983; Ord. No. 4166, § 1, 1-24-1984;
Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-28-1984; Ord. No. 4193, § 1, 10-23-1984; Ord. No. 4197, § 1, 1-8-1985; Ord. No. 4199, § 1, 2-12-1985; Ord. No. 4206, § 1, 3-26-1985; Ord. No.
4257, § 1, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 4260, § 1, 7-8-1986; Ord. No. 4288, § 1, 3-24-1987; Ord. No. 4336, § 1, 12-8-1987; Ord. No. 4368, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4405, § I,
10-10-1989; Ord. No. 4487, § 1, 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 4489, § 1, 4-9-1991; Ord. No. 4493, § 1, 5-28-1991; Ord. No. 4515, § 1, 11-26-1991; Ord. No. 4526, § 1, 4-14-
1992; Ord. No. 4535, § 1, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 4539, § 1, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 4591, § 1, 4-27-1993; Ord. No. 4608, § 1, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 4613, § 1, 7-13-1993;
Ord. No. 4631, § 1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 4635, § 1, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 4637, § 1, 3-8-1994; Ord. No. 4649, § 1, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 4697, § 1, 7-11-1995; Ord. No.
4715, § 1, 2-13-1996; Ord. No. 4762, § 1, 1-14-1997; Ord. No. 4821, § I, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 4823, § I, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 4843, § I, 9-22-1998; Ord. No. 4844, § I, 9-
22-1998; Ord. No. 4845, § I, 9-22-1998; Ord. No. 4860, §§ I, II, 11-24-1998; Ord. No. 4863, § I, 12-22-1998; Ord. No. 4910, §§ I, II, 10-12-1999; Ord. No. 4917, § I, 12-
28-1999; Ord. No. 4926, §§ I, II, 2-8-2000; Ord. No. 4936, §§ I—III, 5-9-2000; Ord. No. 4940, § I, 5-23-2000; Ord. No. 4950, § I, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 4962, § IA, B, 10-
10-2000; Ord. No. 4967, § I, 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 4972, § I, 1-23-2001; Ord. No. 4982, § I, 4-10-2001; Ord. No. 4998, §§ I, II, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 5009, §§ I—III, 8-
28-2001; Ord. No. 5039, §§ I, II, 2-12-2002; Ord. No. 5082, § I, 11-26-2002; Ord. No. 5094, §§ I—VI, 3-25-2003; Ord. No. 5133, § I, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 5150, § I, 1-
27-2004; Ord. No. 5165, § I, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 5181, §§ I—III, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5197, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5213, § I, 10-12-2004; Ord. No. 5217, § I, 10-26-
2004; Ord. No. 5225, § I, 12-14-2004; Ord. No. 5226, § I, 12-14-2004; Ord. No. 5227, § I, 1-11-2005; Ord. No. 5228, § I, 1-11-2005; Ord. No. 5240, § I, 1-25-2005;
Ord. No. 5244, §§ I—III, 2-22-2005; Ord. No. 5245, §§ I, II, 2-22-2005; Ord. No. 5259, §§ I, II, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 5263, § I, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 5275, § I, 8-9-2005;
Ord. No. 5283, § I, 9-27-2005; Ord. No. 5284, § I, 9-27-2005; Ord. No. 5294, § I, 10-25-2005; Ord. No. 5300, § I, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 5305, § I, 1-10-2006; Ord. No.
5307, § I, 1-10-2006; Ord. No. 5318, § I, 2-14-2006; Ord. No. 5327, § I, 3-14-2006; Ord. No. 5331, § I, 4-28-2006; Ord. No. 5339, § I, 4-25-2006; Ord. No. 5345, § I, 5-
23-2006; Ord. No. 5351, § I, 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 5410, § I, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 5411, § I, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 5463, § I, 3-25-2008; Ord. No. 5469, §§ I, II, 4-22-2008;
Ord. No. 5473, § I, 5-13-2008; Ord. No. 5475, § I, 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 5570, § I, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 5575, § I, 8-10-2010; Ord. No. 5734, § I, 5-27-2014; Ord. No.
5736, § II, 6-10-2014; Ord. No. 5780, § I, 9-8-2015; Ord. No. 5781, § I, 9-8-2015; Ord. No. 5874, § I, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 5876, § I, 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 5786, § I,
12-12-2017)


Sec. 50-244. - Municipal parking lot regulations.

 
(a)
 
Bellevue Manchester parking lot.
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
 

No person shall park a vehicle on the Bellevue Manchester parking lot for more than two hours. No vehicle of any type shall be allowed to park overnight on the Bellevue Manchester parking lot.
No vehicle repair or maintenance of any kind shall take place on the Bellevue Manchester parking lot.

All commercial vehicles are prohibited from parking on the Bellevue Manchester parking lot at any time.
 

(b)
 

Marietta parking lot.
 

(1)

(2)
 

Sixteen parking stalls shall be designated two-hour parking only.

Loading zones shall be established as needed by authority of the director of public works.
 

(c)
 

Sutton Loop Park parking lot.
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
 

No person shall park a vehicle on the Sutton Loop Park parking lot for more than two hours. No vehicle of any type shall be allowed to park overnight on the Sutton Loop Park parking lot.
No vehicle repair or maintenance of any kind shall take place on the Sutton Loop Park parking lot.

All commercial vehicles are prohibited from parking on the Sutton Loop Park parking lot at any time.
 

(Code 1982, § 19-88; Ord. No. 4931, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5374, §§ I—III, 10-24-2006; Ord. No. 5656, § I, 2-28-2012)


Sec. 50-245. - Owner prima facie responsible for illegal parking.

If any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any provision of this chapter regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.

(Code 1972, § 410.29; Code 1982, § 19-89; Ord. No. 4931, § I, 4-11-2000)


Sec. 50-246. - Residential parking permit zones.

 
(a)





(b)
 
Where designated, there shall be zones restricted to parking by the residents of the adjacent residence. The chief of police shall issue a permit to the residents residing in the residence adjacent to such zones. Said permit shall be placed within the resident's vehicle on the rear view mirror designating the vehicle to be authorized to park in such zone. The permit shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall expire each year on December 31.
No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle in a residential parking permit zone that is not authorized. No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle in a residential parking permit zone that does not properly display a valid residential parking permit issued by the chief of
 

police.
 

(c)


(d)
 

The fine for illegally parking in a residential permit parking zone shall be $75.00 as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. The fine may be raised by order of the municipal judge in the course of the normal review of fines established for traffic violations.
The city traffic engineer shall erect signs designating the amount of the fine for a violation, in addition to sufficient signs to give notice of the prohibition.
 
(Ord. No. 5454, § I, 2-26-2008)


Secs. 50-247—50-270. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VI. - ABANDONED VEHICLES



Sec. 50-271. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Abandoned vehicle means any unattended motor vehicle, trailer, all-terrain vehicle, out-board motor or vessel removed or subject to removal from public or private property as provided in this article, whether or not operational, including, but not limited to, any motor vehicle or any part of a motor vehicle which is situated upon any property of any person in the city or upon any street, highway, or alley of the city, and:
 

(1)


(2)

(3)
 

Does not have displayed thereon a permanent license plate or set of license plates issued for that vehicle indicating current registration by one of the states of the United States of America;
For which no arrangements have been made for its storage with the owner or occupant of the premises on which it is located; or The owner of which has indicated in some way his intention to leave the vehicle and that he no longer claims ownership of it.
 

Derelict vehicle means any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked motor vehicle or any motor vehicle possessing one or any combination of the following attributes:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
 

Shattered or missing windows, headlights, or tail lights.

Unsecured or missing exterior parts, including, but not limited to, bumpers, grills, doors, and hoods, but excluding hubcaps. An estimated 50 percent or more of the vehicle's exterior paint is rusted, oxidized, or removed.
Observable amounts of vehicle fluids leaking from the vehicle resulting in a street discoloration or fluid streak not less than three inches in diameter or three inches in length.
 

Motor vehicle means any vehicle commonly self-propelled, whether or not such vehicle is, by reason of its present condition, capable of self-propulsion.

Street, highway or alley means and includes the entire width between the boundary lines of any way, any part of which is for public use, including sidewalks. (Code 1972, § 302.02(A); Code 1982, § 19-101; Ord. No. 4918, § I, 12-28-1999; Ord. No. 5196, § I, 7-27-2004)

Sec. 50-272. - Abandonment prohibited.

 
(a)

(b)
 
No person shall leave any abandoned or derelict vehicle on any private or public property in the city. No person shall leave any abandoned or derelict vehicle on any street, highway or alley in the city.
 
(Code 1972, § 302.02(B), (C); Code 1982, § 19-102)


Sec. 50-273. - Storage of abandoned vehicles prohibited.

No person shall store or allow any abandoned or derelict automobile to be stored or to remain on any property in the city owned, occupied or managed by him. Every person owning, occupying or managing any property in the city shall notify the police department of the year, model, make and, if ascertainable or known, the registration, license and manufacturer's number and name of the owner of any motor vehicle left upon his property without his consent.

(Code 1972, § 302.02(D); Code 1982, § 19-103)


Sec. 50-274. - Removal.

Derelict and abandoned motor vehicles shall be removed as follows:

 
(1)
 
Whenever any derelict or abandoned motor vehicle has remained on any street, highway or alley in the city for a period longer than 48 hours, the vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of a member of the police department of the city.
 

(2)



(3)



(4)
 

Whenever the chief of police is notified that a derelict vehicle is located upon any private real property in the city, he shall cause written notice owner and occupant (if other than the owner) of the real property to remove the derelict vehicle within seven days. Such written notice shall b person or shall be sent to the owner at his address last shown on the city's tax records or upon the records of the county recorder of deeds.
If the owner or occupant shall request a hearing within seven days after service of such notice, the chief of police shall conduct a hearing to determine whether such vehicle is a derelict vehicle prior to removal of such vehicle. If the owner or occupant does not request a hearing and the derelict vehicle is not removed within such seven-day period, the chief of police may cause it to be removed.
Any derelict vehicle removed from private property in accordance with the provisions of this subsection shall be deemed abandoned if not claimed within ten working days of after the owner's receipt of the notice of towing, as required by RSMo 304.156, and may be disposed of as provided in s e c t i o n 5 0 - 2 7 5 after compliance with subsection (6) of this section.
 
a.	No person shall fail or refuse to obey the order of the chief of police lawfully issued under the provisions of this section.

b.	The owner or owners of property from which a derelict vehicle has been removed under the direction of the chief of police shall be jointly and severally liable for all uncovered costs to the city in effecting such removal. In the event that payment is not made on demand, such costs shall be assessed against the real property from which such derelict vehicle was removed as special assessments, and such costs are to be collected by the collector of taxes assessed against the property. Such costs shall, like taxes, be a first lien on the property affected thereby until paid.
 
(5)





(6)
 
Whenever an abandoned vehicle has been left on private real property without the consent of the owner or person in possession of the property, a person in possession of such real property shall notify a member of the city police department, and after the abandoned vehicle has remained on said real property for a period longer than 48 hours, the abandoned vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of a member of the city police department.
The city shall make reasonable efforts to ascertain the ownership of all abandoned or derelict vehicles that have been impounded under subsections (1) through (5) of this section. The police department shall complete a crime inquiry and inspection report as follows:
 
a.	After a member of the police department authorizes the removal of an abandoned or derelict vehicle, such officer shall promptly make an inquiry with the national crime information center and any statewide Missouri law enforcement computer system to determine if the abandoned or derelict vehicle has been reported as stolen and shall enter the information pertaining to the towed property into the statewide law enforcement computer system.
b.	Such police officer shall also complete an inspection report, as designed by the Missouri director of revenue.

c.	If the towed vehicle is not claimed within ten working days after notice to the vehicle owner pursuant to RSMo 304.156, the police officer shall submit a crime inquiry and inspection report to the Missouri director of revenue.
d.	Notice as to the removal of any abandoned or derelict vehicle shall be made in writing within five working days to the registered owner and any lienholder. The notice shall include:
1.	The address and telephone number of where the impounded vehicle is stored;

2.	The date, reason and place from which the impounded vehicle was removed;

3.	A statement that the amount of the accrued towing, storage and administrative costs are the owner's responsibility, and that storage or administrative costs will continue to accrue until the impounded vehicle is reclaimed;
4.	A statement that the city claims a possessory lien for all such charges;

5.	A statement that the owner or holder of a valid security interest of record may retake possession of the impounded vehicle by proving ownership or rights to a secured interest and paying all towing and storage charges;
6.	A statement that, should the owner consider that the towing or removal was improper, the owner has a right to request a hearing to contest the propriety of such towing or removal;
7.	A statement that if the impounded vehicle remains unclaimed for 30 days from the date of mailing the notice, title to the impounded vehicle will be transferred to the person or entity in possession free of all prior liens;
8.	A statement that any outstanding charges in excess of the impounded vehicle's value shall remain the owner's liability; and

9.	Any additional information required by state law, if any. Such written notice shall be delivered in person or shall be sent to the owner or lienholder via certified mail, return receipt requested.
e.	If the identity of the registered owner or lienholder is not known to the person or agency that authorized the tow, notice as to the removal of any abandoned or derelict vehicle shall be made in writing within ten business days after the date of mailing of the notice from the Missouri department of revenue identifying the owner and lienholder. The notice shall be delivered to such owner and lienholder via certified mail, return receipt requested, and contain the following information:
1.	The address and telephone number of where the impounded vehicle is stored;

2.	The date, reason and place from which the impounded vehicle was removed;

3.	A statement that the amount of the accrued towing, storage and administrative costs are the owner's responsibility, and that storage or administrative costs will continue to accrue until the impounded vehicle is reclaimed;
4.	A statement that the city claims a possessory lien for all such charges;
 

5.	A statement that the owner or holder of a valid security interest of record may retake possession of the impounded vehicle by provi secured interest and paying all towing and storage charges;
6.	A statement that, should the owner consider that the towing or removal was improper, the owner has a right to request a hearing to contest the propriety of such towing or removal;
7.	A statement that if the impounded vehicle remains unclaimed for 30 days from the date of mailing the notice, title to the impounded vehicle will be transferred to the person or entity in possession free of all prior liens;
8.	A statement that any outstanding charges in excess of the impounded vehicle's value shall remain the owner's liability; and

9.	Any additional information required by state law, if any.

f.	If the Missouri department of revenue records fail to disclose the name of the owner or any lienholder of record, the city shall attempt to locate documents or other evidence of ownership on or within the abandoned property itself. If no ownership information is discovered, the city shall notify the Missouri director of revenue in writing and if required by RSMo 304.156.3, shall certify that a good faith effort has been made to locate evidence of ownership and that a physical search of the abandoned property disclosed that no ownership documents were found. The city may then apply for a title and dispose of the vehicle as provided in s e c t i o n 5 0 - 2 7 5 .
g.	The city shall keep a record for three years on any abandoned or derelict vehicle towed and not reclaimed by the owner. Such records shall contain information regarding the authorization to tow, copies of all correspondence with the Missouri department of revenue concerning the impounded vehicle, and information concerning the final disposition of the impounded vehicle.
 
(7)


(8)


(9)
 
When the presence of a derelict or abandoned motor vehicle on any property, public or private, is an immediate hazard to the health, safety or welfare of any person, the vehicle may be removed without prior notice.
No person shall deny access to any person authorized to enforce or carry out the provisions of this section, nor shall any person interfere in any way with the execution of the provisions of this section.
The owner of the abandoned or derelict vehicle removed pursuant to the provisions of this section, or any person claiming a lien, within ten days after receipt of notification from the city pursuant to subsection (6)d or (6)e of this section (whichever is later) may file a petition in the St. Louis County Associate Circuit Court to determine if the abandoned or derelict vehicle was wrongfully taken or withheld from the owner as provided in RSMo 304.156. Upon filing of such a petition, the owner or lienholder may have the abandoned or derelict vehicle released upon posting with the court a cash or surety bond or other adequate security equal to the amount of the charges for towing and storage to ensure the payment of such charges in the event he does not prevail.
 

(Code 1972, § 302.02(E); Code 1982, § 19-104; Ord. No. 4939, § I, 5-23-2000; Ord. No. 5196, § II, 7-27-2004)


Sec. 50-275. - Disposition of removed vehicles.

Derelict and abandoned motor vehicles removed pursuant to s e c t i o n 5 0 - 2 7 4 shall be kept and disposed of as follows:

 
(1)



(2)



(3)


(4)
 
Whenever a motor vehicle is removed from public or private property or from a street or highway under the provisions of this article, it shall be conveyed by or under the immediate direction of a member of the city police department by means of towing or otherwise to the police station or some other place as may be designated by the city council.
Before the owner, the holder of a valid security interest of record or person in charge of such vehicle shall be permitted to remove it from the custody of the police department, he shall furnish evidence of his identity, and his title to the vehicle or proof of a valid security interest of record; he shall sign a receipt, and pay the costs of towing and storing the vehicle, if any.
Whenever a motor vehicle impounded under the provisions of this article is deemed to have a value of less than $50.00 by the chief of police, then such motor vehicle may be sold for scrap after the tenth day of impoundment.
Whenever the owner of an impounded motor vehicle has been ascertained and notice has been delivered or sent as set forth in  s e c t i o n  5 0 - 
 2 7 4 (6)(e) and the impounded vehicle is unredeemed by the owner or lien holder thereof, and no satisfactory arrangement has been made with the city for continued storage, and the owner or holder of a security agreement has not requested a hearing as provided in s e c t i o n 5 0 - 
 2 7 4 (9) (or if such a hearing has been requested, same has been held and concluded and the impounded vehicle has not been released by the city or redeemed), after the passage of 30 days following the date notice was sent or delivered, the chief of police may order the vehicle to be sold for cash at public sale to the highest bidder. If the owner of an impounded motor vehicle cannot be determined, then after complying with the provisions of s e c t i o n 5 0 - 2 7 4 (6)f, the city may apply for a certificate of title and the chief of police may order the vehicle to be sold for cash at public sale to the highest bidder.
 
a.	Before any sale of a motor vehicle having a value of $50.00 or more shall take place, the police department shall advertise such sale by publishing a notice thereof at least once in some newspaper published in the county not less than five days prior to such sale, and such notice shall give the identity of the record owner if known, the terms, date, time and place of such sale, together with a particular description of that vehicle.
b.	The proceeds of any such sale, less costs incurred by the city in towing and storing the vehicle and expenses of sale, shall be deposited with the city treasurer, and the city clerk shall be given a statement of the amount so deposited with a statement of such costs
incurred by the city in towing and storing the vehicle and the expenses of sale, a written copy of the report of the investigation, and the
 

newspaper publisher's affidavit of publication, together with a police report of the sale, including the name and address of the purchaser.
c.	An owner who makes application to the city clerk within one year of the date of sale, upon establishing proof of this ownership, shall be given a city warrant for any amount remaining after the aforesaid costs and expenses have been deducted.
d.	The owner may redeem any vehicle before sale by paying all costs and expenses, or at the sale he shall be afforded prior opportunity to so redeem before the vehicle is sold to any other person.

(Code 1972, § 302.02(F); Code 1982, § 19-105; Ord. No. 4037, § 2, 4-22-1980; Ord. No. 4939, § II, 5-23-2000; Ord. No. 5196, § III, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5232, § I, 1-11-
2005)


Sec. 50-276. - Exemptions.

The provisions of this article shall not apply to:

 
(1)

(2)





(3)

(4)
 
A motor vehicle in disrepair that is stored in a locked building or locked fenced area and not visible from adjacent public or private property. A motor vehicle in disrepair that is kept for repair by an automobile repair shop; a business licensed as salvage, scrap, junk dealer, towing or
storage facility so long as the business is operated in compliance with its license and the property complies with zoning ordinances; or
motor vehicle dealer who is licensed to do business as such by the city, if such motor vehicle is not abandoned, and is not kept for more than 20 days.
An abandoned or derelict vehicle in a designated tow away area approved by resolution of the city council.

A motor vehicle which does not display a permanent license plate or set of license plates, and which is stored by a motor vehicle dealer registered as such by the department of revenue of the state.
 

(Code 1972, § 302.02(G); Code 1982, § 19-106; Ord. No. 4918, § II, 12-28-1999; Ord. No. 4939, § V, 5-23-2000)


Secs. 50-277—50-300. - Reserved.


ARTICLE VII. - RAILROADS



Sec. 50-301. - Stopping at railroad crossings restricted.

No railroad train, engine or car shall be allowed to stop and remain upon any street or railroad crossing for a time longer than five minutes. (Code 1972, § 413.02; Code 1982, § 27-1)

Sec. 50-302. - Obstruction of railroad crossing.

 
(a)





(b)
 
If any train or part of any train or any engine or car occupies a railroad crossing in such a way as to totally or partially obstruct traffic, and should it be apparent that such train or car cannot be moved within a period of five minutes from the time it began to occupy the crossing, the railroad company which owns the line on which the obstruction occurs shall cause its agents to remove the obstruction and ensure the free and unobstructed use of the crossing to vehicular traffic.
No person shall cause any locomotive, tender car or train of cars, or any freight or other goods to obstruct any street or sidewalk, or in other way cause such street or sidewalk to be obstructed, in violation of this chapter.
 
(Code 1972, § 413.03; Code 1982, § 27-2)


Sec. 50-303. - Railroad companies to keep streets and crossings in repair.

All persons using, constructing or occupying any railroad track on any street, alley or highway in this city shall keep such street, alley or highway in good repair, and construct, build and keep in constant repair good and sufficient crossings at the intersection of such street, alley or highway with such railroad track, for street and highway purposes, in the manner provided by the laws of the state; and shall maintain the surface of such street, alley or thoroughfare, smooth and level with the upper surface of the rails on their tracks on such crossings.

(Code 1972, § 413.04; Code 1982, § 27-3)


Sec. 50-304. - City may repair crossings.

In case of failure by any person or railroad corporation described in s e c t i o n 5 0 - 3 0 3 to keep such railroad crossings in good condition, the city council shall order the same built or repaired under the provisions of the general laws of the state and shall enforce payment therefor and collection of penalties in the manner provided in that law.
 

(Code 1972, § 413.05; Code 1982, § 27-4)


Sec. 50-305. - Sign boards on street crossings.

Every railroad corporation, company or person operating any railroad or running engines and cars through this city shall cause sign boards to be placed, well supported by posts or otherwise, and constantly maintained, across each traveled street where it is crossed by the railroad.

(Code 1972, § 413.06; Code 1982, § 27-5)


Sec. 50-306. - Audible signal.

The bell of a railroad locomotive may be constantly sounded while said locomotive is approaching and passing through all crossings within the city. The whistle or horn of a railroad locomotive shall not regularly be sounded.

(Code 1972, § 413.07; Code 1982, § 27-6; Ord. No. 4492, § 1, 5-14-1991)


Sec. 50-307. - Lights to be kept lit on engine or car.

No person in charge of any locomotive, car or train of cars shall, after dark, for any purpose whatever, within this city, operate or any such locomotive, car or train of cars, without having a brilliant and conspicuous light placed in front of the engine, facing the direction in which it is moving.

(Code 1972, § 413.08; Code 1982, § 27-7)


Chapter 52 - UTILITIES


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Secs. 52-1—52-18. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - WATER



Secs. 52-19—52-39. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - SEWERS



Sec. 52-40. - Termination of sewer main connections.

 
(a)


(b)



(c)





(d)
 
No termination of a connection of a sewer lateral pipe providing sewage disposal from any building or structure within the city to a sewer main shall be performed without first obtaining a permit from the director of public works.
When the location for the proper termination of the sewer lateral pipe from the sewer main is under the right-of-way of the state department of transportation or the county department of highways and traffic, a permit for said work shall also be obtained from the respective agency prior to commencement.
It shall be unlawful to terminate the connection of the sewer lateral pipe from the sewer main pipe at any location other than at the pipe joint immediately adjacent to the sewer main, known as the wye, or seal the wye with materials that do not ensure a permanently sealed disconnection, or fail to fully remove the disconnected sewer lateral pipe within the public right-of-way, or as an alternative, not fully grout the disconnected sewer lateral pipe, or terminate the connection in a manner not approved by the director of public works.
The director of public works or his employees or agents shall inspect every termination of connections to the sewer mains within the city, and shall ensure that such are performed in the manner that complies with the provisions of this section.
 
(Code 1982, § 31-1; Ord. No. 5386, § I, 1-24-2007)


Chapter 54 - VEGETATION


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Secs. 54-1—54-18. - Reserved.
 

ARTICLE II. - TREES



Sec. 54-19. - Purpose and intent.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants within the city.
Intent. It is the intent of the city council that the terms of this article shall be construed so as to promote:
 

(1)

(2)
 

The planting, maintenance, restoration, and survival of desirable trees, shrubs, and other plants within the city; and

The protection of citizens from personal injury and property damage, and the protection of the city from property damage, caused or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance, or removal of trees, shrubs, or other plants located within the city.
 
(Code 1982, § 23-50; Ord. No. 4924, § I, 1-25-2000)


Sec. 54-20. - Defnitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Arboricultural specifications manual means a manual prepared by the city forester pursuant to the ordinance containing regulations and standards for the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants on city owned property. This manual shall be adopted from the publication of the American National Standards Institute entitled Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice A3100.

City forester means the director of parks and recreation or other person so designated by the city manager or contracted by the city, assigned to administer the provisions of this article.

City-owned property means property within the city limits of the City of Maplewood, Missouri, and:

 
(1)

(2)
 
Owned by the city in fee simple absolute; or

Implied or expressly dedicated to the public for present or future use for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or for public sewer easements.
 

Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public parks and all city owned property to which the public has free access as a park.

Parks and recreation commission means the parks and recreation commission of the City of Maplewood, Missouri.

Property owner means the record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land.

Street trees means trees lying between property lines on either side of all streets and all other public rights-of-way within the city. (Code 1982, § 23-51; Ord. No. 4924, § I, 1-25-2000)

Sec. 54-21. - Violation and penalty.

 
(a)



(b)
 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or who fails to comply with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, upon being found guilty of violation, shall be subject to a fine for each separate offense in accordance with the provisions set forth in s e c t i o n 1 - 1 1 . Each day during which any violation of the provisions of this article shall occur or continue shall be a separate offense.
In addition, if, as the result of the violation of any provision of this article, the injury, mutilation, or death of a tree, shrub, or other plant located
on city owned property is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of such tree, shrub, or other plant shall be borne by the party in violation. The replacement value of trees and shrubs shall be determined by a local consulting arborist using the latest revision of A Guide to the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs, and Evergreens, as published by the International Society of Arboriculture. The consulting arborist's fee will be included in the cost of replacement.
 
(Code 1982, § 23-57; Ord. No. 4924, § I, 1-25-2000)


Sec. 54-22. - Parks and recreation commission; designation; duties.

 
(a)



(b)
 
Designation. The parks and recreation commission is hereby designated as the advisory commission for the effectuation of the objectives set forth in the tree ordinance. Nothing in this article shall be construed as vesting legislative authority in the parks and recreation commission regarding the tree ordinance.
Duties. The primary duty of the parks and recreation commission relating to the tree ordinance shall be to advise the city council and the city forester as to the planting, care, maintenance and removal of all trees in city parks and on public rights-of-way. In addition, the parks and
 

recreation commission shall have the following duties:
 

(1)


(2)


(3)

(4)
 

Review of the city forester's comprehensive plan for the planting and maintenance of trees in all city parks and on all streets and other public rights-of-way within the city;
Establishment of educational and informational programs to inform citizens of any matters pertaining to the city tree ordinance and to the Arboricultural Specifications Manual, and the proper selection, planting, care, maintenance and removal of trees on private property;
Suggest amendments to the city tree ordinance and revisions to the Arboricultural Specifications Manual as needed; Development of policies and procedures regarding the city forester's duties.
 
(Code 1982, § 23-52; Ord. No. 4924, § I, 1-25-2000)


Sec. 54-23. - City forester; establishment, appointment, duties.

 
(a)

(b)


(c)
 
Establishment. The position of the city forester is hereby established.

Appointment. The city forester shall be appointed by the city manager, and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager until such time as he shall be removed by the city manager.
Duties. The city forester shall perform the following duties:
 

(1)

(2)


(3)





(4)





(5)


(6)


(7)
 

The city forester shall administer the city tree ordinance and the provisions of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual.

The city forester shall prepare, or cause the preparation of a comprehensive plan for the planting, care and maintenance of all street trees and park trees and trees and shrubs on all city owned property.
The city forester shall cause and superintend the planting and maintenance of trees, including the removal of undesirable trees, shrubs, and other plants located on city owned property, to insure that all trees, shrubs, and other plants located on city owned property conform to the comprehensive plan for planting within the city parks, and on streets and other public rights-of-way in the city and comply with the regulations and standards of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual, and with the requirements of this article.
The city forester, with the advice and assistance of the parks and recreation commission, shall develop and periodically review and revise, as needed, the Arboricultural Specifications Manual. The city forester shall cause the Arboricultural Specifications Manual, and all revisions and amendments to it, to be published and promulgated and shall cause three copies of the manual, and all revisions and amendments to it, to be available for public inspection at the office of the city clerk.
The city forester shall make available to any interested person all information pertaining to the tree ordinance, to the activities of the parks and recreation commission regarding trees, and to the Arboricultural Specifications Manual.
The city forester shall establish a program of public information and education that will encourage the planting, maintenance, or removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants on private property in furtherance of the program for promoting the forestation of the city.
The city forester, in accordance with the provisions regarding nuisance abatement set forth in c h a p t e r 3 4 and regarding code enforcement administration contained within the property maintenance code set forth in c h a p t e r 1 2 , may remove, cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is dead or dying, or is in an unsafe condition, or which by its condition is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
 
(Code 1982, § 23-53; Ord. No. 4924, § I, 1-25-2000)


Sec. 54-24. - Public nuisances; abatement; permit required for removal.

 
(a)
 
Declaration of public nuisances. The following are hereby declared public nuisances under this article:
 

(1)

(2)


(3)


(4)


(5)
 

Any dead or dying tree, shrub, or other plant, whether located on city owned property or on private property.

Any otherwise healthy tree, shrub, or other plant, whether located on city owned property or on private property, which harbors insects or diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree, shrub, or other plant.
Any tree, shrub, other plant, or portion thereof, whether located on city owned property or on private property, which by reason of location or condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public.
Any tree, shrub, or other plant or portion thereof whether located on city owned property or on private property which obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a street light.
Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located on city owned property or on private property which dangerously obstructs the view of traffic as determined by the city forester.
 
(b)
 
Abatement. The city forester may cause the removal of any tree, shrub or other plant declared a public nuisance if the owner of the land on which the tree is located fails to abate the nuisance, using the procedure set forth in s e c t i o n 3 4 - 2 4 2 .
 
(Code 1982, § 23-54; Ord. No. 4924, § I, 1-25-2000)


Sec. 54-25. - Interference with city forester.

No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the city forester or his agents engaged in the execution of enforcement of this article.
 

(Code 1982, § 23-55; Ord. No. 4924, § I, 1-25-2000)


Sec. 54-26. - Prohibited acts.

It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to do any of the following:

 
(1)


(2)



(3)



(4)
 
Deposit, store, or maintain on city owned property any stone, brick, sand, concrete, lumber, tile, pipe, or other material which reasonably may be expected to impede the free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree, shrub, or other plant;
Cause any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which, because of the nature or amount, reasonably may be expected to be toxic or otherwise harmful to trees, shrubs or other plants to be located where such substance reasonably may be expected to affect trees, shrubs, or other plants located on city owned property;
Cause any fire to burn on city owned or private property if such fire, or the heat, smoke, or ash therefrom reasonably may be expected to injure any portion of any tree, shrub, or other plant located on city owned property; provided, however, this subsection shall not be construed to exempt any person from complying state laws or ordinances of the city with respect to burning;
Cause injury to any tree on city owned property by any means including, but not limited to, removing tree limbs by any means, driving nails into the tree trunk, removing bark or carving on the trunk; or remove or cause the removal of a tree on city owned property without authorization from the city forester.
 

(Code 1982, § 23-56; Ord. No. 4924, § I, 1-25-2000)


Secs. 54-27—54-55. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - WEEDS



Sec. 54-56. - Cutting required.

 
(a)






(b)
 
The owner, lessee, renter, head of a household or person having control of any lot or tract of land, or any part thereof, shall not allow or maintain on any such lot or tract of land or any part thereof any growth of grass or weeds to a height of 12 inches or over; nor shall growth be allowed upon the street or right-of-way or sidewalk adjacent to and adjoining any such lot or tract of land; nor shall any such owner, lessee, renter, head of a household or person having control of any lot or tract of land allow the unbridled growth of any wild vines beyond the boundaries of such lot or tract of land in such manner that they interfere with and damage adjoining and adjacent lots or tracts of land or trees and shrubs therefor.
Weeds and vines, when cut, shall be removed from the lot or tract of land and disposed of in such manner as not to create any other nuisance defined in  c h a p t e r  3 4 , article VIII.
 
(Code 1982, § 15-61; Ord. No. 4118, § 1A, 7-13-1982)


Sec. 54-57. - Defnitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Head of household means:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Husband or father, if living in said premises with a spouse or children under 21 years of age. Father, if living in said premises with children under 21 years of age, but no spouse.
Mother, if living in said premises with children under 21 years of age, but no spouse.
 

Lessee means any person who leases all or a portion of a premises on a day-to-day, week-to-week, or monthly and yearly basis.

Owner means any person who has a vested fee simple title, an equitable interest, or a life interest in any tract or lot of land, or in a particular part thereof, whether said tract or lot of land is held in common or as joint owners.

Person having control means any occupant, agent, servant, representative or employee of any owner, or lessee or renter of any property who exercises any control on behalf of the owner, lessee or renter.

Renter means any person who rents all or a part of a premises on a day-to-day, week-to-week, month-to-month or yearly basis. A child over the age of 21 years who is living in a household with a parent but who is neither the owner, lessee, head of household or person having control, shall be considered to be a renter, whether or not he pays rent for such occupancy in money.

(Code 1982, § 15-62; Ord. No. 4118, § 1A, 7-13-1982)
 

Sec. 54-58. - Notice to abate weeds.

 
(a)





(b)



(c)



(d)





(e)
 
Whenever the city manager or any department of the city notifies the chief of police or when the chief of police otherwise has knowledge of the existence of any weeds, he shall immediately notify the person having control, renter, lessee or owner of the lot or tract of land, or any combination thereof necessary to obtain the abatement, that weeds exist in or on such lot or tract of land, specifying generally in said notice the nature of the violation as defined in this article.
Such notice may be served by the chief of police or any police officer of the city by delivering a copy thereof to the person or persons to be notified, or by leaving a copy at the usual place of abode of such person or persons with a member of his family or household over the age of 15 years.
If service cannot be made upon the person or persons to be served, the notice shall be posted upon the front and/or rear or side door of the residence or, if there be no residence on said lot or tract of land, then by posting at least one copy on said lot or tract of land and by mailing a copy thereof, by ordinary mail, postage prepaid, to the last-known address of the person or persons to be notified.
If any person required to be notified resides outside the limits of the city, the notice may be mailed by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last address shown on the records of the collector of the city. If registered or certified mail is refused by such person and returned or if not picked up by such person at the post office, then a notice shall be sent by ordinary mail, postage prepaid to said last address; and if not returned by the post office department, the notice shall be presumed delivered.
The notice shall contain substantially the following information:
 

(1)

(2)


(3)

(4)

(5)
 

The address, either by street number or legal description of the lot or tract of land in or on which such weeds are alleged to exist.

The name of the owner of the lot or tract of land according to the records of the city collector and the name of the head of household, renter, lessee or person having control of said lot or tract of land, if known.
The nature of the violation as defined in this article. The date by which the nuisance shall be abated. The nature of the penalty, if not abated.
 
(f)
 
For purposes of this article, the notice or notices herein required to be served may be served upon any person defined in s e c t i o n 5 4 - 5 7 . In any household in which a child under age of 21 years lives with his parents, the head of the household shall be held responsible for any violation created by such child. If the head of the household is not the owner, renter, lessee or person having control of the lot or tract of land, such person shall, along with the head of a household, be held responsible for the maintaining of such violation.
 
(Code 1982, § 15-63; Ord. No. 4118, § 1B, 7-13-1982)


Sec. 54-59. - Recurring creation or maintenance of nuisances.

 
(a)


















(b)
 
Once a notice has been given to a head of household, renter, lessee, person having control, or the owner of a lot or tract of land in or on which a violation has been created or maintained, and after abatement the same violation recurs in or on the same lot or tract of land by the same person or persons responsible, within one calendar year, no further notice need be given such responsible person or persons; but such responsible person or persons may be summoned into municipal court and shall be subject to the following penalties:














In addition to the court costs normally assessed in all cases, there shall be added all costs incurred by the city in abating the violation as set out in
 s e c t i o n 5 4 - 6 0 .
 

(Code 1982, § 15-64; Ord. No. 4118, § 1C, 7-13-1982)


Sec. 54-60. - Removal or abatement by city.

 
(a)
 
Authorized. The city may prevent, abate and remove all violations on public or private property in a summary manner, at the cost of the person or persons responsible for creating and/or maintaining the violation, if the cause therefor lies with any such person defined in s e c t i o n 5 4 - 5 7 . All costs and expenses incurred by the city in removing or abating any violation on any private property may be assessed against the property in the
 

form of a special tax bill, which special tax bill shall become a lien on the property. Alternately the cost of removing or abating the violation, whether on public or private property, may be made a part of the judgment by the municipal judge, in addition to any other penalties and costs imposed, if convicted in the municipal court of causing, creating or maintaining a violation on public or private property.
 
(b)





(c)
 
Time to abate. Summary abatement by the city shall occur only where an existing violation creates an emergency whereby reasonable persons would not differ upon the necessity for the immediate abatement thereof for reasons of the health, safety, morals or general welfare of inhabitants of the city. In all other cases, where the violation is a first offense, the notice provisions of s e c t i o n 5 4 - 5 8 shall be observed. The notice shall specify the number of days in which the violation shall be abated, which time shall be not less than three days, nor more than seven days.
Refusal to abate. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to abate or remove any violation within the time specified in the notice by the chief of police. If the violation is not abated within the time specified in the notice, the city shall abate the violation and a summons or warrant therefor may be issued to the person or persons responsible for creating or maintaining such violation. Persons failing to abate after receiving notice shall be subject to first offense penalty set out in s e c t i o n 5 4 - 5 9 and this section. Upon conviction, such person or persons shall be
punished as provided in s e c t i o n 5 4 - 5 9 and this section. Each and every day such violation is maintained after the time set out in the notice, or after the time that a summons or warrant is issued in recurring instances of creating or maintaining the same violation on same property by same responsible person or persons, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
 
(Code 1982, § 15-65; Ord. No. 4118, § 1D, 7-13-1982)


Chapter 56 - ZONING


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL



Sec. 56-1. - Short title.

This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the Maplewood Zoning Code. (Ord. No. 4062, § 901.01, 10-14-1980)

Sec. 56-2. - Intent and purpose.

This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:

 
(1)

(2)
 
To promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the people of the city.

To divide the city into districts, restricting and regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings, structures, and land for residential, commercial, industrial and other uses specifically for the purposes stated in the districts created herein.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 901.02, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-3. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Accessory use (structure). See article III, division 4 of this chapter.

Alley. See Public service drive.

Antique means a work of art, a piece of furniture or a decorative object made at an earlier period of time, usually defined as 100 years or older, and having a current market value higher than when it was originally made and having a current market value higher than an equivalent present-day item.

Apartment dwelling means a building or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by three or more families living independent of each other, exclusive of attached single-family dwellings, townhouses or patio houses located on individually subdivided lots and intended primarily for owner occupancy.

Arterial road means those roads (as defined in the comprehensive plan, in effect from time to time) that are the major traffic carriers within the community which have as their main objective the carrying of traffic through a city and which have as their secondary objective the carrying of traffic across the community from one part to another.

Attached single-family dwelling means one of a series of attached dwellings designed for single-family occupancy and located on individually subdivided lots of record.

Automobile, passenger, private, means any motor vehicle, other than a commercial vehicle, which is licensed as a passenger automobile.
 

Automobile filling station means a use solely for the retail sale and dispensing of gasoline, oil, air and water.

Automobile repair. See Motor vehicle repair, minor.

Automobile service station means a use primarily for supplying gasoline, oil, air and water, tires, accessories and services for motor vehicles at direct retail  to the consumer including the incidental washing of motor vehicles and the making of minor repairs, but not including such major repairs as spray painting; body, fender, clutch, transmission, differential, axle, spring and frame repairs; major overhauling of engines or radiators requiring removal thereof; or recapping or retreading of tires.

Blood bank means any establishment engaged in collecting human blood or plasma for any purpose other than for performing medical examinations on the donor.

Building means a structure intended for shelter.

Building coverage (lot coverage) means that percentage of a lot which, when viewed from above, would be covered by a structure or structures or any part thereof, excluding eaves.

Building height means the vertical distance measured from the curb grade or its equivalent established grade at a point midway between the two side lot lines to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided, that where buildings are set back from street line, the height of the building may be measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.

Building permit means a permit issued by the building commissioner prior to any construction.

Carwash means a structure or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing motor vehicles, such as a chain conveyer, blower, steam cleaning device or other mechanical device.

Certificate of nonresidential occupancy. See Use certificate.

Child day care center or day nursery means an organized group program for the care of children away from their own home for any part of a 24-hour day for compensation or otherwise.

Collectible means a cultural object other than an antique or such traditionally collectible items as stamps, coins, works of art, toys, tools, glassware, pottery, china, or other objects representing a cultural time period and having a current market value higher than when it was originally made and having a current market value higher than an equivalent present-day item.

Commercial/industrial collector road means a road (as defined in the comprehensive plan, in effect from time to time) that has as its primary function the movement of traffic directly from commercial or industrial areas to major arterials.

Commonly useable residential open space (CUROS) means any outdoor area of such size, shape and location as to provide for specific outdoor living functions, such as patios, playgrounds or swimming pools or outdoor service functions, such as laundry drying. Site areas considered as CUROS must be available and accessible for all residential occupants of a given building or development and may include only those spaces enclosing an area of at least 300 square feet with a least dimension of 15 feet.

Communication antenna or communications antenna means any device or array that uses airwaves to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic signals for voice, data or video communication purposes, including, but not limited to, VHF and UHF television, FM or AM radio, two-way radio, cellular telephone, PCS or other wireless telephony, fixed point microwave, low power television, or other wireless communications and common carriers.

Communication tower means a tower used as a base for any communications antenna, including, but not limited to, the following antennas: VHF and UHF television; FM or AM radio; two-way radio, cellular telephone, PCS or other wireless telephony, fixed point microwave, low power television, or other wireless communications and common carriers. A communication tower shall not be considered a utility substation for purposes of this chapter.

Consignment shop means a retail store at which items are offered for sale by a store owner/operator pursuant to a written contract with the owner of the item or items offered for sale which provides that the store owner/operator pays the owner of an item or items only if the item or items are sold, and that the store owner/operator may return or dispose of unsold items, but not including any store that accepts or sells donated goods.

Convenience service retail uses means small establishments designed and intended to serve the daily or frequent trade or service needs of surrounding population. Such establishments include grocery stores, variety stores, drug stores, coin-operated laundry and dry cleaning establishments, beauty shops, barber shops and medical and dental offices. Specifically excluded are automobile filling and service stations and drive-in restaurants.

Day spa means a business that provides hair salon services, facials, manicures, pedicures and massages from which 51 percent of gross revenues is derived from retail sales and is open a minimum of five nights a week until 8:00 p.m.

Decibel means a scientifically accepted unit of measurement of the intensity of sound.

Demolition permit means a permit issued by the building commissioner prior to any demolition.
 

Density means the number of dwelling units that may be constructed per acre or per square feet of a zoning lot area.

Detached single-family dwelling means a dwelling designed for a single-family occupancy and entirely surrounded by a yard or other separation from buildings or adjacent lots.

Development standard means regulations which limit the size, bulk or siting conditions of discrete types of residential buildings located within any designated use district.

Drive-in restaurant means a structure or portion thereof primarily so developed that its principal retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to either serve patrons while in the motor vehicles, or else where the patrons may serve themselves and may eat or drink the food refreshment or beverages on the premise.

Drug and/or alcohol treatment facility means any out-patient or residential facility for the specific treatment of alcohol or drug abuse.

Dwelling means a structure or portion thereof used exclusively for residential purposes.

Dwelling unit means one or more rooms in a building designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having its own permanently installed cooking and sanitary facilities.

Elevator apartments means an apartment building of more than three stories in height with primary access to units above the third-floor level typically provided by means of an elevator.

Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption occupying a dwelling unit as an individual housekeeping organization, including a group comprised of one or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years) being domiciled with:
 

(1)

(2)
 

A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or

The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person.
 

A family may include two additional persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption. Foster children, who are legal wards of the court, shall be construed as adopted children for purposes of enumeration. The foregoing includes any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.

Financial institution means any business or use of property as a full service bank, credit union or savings and loan. This definition shall not include shortterm loan businesses, as defined herein.

Floor area (gross floor area) means the sum of the horizontal surfaces of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls, to include all corridors, lobbies, air shafts, elevators, stairwells and toilets. Areas devoted to off-street parking or loading or to boiler rooms shall not be included in gross floor area.

Floor area ratio (FAR) means the total gross floor area of the building or buildings on any zoning lot divided by the area of such zoning lot.

Garage, private, means a detached accessory building or portion of a principal building, designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for the storage of motor vehicles of the occupants of the premises or their clients or customers without charge to visitors, clients or customers during the period they are visiting or conducting business with an occupant on the premises.

Garden apartment (walkup apartment) means a two- or three-story apartment building containing not more than 12 dwelling units with common access to all units provided by one or two stairways.

Gross floor area. See Floor area (gross floor area).

Group living facilities/group homes means any combination of dwelling units for a number of unrelated persons associated with an educational religious, charitable for profit, not for profit or service institution or organization and which is intended for the purpose of rehabilitation (except drug and alcohol treatment facilities), geriatric care, convalescent home, nursing home or group therapy home.

High quality, pre-owned apparel and clothing accessories means pre-owned outer garments and jewelry, scarves, belts, purses, footwear and similar accessories which are free from visible wear such as tears, spots, holes, fading or discoloring, odor, stains or dirt; outer garments include items such as shirts, pants, skirts, coats and similar external apparel, and specifically does not include undergarments.

Home occupation. See article III, division 3 of this chapter.

Hotel means a building which is intended, used, converted or designed to be rented or let out for compensation by tourists or other transients.

Live music establishment means a business offering dueling piano bars, jazz or blues with food service. Live entertainment must be available one-half the time the establishment is open to the public.
 

Lot means a parcel of land which has been or which is proposed to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership. Such a lot may consist of a single lot of record or a part or combination of one or more lots of record.

Major recreational equipment means any equipment such as travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches, motorized campers, tent trailers, boats and boat trailers and the like, and cases, boxes or trailers for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not.

Mobile home means a self-contained mobile structure intended to be used for dwelling purposes which has been, or reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting such structure.

Motel. See Hotel.

Motor vehicle-oriented business (MVOB) means any commercial business which, by design, type of operation and nature of business, has as one of its functions, the provision of services to a number of motor vehicles or its occupants in a short time span for each, or the provision of services to the occupants of the motor vehicle while they remain in the vehicle. The list of businesses subject to this chapter include, but may not be limited to, convenience stores, gasoline service stations, banks with drive-through facilities and restaurants with drive-through facilities.

Motor vehicle repair, minor, means incidental repairs or services to motor vehicles including changing flat tires, repairing or servicing the electrical or ignition system, replacing hoses, cleaning or replacing filters, installing minor accessories, and adding or replacing lubricants, coolants, refrigerants or hydraulic system fluids.

Nonconforming lot of record means an unimproved lot which does not comply with the lot size requirements for any permitted use in the district in which it is located.

Nonconforming structure means a structure which does not comply with the lot size requirements or bulk regulations applicable to a new structure in the zoning district in which it is located.

Nonconforming use means an existing use of a structure or land which does not comply in some respect with the use regulations applicable to new uses in the zoning district in which it is located.

Open space (useable residential open space) means any outdoor area of such location, size and shape as to provide for specific outdoor living as patios, swimming pools, etc., or outdoor service functions such as laundry drying. Areas considered as commonly useable residential open space must be available for private or collective use by residential occupants of a given building or project.

Parking space. See article III, division 2 of this chapter.

Patio house means one of a series of one-story, basically L-shaped, single-family residential dwellings which, together with an enclosed private courtyard or patio, may occupy up to 100 percent of a subdivided lot. The courtyard or patio of such a house serves as the principal open space and source of natural light for the occupants.

Performance standard means a criterion established to control noise, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, and glare and heat generated by or inherent in the use of land or buildings. See also s e c t i o n 5 6 - 4 1 .

Person means a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit as well as individuals. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever the term "person" is used in any section of this chapter prescribing a penalty or fine as to partnership or association, the word shall include the partners or members thereof and, as to corporation, it shall include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such section.

Principal building means the structure in which the principal use on the lot is located.

Project (development) means one or more buildings on a single lot, or a group of buildings to be constructed by a single developer to be later sold individually on separate subdivided lots of record.

Public service drive means a public or private way, at the rear or side of property, primarily used as a means of secondary vehicular access to abutting property.

Research and development establishment means a business engaged in the development and assembly of electronic equipment, precision instruments or miniaturized mechanical prototypes.

Residential collector road means a road (as defined in the comprehensive plan, in effect from time to time) that has as its primary function the movement of traffic directly from residential neighborhoods to major arterials.

Roominghouse. See Hotel. Row house. See Townhouse.
Screening means a hedge, earth berm, wall or fence to provide a visual separator and physical barrier.
 

Setback means the distance between the front lot line and the major building surface of the principal building on the lot.

Shortterm loan business means any of the following:

 
(1)


(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
 
A business providing as a primary or substantial portion of its business unsecured loans, regardless of whether or not the business is licensed or holding a certificate of registration to engage in consumer credit business from the appropriate state agency;
A business engaged in check cashing for a fee and which may or may not provide shortterm loans for a fee; A pay-day loan business;
A car title loan business;

Any business possessing the same or similar characteristics as the businesses described in this definition, with the exception of financial institutions as defined herein.
 

Sign. All definitions pertaining to signs and signing are contained in c h a p t e r 6 .

Site plan. See article IV, division 8 of this chapter.

Site plan review. See article IV, division 8 of this chapter.

Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.

Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having or requiring a fixed location on the ground.

Townhouse means one of a series of three or more attached single-family dwellings, two or three stories in height, which are separated horizontally from one another by solid partition walls extending from basement to roof without openings.

Townhouse apartment means one of a series of three or more attached dwellings, two or three stories in height for single-family occupancy which are separated from one another by partition walls extending from basement to roof without openings, but which are not located or sited on individual subdivided lots.

Truck means any motor vehicle which is licensed as a truck or can be legally licensed only as a truck, unless currently registered by the city as a motor vehicle other than a commercial motor vehicle.

Two-family dwelling means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other, including a duplex or a semi- detached dwelling.

Use means the purpose or activity for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is maintained, and shall include any manner or performance of such activity with respect to the performance requirements of this chapter.

Use certificate means a permit issued by the zoning administrator prior to occupancy of any structure.

Use limitations means regulations intended to delimit or emphasize the desired nature and quality of uses permitted within a business, manufacturing or special district.

Use regulations means regulations which relate to a specific quantifiable use condition such as density or intensity or to building size, bulk or sitting conditions occurring anywhere and for any type of building located within a given zoning district.

Vehicle, commercial, means any vehicle used for business or institutional purposes and having painted thereon or affixed thereto a sign identifying the business, institution or a principal product or service of the business; or any motor vehicle used primarily for transportation of persons for a fee or charge such as buses or taxicabs; or any truck.

Walkup apartment. See Garden apartment.

Wholesale sales means the sale of goods, merchandise and commodities for resale.

Yard means an open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or group of buildings which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level upward except as otherwise permitted in this chapter and which extends along a lot line and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located.

Yard, front (right-of-way setback), means a yard extending along the full width of the zoning lot and lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building.

Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the full width of the zoning lot and lying between the rear line of the lot and nearest line of the principal building.
 

Yard, side, means that part of the yard lying between the nearest line of the principal building and a side lot line and extending from the required front yard (or from the front lot line, if there is no required front yard) to the required rear yard.

Yard, transitional, means a yard that must be provided with landscaping and screening on a lot in a business district which adjoins a lot in a residential district; or a yard that must be provided in the manufacturing district which adjoins a lot in either a residential or business district. A transitional yard shall include any otherwise required yard or right-of-way setback.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 907.01, 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4186, § 1, 6-26-1984; Ord. No. 4446, § 1, 4-10-1990; Ord. No. 4475, § 1, 12-11-1990; Ord. No. 4511, § 2, 10-8-1991;
Ord. No. 4523, § 1, 3-24-1992; Ord. No. 4561, § 7, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4568, § 1, 12-8-1992; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 4721, § 2, 3-12-1996; Ord.
No. 4815, § 1, 2-24-1998; Ord. No. 5155, §§ I, II, 2-10-2004; Ord. No. 5317, § I, 2-14-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § II, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 5494, § I, 12-9-2008)


Sec. 56-4. - Penalties for violation of this chapter.

 
(a)










(b)
 
The owner or general agent of a building or premises where a violation of any provision of the regulations herein has been committed or shall exist or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such violation has been committed or shall exist or the general
agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 and not more than
$100.00 for each and every day that such violation continues, but if the offense be willful on conviction thereof, the punishment shall be a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00 for each and every day that such violation shall continue or by imprisonment for ten days for each and every day such violation shall continue, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
Any person who, having been served with an order to remove any such violation, shall fail to comply with such order within ten days after such service or shall continue to violate the provisions of the regulations herein, in the respect named in such order, shall also be subject to a civil penalty of $250.00.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.11(3), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-5. - Activities regulated by this chapter.

 
(a)





(b)
 
Except as may otherwise be provided in article V (nonconformities) of this chapter, all structures erected hereafter, all uses of land or structures established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocation of existing structures occurring hereafter and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such structures, uses or land shall be located.
However, where a building permit for a structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and provided that construction is begun within six months of the date of the building permit and diligently prosecuted to completion, such structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit has been issued and, further, may, upon completion, be occupied under a use certificate by the use for which originally designated, subject thereafter to the provisions of article V (nonconformities) of this chapter.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 901.03, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-6. - Zoning map.

The locations and boundaries of the zoning districts established herein are shown upon the zoning map, which is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this chapter. The zoning map, together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be a part of  this chapter and shall have the same force and effect as if the zoning map, together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon, were fully set forth and described herein.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 901.04, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-7. - Zoning of streets, public service drives (alleys), public ways, and railroad rights-of-way.

All streets, public service drives (alleys), public ways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways or railroad rights-of-way. Where the centerline of a street, alley, public way or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 901.05, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-8. - Boundary lines.

Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any use district as shown on the zoning maps incorporated herein, the following rules shall apply:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets, alleys or similar rights-of-way, they shall be construed as following the centerli Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
Where a lot held in one ownership and of record on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be construed to be within the district containing more than half the area of the lot.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 901.06, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-9. - Rules of construction.

In the construction of this chapter, the rules contained in this section shall be observed and applied except when the context clearly indicates otherwise:

 
(1)

(2)
 
The word "lot" shall include the words "plot," "piece" and "parcel."

The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" and "occupied for."
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 901.07, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-10. - Interpretation.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)
 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
Wherever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
This chapter is not intended to abrogate or annul any existing easement, covenant or other private agreement.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 901.08, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-11. - Establishment of zoning districts.

The city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:

 
(1)
 
Residential.
 

a.	SR Single-Family Residential District (single-family detached dwellings or attached dwellings with site plan approval).

b.	LR Limited Residential District (single-family attached dwelling or low rise apartments including townhouse and garden apartments with site plan approval).
c.	MR Medium Density Residential District (all types of apartments without height limit and attached single-family dwellings).

d.	P-RO Planned Residential-Office District (all types of apartments as well as office-apartment mixed uses).
 

(2)
 

Business.
 

a.	NB Neighborhood Business District (convenience retail and limited office use).

b.	CB Community Business District (shoppers' retail and convenience retail, offices, hotels and motels).

c.	PB Planned Business District (shoppers' retail, office, hotel and motel).

d.	AB Arterial Business District (automobile oriented retail and limited wholesale as well as offices, hotels, and motels).
 

(3)
 

Manufacturing.
 

a.	LM Light Manufacturing District (light manufacturing and warehousing).

b.	HM Heavy Manufacturing District (heavy manufacturing and storage within environmental control limits).
 

(4)
 

Special. PA Public Activity District (schools, parks, cemeteries, churches, community centers).
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 901.09, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-12. - Schedule of fees, charges and expenses.

The city council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for all matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be filed with the city clerk. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any action or appeal provided by this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.11(1), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-13. - Construction and use must be as provided in any approved applications, plans and permits.

 
(a)
 
All permits issued on the basis of plans (including site plans approved by the city council) and/or applications approved by the building inspector
 

and/or zoning administrator authorize only the use, arrangement and/or construction set forth in such approved plans and/or applications and no other use, arrangement or construction.
 
(b)
 
Use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter punishable as provided by s e c t i o n 
 5 6 - 4 .
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.11(2), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-14. - Schedule of fees.

 
(a)























(b)
 
There are hereby established the following fees to be paid by the requesting party prior to any action being taken by the city in connection with zoning matters as found in this chapter:





















A copy of these fees shall be on file with the city clerk.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.12, 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 5-28-1985; Ord. No. 5400, § I, 5-8-2007)


Secs. 56-15—56-31. - Reserved.


ARTICLE II. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Sec. 56-32. - Number of structures.

In any zoning district, only one structure containing a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected on a single zoning lot. (Ord. No. 4062, § 902.01, 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 5207, § I, 9-28-2004)

Sec. 56-33. - Access.

Every structure hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking and loading.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 902.02, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-34. - Height exception.

The building height limitations provided in this chapter shall not apply to chimneys, belfries, flagpoles, screened mechanical appurtenances (such as air conditioning units) which are usually placed above the roof level and are not intended for human occupancy.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 902.03, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-35. - Visibility at intersections.
 

Nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow on any corner in such a manner as to materially obstruct or impede vision between a height of 2½ and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street lines 12 feet from the point of the intersection.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 902.04, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-36. - General bulk regulations.

 
(a)






(b)
 
Continued conformity. The maintenance of yards, courts, and other open space and minimum lot area legally required for a structure shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such structure or of the property on which it is located as long as the structure is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts, other open space or minimum lot area allocated to any structure shall, by virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yards, courts, legally required parking areas, other open spaces or minimum lot area requirements for any other structure, and there shall be no permitted obstructions in required yards except as hereinafter set forth.
Division of zoning lots.
 

(1)
 

No zoning lot unimproved or improved with a structure or structures shall hereinafter be subdivided into two or more zoning lots and no portion of any zoning lot which is unimproved or improved with a structure or structures, shall be sold unless all zoning lots resulting from each such subdivision meet one of the two following criteria:
 
a.	Improved lots containing a structure or structures shall conform with all regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located.
b.	Unimproved lots shall be of such configuration as to allow for the development of permitted uses within the prevailing zoning district.
 

(2)
 

All subdivided zoning lots shall be appropriately recorded record plats as required by the county.
 

(c)



(d)
 

Required yards for existing structures. No yards now or hereafter provided for a structure existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall subsequently be reduced below the minimum yard requirements of this chapter for equivalent new construction. If already less than such yard requirements, it shall not be further reduced.
Permitted obstructions in required yards. The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards specified:
 

(1)







(2)


(3)
 

In all yards. Open terraces not over four feet above the average level of the adjoining ground but not including roofed-over terrace or porch; steps four feet or less above grade, which are necessary for access to a permitted structure or for access to a zoning lot from a street or alley; awnings and canopies; chimneys projecting 18 inches or less into the yard; flagpoles; vent pipes, if suitably concealed; yard lights; stair railings where required; arbors and trellises; hedges, shrubs, trees and other natural growth; and "physically disabled accessibility ramps,"  as defined in  s e c t i o n  5 6 - 4 2  provided that a physically disabled accessibility ramp license has been issued pursuant to  s e c t i o n  5 6 - 4 2  and remains in effect.
In right-of-way setbacks (front yards). One-story bay windows projecting three feet or less into the yard; overhanging eaves and gutters projecting four feet or less into the yard.
In rear yards. Enclosed, attached or detached off-street parking garages or carports; open off-street parking spaces; accessory structures, tool rooms and similar buildings or structures for domestic storage; balconies; breezeways and open porches; one-story bay windows; overhanging eaves and gutters projecting four feet or less into the yards; and recreational and laundry drying equipment.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 902.05, 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 5597, § I, 2-8-2011)


Sec. 56-37. - Conversion or change in uses of single-family dwellings.

In any district permitting uses other than single-family dwellings, single-family dwellings shall not be converted or changed in use without first obtaining a conditional use permit as provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 902.06, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-38. - Multiple-family occupancy of single dwelling units prohibited.

 
(a)



(b)
 
Increasing number of dwelling units. It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, or cause to be altered, any existing structure or portion thereof to increase the number of dwelling units on any parcel of land without first obtaining a building permit specifically approving the increase in number of dwelling units on the parcel.
Occupancy by more than one family. The occupancy of a dwelling unit by more than one family is prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or permit the occupancy of a dwelling unit or part thereof unless all occupants of the dwelling units are members of only one family.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 902.07, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-39. - Site, building and environmental accessibility and utility for disabled persons.
 

To the maximum extent possible any new construction, rehabilitation or conversion of buildings, or related site improvements shall provide for the access and movement of physically disabled persons, including those with nonambulatory (requiring wheelchair); semi-ambulatory (crutches); or sight-, hearing-, coordination- or aging-related disabilities. These provisions should include but not be limited to the following:
 

(1)


(2)


(3)



(4)





(5)


(6)
 

Building access. Provisions of on-grade, unobstructed access or alternative ramp access of sufficient design to accommodate a wheelchair (five-foot degree grade, 32 inches wide, non-slip surface, level entrance platform, etc.) to all buildings other than single-family dwellings.
Door and corridor width. Provisions of minimum 32-inch door width and corridors of 60 inches for both entrance and internal circulation of disabled persons.
Walks. Exterior sidewalks should not exceed a five percent grade, should have a minimum width of 48 inches, should have a nonslip surface, and should blend to a common level with other walks, driveways or parking lots to avoid curbs and other abrupt grade changes impeding the free movement of disabled persons.
Parking lots. Certain spaces that are accessible and approximate to the facilities served by such parking areas should be set aside and identified for individuals with physical disabilities. These spaces should, where possible, be open on one side or be a minimum of 12 feet in width. The grade, surface quality and relation to other vehicle movements should be considered for maximum safety and convenience of the disabled person.
Stairs. Stairs should be designed with adequate rails, (32 inches extending 18 inches beyond the top and bottom), landing size, and riser height (seven-inch maximum) to accommodate semi-ambulatory disabled persons.
Other standards. The published standards of the American Standards Association, entitled Specifications for Making Buildings and Facilities Accessible to, and Useable by, the Physically Handicapped (October 31, 1961) should be referred to for further and more specific guidelines to accommodate the disabled, including vertical circulation in buildings, access to toilets, water fountains, public telephones and controls or switches, warning signals, hazard avoidance, identification signs, etc.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 902.08, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-40. - Blood banks prohibited in all districts.

Blood banks, both for-profit and not-for-profit, are hereby classified in all zoning districts of the city as a prohibited use. (Ord. No. 4062, § 902.09, 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4511, § 1, 10-8-1991)

Sec. 56-41. - Performance standards.

 
(a)

(b)
 
Applicability. The performance standards shall apply to all present and future uses and developments in the city.

Enforcement of performance standards.
 

(1)



(2)



(3)
 

Whenever, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, there is a reasonable probability that any use or occupancy violates these performance standards, he is hereby authorized to employ a qualified technician or technicians to perform whatever investigations and analyses as are necessary to determine whether or not they are in fact being violated.
In the event that a violation is found to exist, the violator shall be liable for the reasonable fee of the technicians employed to perform such investigations and analyses. Such fees may be recovered as a penalty in the same manner as, and in addition to, the penalties specified in
 s e c t i o n 5 6 - 4 .

Any violation of this chapter shall hereby be considered as creating a public nuisance. Therefore, in addition to the enforcement procedures specified in this section, the regulations of c h a p t e r 3 4 , article VIII (nuisances) and any other applicable sections of this Code shall apply.
 
(c)
 
Standards. The following performance standards shall apply in accordance with the above criteria for applicability to any new or existing use located in the city. All uses shall be constructed, maintained and operated so as to not be injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dirt or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious waste materials, odors, fire and explosive hazard or glare.
 
(1)

(2)



(3)



(4)
 
Noise. Every use shall comply with the requirements of c h a p t e r 2 2 , article IV (noise regulations).

Vibration. A use shall be so operated that ground vibration inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible without instruments at any point on the property line of the property on which the use is located. Although scientific tools such as the seismograph are often used to measure earthborne vibration, the situation in the city is such that the rule of thumb method should be sufficient.
Dust, dirt and other matter. Every use shall be so operated as to prevent the emission into the air of dust, dirt, noxious acids, fumes, gases and other particulate matter, whatever its source, which may cause damage to property and health of persons at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use is located.
Odors. Every use shall be so operated as to prevent the emission of objectionable or offensive odors in such concentration as to be readily perceptible at any point at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use is located. Unfortunately, to date, no adequate standard or equipment has been developed in order to scientifically assess this problem area. Therefore, a concept of "odor threshold" is often
 

employed to cover this municipal problem. The term "odor threshold" is defined as the lowest concentration of an odorous material that will cause a response in the human nose. All odors are covered, even so-called pleasant ones (candy, bakeries, etc.), which in concentration can be annoying to the public.
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.14, 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 2, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4660, § 2, 8-9-1994)


Sec. 56-42. - Physically disabled accessibility ramp license.

 
(a)





(b)


(c)
 
Physically disabled accessibility ramp license required. A ramp or series of ramps designed in a manner that complies with all other code and ordinance requirements and intended to provide an unobstructed means of exterior access to a dwelling unit by a physically disabled person (referred to herein as a "physically disabled accessibility ramp") may be located in any required yards provided a physically disabled accessibility ramp license has been issued and remains in effect as provided in this section.
Authority. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to issue a physically disabled accessibility ramp license, subject to the terms, conditions, standards and procedures contained in this section.
Procedure for physically disabled accessibility ramp license.
 

(1)








(2)
 

Application. Applications for a physically disabled accessibility ramp license shall be filed with the zoning administrator and shall include such information and materials as the applicant deems appropriate or as may be requested by the zoning administrator to determine compliance with the provisions of this section. The application shall include the name and address of the property owner, the name of the occupant(s) of the dwelling requiring a physically disabled accessibility ramp in order to be able to access the dwelling unit ("occupant") and documentation establishing the need for the location of such physically disabled accessibility ramp in such required yard in order for such occupant to be able to access the dwelling unit and otherwise addressing the standards set forth in this s e c t i o n 5 6 - 4 2 for issuance of the physically disabled accessibility ramp license.
Standards for physically disabled accessibility ramp license approval. The zoning administrator shall base the decision whether to approve a physically disabled accessibility ramp license on the following criteria:
 
a.	Whether it is strictly necessary for the proposed physically disabled accessibility ramp to be located in such yard in order for the occupant to be able to have access to the dwelling unit and whether there is any less intrusive means of providing such access.
b.	If the proposed physically disabled accessibility ramp is proposed to be located in the front yard setback, whether the proposed physically disabled accessibility ramp can be located in any rear or side yard and still provide access to the habitable space in the dwelling  unit.
c.	Whether the proposed physically disabled accessibility ramp minimizes the degree and nature of the encroachment into any required yards.
 
(3)



(4)



(5)
 
Authorization. If the zoning administrator makes a determination that the application for a physically disabled accessibility ramp license satisfies the criteria listed above, and subject to and in accordance with the limitations and conditions contained in this s e c t i o n 5 6 - 4 2 , the zoning administrator shall grant a physically disabled accessibility ramp license to the property owner for the benefit of the occupant.
Conditions. The zoning administrator may impose such terms, conditions or restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of the physically disabled accessibility ramp license, as the zoning administrator may determine in order to further the general objectives of the zoning ordinance and to minimize the possibility of injury to the value of property in the neighborhood.
Construction. The physically disabled accessibility ramp license granted by the zoning administrator shall expire unless construction of the physically disabled accessibility ramp commences within 12 months of the issuance of such license.
 
(d)



(e)
 
Transfer of accessibility license permit. The physically disabled accessibility ramp license shall be approved only for the specific occupant identified in the license and for the specific location approved in the license. The physically disabled accessibility ramp license may not be transferred to any other location or used for the benefit of any other individual.
Revocation of physically disabled accessibility ramp license. A physically disabled accessibility ramp license shall be surrendered by the property owner of the property for which it was issued whenever the need for the license as presented in the application shall no longer exist, in which case it shall be revoked and be of no further force or effect. Further, the zoning administrator may revoke a physically disabled accessibility ramp license in accordance with the procedure described below if any terms of the physically disabled accessibility ramp license have been violated.
 
(1)





(2)
 
If any terms of a physically disabled accessibility ramp license have been violated, a revocation of such physically disabled accessibility ramp license may be initiated by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall give 15 days' notice by certified mail to the property owner and to the occupant stating that the physically disabled accessibility ramp license may be revoked and stating the reasons for revoking such physically disabled accessibility ramp license and providing such property owner and occupant an opportunity to be heard.
Any such notice shall be addressed to the property owner at his or her last known address as shown on the property tax records for said property in the office of the Department of Revenue of St. Louis County and to the occupant at the address of the dwelling unit.
 
(f)
 
Duration. A physically disabled accessibility ramp license shall be effective for the time period from the date the physically disabled accessibility ramp license is issued and continuing so long as the occupant is occupying the dwelling unit and is only able to access the dwelling unit via the physically disabled accessibility ramp. The physically disabled accessibility ramp license shall expire on the earlier of the following to occur: (i) the
 

occupant no longer occupies such dwelling unit; or (ii) the occupant no longer requires a physically disabled accessibility ramp to access the dwelling  unit.
 
(g)
 
Removal of physically disabled accessibility ramp. Within 30 days after the revocation, expiration or termination of the physically disabled accessibility ramp license, the property owner shall remove the physically disabled accessibility ramp and repair and restore any damage caused to the property by the location or removal of the physically disabled accessibility ramp. If the property owner fails to remove the physically disabled accessibility ramp within 30 days of such revocation, expiration or termination, the city may remove the ramp, at the cost of the property owner. All costs and expenses incurred by the city in removing the ramp together with any legal fees incurred by the city in connection with enforcing such removal obligation may be assessed against the property in the form of a special tax bill, which special tax bill shall become a lien on the property and shall also be a personal liability of the property owner.
 
(Ord. No. 5597, § II, 2-8-2011)


Secs. 56-43—56-70. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - SR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



Sec. 56-71. - Intent and purpose.

The purpose of the SR district is to protect and conserve areas of predominantly single-family detached residences, while allowing at the same time for the construction of new units if in substantial conformance with surrounding and adjacent residences. The construction of attached single-family residences may be permitted by site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.01(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 1, 6-10-1986)


Sec. 56-72. - Permitted uses.

The following uses shall be permitted in any location within the SR district:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
 
Detached single-family dwellings, if built and located in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Home occupations as provided in article III, division 3 of this chapter.
Accessory uses as provided in article III, division 4 of this chapter.

Conditional uses. The following uses shall be allowed as conditional uses in accordance with the procedures provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter:
 
a.	Convents and rectories.

b.	Utility substations.

c.	Day care centers.

d.	Group living facilities/group homes.

e.	Short term vacation rentals that meet the requirements of article XIII, division 3, sections 1 4 - 8 0 0 to 1 4 - 8 0 4 , short term vacation rentals of the city Code.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.01(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 1, 6-10-1986; Ord. No. 5784, § I, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 5865, § I, 9-26-2017)


Sec. 56-73. - Use regulations.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)





(d)



(e)
 
Lot size standards. Every proposal for the construction of a single-family detached dwelling shall have a lot with a minimum average dimension of 50 feet and a minimum area of 6,000 square feet.
Front yard setback. Every proposal for the alteration or construction of a single-family detached dwelling shall have a front yard setback from a public right-of-way or from a private roadway of not less than 25 feet.
Side yard setback. On a lot to be improved with a single-family detached dwelling or where any alteration to any such existing dwelling unit is proposed, the combined side yard dimensions should in no case be less than 15 feet with any side yard being a minimum of five feet. In the event that a side yard faces a public right-of-way or a private roadway, there shall be a side yard setback on the right-of-way side of the lot. The interior side yard of a corner lot shall be no less than five feet.
Rear yard standards. Every proposal for the construction or alteration of a single-family detached dwelling shall have a rear yard at least 30 feet in depth. Within such a rear yard an area of private useable open space shall be provided. This area shall contain at least 800 square feet and have a minimum dimension of at least 20 feet.
Height and bulk standards. Any proposal for the construction or alteration of a single-family detached residence must be judged by the zoning administrator to be in substantial conformance not only with the above standards for placement and lot size, but also with the prevailing height
 

and bulk of adjacent and surrounding single-family detached residences.
 

(f)






(g)
 

Variations from height and bulk standard. Substantial deviation from the prevailing pattern may be permitted by a site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter. In addition to all requirements of article IV, division 8 of this chapter, the site plan submission shall consist of
a plot plan at scale one inch equals 20 feet or 25 feet, showing the relationship of the proposed use to all existing buildings, landscaping, roadway and pavement areas within a radius of 200 feet, and front elevations at an equal or greater scale showing all existing adjacent buildings and landscaping.
Parking. If no enclosed garage is provided, an area for private parking of vehicles shall be required.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.01(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 1, 6-10-1986)


Secs. 56-74—56-104. - Reserved.


DIVISION 3. - LR LIMITED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



Sec. 56-105. - Intent and purpose.

The purpose of the LR district is to protect and conserve existing areas of predominantly detached single-family and two-family residences, and provide for the construction in accordance with standards set out in this division of those dwelling types commonly referred to as duplexes, row houses or townhouses, cluster houses or patio houses. In general, this use classification is intended to provide development standards for owner occupied dwellings rather than for rental units. These housing types are in fact single-family residences despite the fact of attachment or contiguity. The construction of low rise apartments may be permitted by site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.02(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 1, 6-10-1986)


Sec. 56-106. - Permitted uses.

The following uses shall be permitted in any location within the LR district:

 
(1)

(2)


(3)





(4)

(5)

(6)
 
Detached single-family dwellings, if built and located in accordance with the use regulations provided in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 7 3 .

Attached single-family dwellings, if built and located in accordance with the development standards for two-family houses, townhouses, or patio houses provided in this section.
Apartment dwellings by site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter, if built and located in accordance with the development standards for townhouse apartments or garden apartments provided in article II, division 4 of this chapter. All such apartment dwellings must conform with the use regulations for intensity, useable residential open space, and parking provided in article II, division 4 of this chapter.
Home occupations as provided in article III, division 3 of this chapter. Accessory uses. As provided in article III, division 4 of this chapter.
Conditional uses. The following shall be allowed as conditional uses in accordance with the procedures provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter:
 
a.	Convents and rectories.

b.	Utility substations.

c.	Day care centers.

d.	Group living facilities/group homes.

e.	Short term vacation rentals that meet the requirements of article XIII, division 3, sections 1 4 - 8 0 0 to 1 4 - 8 0 4 , short term vacation rentals of the city Code.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.02(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 1, 6-10-1986; Ord. No. 5865, § I, 9-26-2017)


Sec. 56-107. - Use regulations.

All uses within the LR district shall conform to the following general regulations:

 
(1)


(2)

(3)
 
Density. A maximum residential density of 16 dwelling units/per acre (2,722 square feet average per dwelling unit) must be maintained within a project, exclusive of public or commonly used rights-of-way.
Height. No building shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is smaller.

Parking. One parking space shall be provided for each residential dwelling unit which is completely enclosed and located within the minimum private lot area stipulated below. Garages may be detached from the principal building if access is from a private or public service
 

drive or street. Otherwise, such garages must be incorporated into the main building or attached thereto. (Ord. No. 4062, § 903.02(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 1, 6-10-1986)
Sec. 56-108. - Development standards.

The following standards are intended to guarantee adequate sunlight, open space, and privacy for occupants of two-family houses, townhouses, and patio houses. Certain deviations from the strict application of these standards may be permitted by site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter, so long as they are in conformance with the general intent, purpose and use regulations for this district.
 

(1)
 

Two-family dwellings.
 

a.	Lot area and width. Every proposal for the construction of a two-family dwelling shall have a lot with a minimum average dimension of 60 feet and a minimum area of 6,000 square feet.
b.	Building coverage. In no event shall a two-family dwelling on a private lot, including any accessory structures, cover more than 30 percent of the surface of that lot.
c.	Right-of-way setback. No two-family dwelling or accessory structure associated with such a use shall be located closer than 20 feet from a public right-of-way, except that a garage may abut a service road or alley right-of-way.
d.	Minimum distance. No two-family dwelling or accessory structure shall be located closer than 15 feet from an adjacent building on the same or on an adjacent lot, except that a detached garage may abut another garage located on the same or on an adjacent lot.
e.	Private open space. Every lot containing a two-family dwelling must provide at least one private yard or court space enclosed visually by fences, walls, or planting, and containing at least 800 square feet of useable open space.
f.	Minimum unit size. Every individual dwelling unit shall contain at least 1,000 square feet of livable floor area, exclusive of basement or attic space.
 
(2)
 
Townhouses.
 

a.	Lot area. Every townhouse shall be located on a lot with a minimum area of 2,000 square feet.

b.	Lot and unit width. Every lot containing a townhouse shall have a minimum width of at least 18 feet, and all townhouse dwellings, except end-of-row units and those on corner lots, shall occupy the full width of the lot.
c.	Building coverage. In no event shall a townhouse on a private lot, including any accessory structure, cover more than 35 percent of the surface of that lot.
d.	Project size, and grouping. A townhouse development shall consist of at least eight townhouse dwelling units, with no less than three and no more than eight units contiguous to one another.
e.	Right-of-way setback. No townhouse dwelling shall be located closer than 25 feet from any public right-of-way nor within 15 feet from a private drive, access road or open parking area to the front or rear of such a dwelling.
f.	Setback variation. No more than four abutting townhouses shall have a common roof or the same setback. Variations in the setback of building faces shall be at least four feet.
g.	Side yard setback. Side yard setback from a public right-of-way or from a private access road for corner lots shall be a minimum of 15 feet and ten feet respectively. Any townhouse adjacent to another use shall have two side yards of not less than five feet.
h.	Minimum distance between groupings. A minimum distance of ten feet shall separate any two groups or rows of townhouses, or any townhouse from any other abutting use or building type except that no other building shall be directly visible within 20 feet, or no other window shall be directly visible within 20 feet, or no other window shall be directly visible within 30 feet from an eye level window on any dwelling unit.
i.	Private open space. Every lot containing a townhouse must provide a private yard, oriented to either the building front or rear, enclosed visually by fences, walls or planting at least 30 feet in depth and containing at least 500 square feet of useable open space.
j.	Minimum unit size. Every townhouse unit shall contain at least 1,000 square feet of livable floor area, exclusive of garages, basements, or attics.
 
(3)
 
Patio houses.
 

a.	Lot area and width. Every lot for the construction of a patio house shall have a lot with a minimum average dimension of 40 feet and a minimum area of 2,500 square feet.
b.	Maximum height. No patio house shall exceed 12 feet in height.

c.	Project size and grouping. A development or project shall consist of at least six patio houses, with no less than three and no more than 12 units contiguous to one another.
d.	Right-of-way setback. A patio house may be built adjacent to a public or private right-of-way line so long as no enclosed or open living space is located within 12 feet of a paved street, access road, alley or open parking area other than on-site parking for the individual unit.
 

e.	Property line setback. No side or rear yard setback shall be required except that any use on a lot located at the intersection of two public must adhere to the provisions of s e c t i o n 5 6 - 3 5 (visibility at intersections).
f.	Minimum distance between groupings. A minimum distance of ten feet shall separate any two groups of patio houses, or a patio house from any other abutting use or building type, except that no other building shall be directly visible within 20 feet or no other window shall be directly visible within 30 feet from an eye level window of any patio house.
g.	Private open space. Every lot containing a patio house must provide a patio or court yard with a minimum area of 800 square feet and a minimum dimension of 25 feet. Because the patio is intended to be fully private open space and to be the principal source of natural light for the interior of the patio house, the house itself must face on and form at least 40 percent of the perimeter of the patio court. The remaining perimeter may be enclosed by the walls of adjacent patio houses (so long as such walls are without windows) or by fully opaque walls or fence at least eight feet in height.
h.	Minimum unit size. Every patio house shall contain at least 1,000 square feet of livable floor area, exclusive of garage, basement or attic.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.02(4), (5), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 1, 6-10-1986)


Secs. 56-109—56-129. - Reserved.


DIVISION 4. - MR MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



Sec. 56-130. - Intent and purpose.

The purpose of the MR district is to protect and conserve areas of predominantly multifamily or apartment dwellings built at a medium density, and to provide for the construction in accordance with standards set out in this division of those building types commonly referred to as townhouse apartments, garden apartments and elevator apartment buildings.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.03(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4186, § 1, 6-26-1984)


Sec. 56-131. - Permitted uses.

The following uses shall be permitted in any location within the MR district:

 
(1)


(2)


(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)
 
Apartment dwellings, if built and located in accordance with the development standards for townhouse apartments, garden apartments, or elevator apartments provided in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 1 3 3 .
Attached single-family dwellings by site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter, and if built and located in accordance with development standards for townhouse or patio houses provided in article II, division 3 of this chapter.
Convent or rectories.

Home occupations as provided in article III, division 3 of this chapter. Accessory uses, as provided in article III, division 4 of this chapter.
Conditional uses. The following uses shall be allowed as conditional uses in accordance with the procedures provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter:
 
a.	Detached single-family dwellings.

b.	Apartments for the elderly.

c.	Convalescent homes.

d.	Public or common parking garages or lots.

e.	Utility substations.

f.	Police or fire stations.

g.	Private schools, except private trade, technical or business schools, and university facility.

h.	Group living facility/group home.

i.	Short term vacation rentals that meet the requirements of article XIII, division 3, sections 1 4 - 8 0 0 to 1 4 - 8 0 4 , short term vacation rentals of the city Code.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.03(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4186, § 1, 6-26-1984; Ord. No. 5865, § II, 9-26-2017)


Sec. 56-132. - Use regulations.

All uses within the MR district shall conform to the following general regulations:
 

(1)
 

Bulk and intensity regulations.
 

a.	Floor area ratio. The maximum amount of gross floor area permitted for development on any lot shall not exceed an amount equal to one-half of the total area of that site, or an FAR of 0.5. Examples:

On a one acre site; FAR 0.5:
	
Allowable gross foor area	
21,780 sq. ft., w ½ × 43,560
	
Building height @ 20 percent Coverage	
2½ stories
	
Building height @ 50 percent Coverage	
1 story
	
Density @ 1,000 (1,200) sq. ft. foor area/du	
du -22(18) du/acre
	
Required parking @ 1.5 spaces/du	
33(27) spaces
	
Parking area	
10,550 (9450) sq. ft.



b.	Modification of floor area ratio. The total amount of gross floor area allowable on a given lot may be increased by an amount equal to twice the number of square feet of open balcony or private enclosed patio space provided within that area, so long as any such balcony or patio contains at least 60 square feet of outdoor area and has at least a dimension of six or more feet. Examples:

On a one acre site, FAR bonus:
	
Allowable gross foor area, FAR 0.5	
21,780 sq. ft.
	
Assume 1,600 sq. ft. in balconies to be provided (20 du × 80 sq. ft. × 2)	
3,200
	
Adjusted allowable foor area	
24,980



If average unit size were 1,000 square feet, the density would increase from 21.8 to 25.0 d.u./acre.

 
(2)

(3)


(4)



(5)
 
Maximum height. No structure erected in the MR district shall exceed three stories except by the provisions of this division.

Commonly useable residential open space. Commonly useable residential open space shall be provided in accordance with the provisions in article III, division 5 of this chapter for the exclusive use of residents of any building or group of buildings in this district.
Parking. On-site automobile parking shall be provided at the ratio of 1½ spaces for each efficiency apartment or one- or two-bedroom dwelling unit and two spaces for each dwelling unit containing three or more bedrooms. Any spaces not enclosed shall be located in parking areas designed as provided in article III, division 2 of this chapter.
Minimum unit size. Every unit constructed in MR district shall contain at least 600 square feet of livable floor area, exclusive of garage, basement or attic except in the case of elderly housing which shall have a minimum of 450 square feet of livable floor area per unit.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.03(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4186, § 1, 6-26-1984)


Sec. 56-133. - Development standards.

The following standards are intended to guarantee adequate sunlight, open space, and privacy for the occupants of garden apartments, townhouse apartments, and elevator apartments. Certain deviations from the strict application of these standards may be permitted by site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter, so long as they are in conformance with the general intent, purpose, and use regulations for this district.
 

(1)
 

Townhouse apartments. Townhouses built within this district shall comply with the following development standards:
 

a.	Lot area and width. Every lot for the construction of a townhouse apartment development or project shall have a minimum average dimension of 100 feet and a minimum area of 20,000 square feet.
b.	Minimum unit width. Every townhouse apartment shall have a minimum average width of 15 feet between the vertical partition walls which separate units.
 

c.	Project size and groupings. A townhouse project shall consist of at least 11 townhouse dwelling units with no less than three and no mor contiguous units to each other.
d.	Right-of-way setback. No townhouse apartment shall be located closer than 20 feet from a public right-of-way, or 15 feet from a private drive, access road, or open common parking area, except that parking areas may be located within five feet and private drives may be located within ten feet of any blank or windowless wall.
e.	Property line setbacks. No townhouse apartment shall be located closer than ten feet from a property line.

f.	Minimum distance between groupings. A minimum distance of ten feet shall separate any two groups or rows of townhouses, or any townhouse from any other abutting use or building type except that no other building shall be visible within 20 feet or no other window shall be directly visible within 30 feet from an eye level window of any townhouse.
The development standards provided here are not necessarily related to the subdivision and subsequent individual ownership of the individual townhouse together with its site or lot. In contrast the development standards provided for townhouses in the LR district classification do relate to probable individual ownership of house sites for townhouses, patio houses, or two-family houses. Townhouses responding to the density and development standards of this district would be essentially a variant of medium density multifamily housing appealing to the rental market.
 

(2)
 

Garden walkup apartments.
 

a.	Lot area and width. Every lot for the construction of one or more garden apartment buildings shall have a minimum average dimension of 100 feet and a minimum area of 20,000 square feet.
b.	Grouping and building perimeter. No more than four garden apartment buildings shall be contiguous, and in no case shall the total perimeter of the combined buildings measured exceed 600 lineal feet.
c.	Right-of-way setback. Every garden apartment building shall be set back at least 20 feet from a public right-of-way or 15 feet from a private drive, access road, or open common parking area, whether oriented to the front, sides or rear of such a building, except that parking areas may be located within five feet and private drives may be located within ten feet of any blank, windowless wall.
d.	Property line setback. Every garden apartment building shall be set back at least 15 feet from any property line except that any wall with windows of a garden apartment building facing a property line coterminous with an LR or SR district shall be set back 25 feet from such lot line.
e.	Minimum distance. A minimum distance of 15 feet shall separate a garden apartment building from any other building, except that no other building shall be directly visible within 20 feet, or no other window shall be directly visible within 30 feet, at eye level from a window of any other dwelling unit.
 
(3)
 
Elevator apartment buildings.
 

a.	Lot area and width. Every lot for the construction of an elevator apartment building shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet and a minimum average dimension of 100 feet.
b.	Right-of-way setback. No elevator apartment building shall be located nearer than 30 feet from an existing or officially approved public right-of-way.
c.	Lot line setback. No elevator apartment building or accessory building shall be located nearer than 25 feet from any lot line. In the event that such a lot line shall be coterminous with the boundaries of an SR or LR zoning use district, this minimum distance shall be increased as follows:
1.	Every portion of any structure which is higher than four stories or 50 feet, whichever is less, above the proposed grade at such a lot line and district boundary shall be at least 50 feet from this lot line;
2.	Every portion of any structure which is higher than seven stories or 86 feet, whichever is less, above the proposed grade at such a lot line shall be at least 80 feet from this lot line.
d.	Minimum distance. No elevator apartment building shall be located closer than 75 feet from any other building containing an apartment or dwelling unit, and located either on the same or on an adjacent lot.
e.	Height and density variance. Elevator apartments by site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter and if built in accordance with the regulations of this division, shall have a height limit of 12 stories and shall be allowed a maximum floor area ratio of 0.75.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.03(4), (5), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4186, § 1, 6-26-1984)


Secs. 56-134—56-151. - Reserved.


DIVISION 5. - P-RO PLANNED RESIDENTIAL-OFFICE DISTRICT



Sec. 56-152. - Intent and purpose.
 

The purpose of the P-RO classification is to encourage high quality, high-rise, multifamily residential and office development in intensities varying up to the highest density currently deemed in the welfare of, or healthful for, residents of the city. To be eligible for this classification:
 

(1)

(2)
 

Sites must have economic and physical potential for such high intensity development; and

Such development must be consistent with the city's master plan and with those land use policies further articulated from time to time by the city council.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.05(1), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-153. - Permitted uses.

The following uses shall be permitted in any location within the CB district:

 
(1)


(2)


(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)



(8)

(9)

(10)
 
Attached single-family dwellings, if built in accordance with development standards for townhouses provided in article II, division 3 of this chapter.
Apartment dwellings, if built in accordance with the development standards for townhouse apartments, garden apartments, or elevator apartments provided in article II, division 4 of this chapter.
Offices, all types including medical or dental clinics.

Home occupations as provided in article III, division 3 of this chapter. Public parking garages.
Private business, technical or trade schools or universities.

Convenience/service retail uses that do not comply as accessory uses may be permitted as a condition of site plan review in those instances where, in the judgment of the city council, special locational factors justify and necessitate such non-accessory retail activities. At no time, however, should retail commercial activity become the principal use of property.
Public facilities.

Accessory uses, as provided in article III, division 4 of this chapter.

Conditional uses. The following uses shall be allowed as conditional uses in accordance with the procedures provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter:
 
a.	Detached single-family dwellings.

b.	Apartment dwellings for the elderly.

c.	Convalescent homes.

d.	Hotels or motels.

e.	Utility substations.

f.	Theaters.

g.	Research and development establishments engaged in the development and assembly of electronic equipment, precision instruments or miniaturized prototypes, so long as the occupancy of such an establishment at any one period of the day does not exceed one employee per 170 square feet of gross office, laboratory, processing or assembly floor area.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.05(2), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-154. - Use regulations.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Access. Every site or lot proposed for rezoning to a P-RO classification must have adequate automobile access to Big Bend Boulevard or Manchester Road, within 750 feet as normally traversed by automobile.
Intensity regulations.
 

(1)


(2)
 

Floor area ratio. The maximum amount of gross floor area permitted for development within this district shall not exceed one times the product of the number of square feet of lot area contained within the site, or a floor area ratio, FAR of 1.0.
Modification of the floor area ratio. The maximum floor area allowable on a lot or parcel within this district may be increased as follows, provided that a site plan for the development of any such lot or parcel is submitted and reviewed as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter (site plan review):
 
a.	Lots greater than one acre in area, maximum allowable FAR of 2.5.

b.	Lots greater than three acres in area, maximum allowable FAR of 3.0.
 

(c)


(d)
 

Commonly useable residential open space. Commonly useable residential open space shall be provided in accordance with the provisions provided in article III, division 5 of this chapter for the exclusive use of residents of any building or project built in this district.
Site coverage. In order to assure the provision of open space for the exclusive use of pedestrians, the total amount of the surface of the site
 

covered by buildings, parking, driveways, roads and any accessory buildings, shall not exceed 55 percent of the total amount of the surface of the site. This requirement shall not be construed to preclude an underground structure from occupying an entire lot and, as a condition of site plan approval, projecting no more than one story or 12 feet above the existing grade level. Any open plaza elevated above or depressed below the predominant site grade may be considered for these purposes as site surface, so long as it is developed and landscaped for pedestrian use, and adequate provision is made for open pedestrian access to such a plaza level.
 
(e)
 
Parking/space  requirements.
 

(1)


(2)



(3)
 

Residential parking. A minimum of 1½ on-site parking spaces shall be provided for each apartment or attached single-family dwelling unit located on the first five stories of any structure, plus 1.4 spaces for each dwelling unit located above the fifth story.
Office and convenience service retail parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor space provided for office or convenience service retail uses on the first five stories of any structure, plus one parking space for each 500 square feet of such gross office floor space located above the fifth story.
Parking reduction for mixed apartment-office projects. The combined total number of parking spaces required in accordance with separate regulations for residential and commercial use may be reduced in accordance with the provisions of article III, division 2 of this chapter.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.05(3), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-155. - Development standards.

The following standards are intended to provide a benchmark for proposals for development in the P-RO district. They may be varied in the direction of greater or lesser restriction as a condition of site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter.
 

(1)
 

Lot size.
 

a.	Minimum area: 30,000 square feet.

b.	Minimum dimension: 100 feet.
 

(2)

(3)
 

Minimum right-of-way setback. 30 feet.

Minimum property line setback. 25 feet.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.05(4), 10-14-1980)


Secs. 56-156—56-178. - Reserved.


DIVISION 6. - NB NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT



Sec. 56-179. - Intent and purpose.

 
(a)



(b)
 
The NB district is intended to accommodate convenience retail shopping facilities at a scale and intensity of use that is compatible with adjacent and surrounding residential uses. Such facilities should not be extensive in area, nor should they generate substantial amounts of vehicular traffic at any time during the day. Likewise, the level of evening business activity should be minimal.
The uses permitted in this district are limited to those businesses which the residents of nearby houses and apartments need to use frequently or every day. Included are those smaller convenience/service retail establishments which do not require extensive parking areas or draw large numbers of customers.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.06(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 3-12-1985; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4250, § 1, 3-11-1986; Ord. No. 4528, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-
1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 1, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4980, § I, 3-27-2001)


Sec. 56-180. - Permitted uses.

The following uses shall be permitted in any location within the NB district:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)
 
Food stores, including grocery stores, meat markets, or delicatessens, ice cream stores, and bakeries. Apparel and clothing accessories stores (except for the sale of used merchandise).
Custom dressmaking or tailor shops. Barbershops and beauty parlors.
Self-service laundries and retail dry cleaning establishments.

Dry cleaning and laundry receiving stations without processing or pickup or delivery service. Shoe repair shops.
Household appliance repair shops. Bicycle shops (sales and repair).
 

 
(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)


(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)
 
Drugstores.

Florist, gift or card shops.

Business, professional or medical offices, except clinics.

Public facilities, including police or fire stations and post offices. Home occupations as provided in article III, division 3 of this chapter. Accessory uses as provided in article III, division 4 of this chapter.
Any use which in the judgment of the zoning administrator is identical or similar to one or more of the above listed uses and which conforms with the intent and purpose and with the use regulations and limitations for this chapter.
Health care delivery services and laboratories, excluding clinics. Caterers.
Interior decorators, including drapery and upholstery.

Sales offices, manufacturers and sales representative offices. Watch and clock shops, including repair.
Interior decorating services. Photographic portrait studios. Travel agents.
Hearing aid sales.

Conditional uses. The following uses shall be allowed as conditional uses in accordance with the procedures provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter:
 
a.	Utility substations.

b.	Day-care centers.

c.	Nursery or kindergarten.

d.	Restaurants.

e.	Taverns.

f.	Public-common parking lots.

g.	Antique stores.

h.	Loft apartment/condo dwelling units for occupancy for one family per unit that meet the following requirements:

1.	Loft apartment/condo dwelling units shall be permitted only in nonstreet level locations. The term "nonstreet level" means any floor situated more than eight feet above grade level at all entrances.
2.	Loft apartment/condo dwelling units must have a minimum of 1,000 square feet of habitable space provided for each dwelling unit.
3.	No more than four persons shall occupy a loft apartment/condo dwelling unit.

4.	If vacancy of commercial space exceeds 50 percent for a period of 18 months or more, no new tenants for loft apartment/condo dwelling units will be allowed to occupy the dwelling units until commercial occupancy is above 50 percent.
i.	Dance studios.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.06(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 3-12-1985; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4250, § 1, 3-11-1986; Ord. No. 4528, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-
1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 1, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4980, § I, 3-27-2001; Ord. No. 5648, § I, 1-10-2012)


Sec. 56-181. - Use regulations.

 
(a)
 
Lot size requirements.
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet. Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
 

(b)
 

Bulk regulations.
 

(1)


(2)


(3)
 

Maximum structure height: 35 feet. Buildings of a greater height may be specifically permitted by site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter.
Maximum building coverage: The total amount of any lot covered at grade level by principal and accessory building shall not exceed 30 percent.
Maximum floor area ratio: 0.75.
 

(c)
 

Yard and setback requirements.
 

(1)





(2)
 

Minimum right-of-way setback: 35 feet, except that if no automobile parking, storage or driveway is located between the public right-of-way an or accessory building, the minimum right-of-way setback may be reduced to 15 feet. However, any portion of a building 12 feet above grade le right-of-way line, may project horizontally to that line, provided no structural columns, or posts, signs, parking spaces, or other potential obstr located within 15 feet of such right-of-way.
Minimum side or rear yard: None required, but if a side or rear yard is provided, no such yard shall be less than five feet in width.
 

(d)
 

Transitional yard.
 

(1)


(2)


(3)


(4)
 

Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line of an adjacent residential area, then a closed fence at least six feet but not more than eight feet in height and a landscaped yard at least ten feet in width shall be provided.
Where the rear lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, then a closed fence at least six feet but not more than eight feet in height, and a landscaped yard at least 20 feet in width shall be provided.
Where the rear or side wall of any nonresidential structure in this district lies across the street from the front yard of residential structures located in a residential district, then a landscaped yard at least 20 feet in depth shall be provided along such a rear or side wall.
A detailed landscape plan for all transitional yard conditions shall be submitted to the plan and zoning commission for review prior to final approval of an application.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.06(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 3-12-1985; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4250, § 1, 3-11-1986; Ord. No. 4528, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-
1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 1, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4980, § I, 3-27-2001)


Sec. 56-182. - Use limitations.

 
(a)





(b)

(c)
 
No new residential structures shall be constructed in an NB district, although normal alterations, remodeling, and improvements may be carried out on existing residential structures. Exceptions to this limitation may be permitted by site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter. Such a site plan submission is intended to ensure that adequate provision is made for the vertical as well as the horizontal separation of such uses, and for the separation of the means of access to such mixed uses.
No separate business establishment shall contain more than 7,500 square feet of gross leasable floor space.

All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced, processed, or treated on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
 
(d)	All business, service, storage and display of goods, shall be conducted within completely enclosed structures, except as permitted in item (h) of this section below.
 

(e)


(f)


(g)

(h)
 

No business establishment shall offer goods or services directly to consumers waiting in parked automobiles or sell beverages or food for consumption on the premises in parked automobiles.
Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any property located in a residential district, and so that no glare is visible to traffic on any public street.
All uses shall comply with the performance standards provided in article II, d i v i s i o n 1 3 of this chapter.

Mobile food and/or drink carts are permitted by permit only authorized by the public works director, subject to the following conditions:
 

(1)


(2)



(3)

(4)


(5)


(6)

(7)
 

Mobile carts must be operated on the premises on which the primary business is located and the location of the cart shall be subject to the review and approval of the public works director.
Mobile carts cannot be located on sidewalks and/or any public right-of-way, and mobile carts will only be permitted in parking lots where the mobile food cart does reduce parking below the minimum required off-street parking. Mobile carts must not interfere with any means of ingress/egress, curbs, ramps or drive aisles.
Mobile carts must not exceed one axle and/or 35 square feet.

The director of public works shall determine where mobile carts that are not in use should be stored. The preferred location would be indoors and/or completely screened from view when not in use.
Tables and chairs shall not be used in association with a mobile food and/or drink cart unless licensed in accordance with the outdoor dining regulations of s e c t i o n 4 2 - 9 8 of the city ordinance.
The server shall be located outside of the cart; carts supporting servers inside the cart shall not be permitted.

Mobile carts shall be subject to all health and sanitation regulations as required by but not limited to s e c t i o n 2 6 - 1 9 of the city ordinance as regulated by St. Louis County Health Department.
 
Any violation of the above conditions may result in the revocation of the mobile food and/or drink cart permit by the public works director.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.06(4), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 3-12-1985; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4250, § 1, 3-11-1986; Ord. No. 4528, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-
1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 1, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4980, § I, 3-27-2001; Ord. No. 5774, §§ I, II, 5-26-2015)


Secs. 56-183—56-202. - Reserved.
 

DIVISION 7. - CB COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT



Sec. 56-203. - Intent and purpose.

 
(a)


(b)






(c)
 
The CB district is intended to accommodate a wide variety of retail commercial and personal and business service uses including those which attract shoppers from a community or city-wide and larger market area, as well as convenience service retail uses.
The district seeks to give the highest priority to uses typically located in nucleated shopping districts which, in turn, serve a contiguous community and neighborhood shopping market. Included are small retail establishments of a convenience or service nature as well as specialized or larger shoppers' goods establishments, which together attract and require intensive pedestrian and vehicular traffic. At the same time, provision is
made to accommodate a variety of other business services, offices and entertainment uses which provide patronage to retail uses and a diversity of business activity.
It shall be the responsibility of the plan and zoning commission to ensure that the uses established in the CB district meet these purposes and that an appropriate balance of goods and services be made available within the CB district.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.07(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4202, § 2, 3-12-1985; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4250, § 2, 3-11-1986; Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 8-12-1986;
Ord. No. 4514, § 1, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 4665, § 1, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 11-8-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord.
No. 4857, § I, 11-10-1998; Ord. No. 4948, § I, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 4953, §§ I, II, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 5004, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 5005, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No.
5149, § I, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 5311, § I, 1-24-2005; Ord. No. 5314, § I, 2-14-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 5545, § I, 10-13-2009)


Sec. 56-204. - Permitted uses.

The following uses shall be permitted in any location within the CB district:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)
 
Department and variety stores.

Business equipment and furniture stores (except for the sale of used merchandise). Household appliances and furniture sales (except for the sale of used merchandise). Carpet, rug and linoleum stores.
Watch and clock shops, including repair. Art, handicraft and school supply stores.
Book or stationery stores as limited by s e c t i o n 5 6 - 2 0 9 (d). Tobacco and pipe shops.
Photographic and audio-visual equipment and supply shops for sale or rental. Hobby and toy stores.
Jewelry stores.

Leather goods and luggage stores.

Music, musical instrument and record stores. Sporting good stores.
Hardware, paint, glass and wallpaper stores.

Food stores, including grocery stores, meat markets or delicatessens, ice cream stores and bakeries. Apparel and clothing accessories stores (except for the sale of used merchandise).
Bicycle stores (sales and repair). Drugstores.
Florist, gift and card stores. Interior decorating services. Photograph portrait studios. Travel agents.
Hearing aid sales.

Retail dry cleaning or laundry facilities, not to include self-service laundry or dry cleaning plants without retail services. Barbershops and beauty parlors.
Custom dressmaking or tailor shops. Newsstands, as limited by  s e c t i o n  5 6 - 2 0 9 (d). Shoe repair shops.
Doctors' offices.
 

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)



(38)
 

Dentists' offices. Veterinary offices. Accounting offices. Architects' offices. Engineers' offices. Lawyers' offices.
Any use which, in the judgment of the plan and zoning commission, is similar to one or more of the above listed uses and which conforms with the intent and purposes of this chapter and which conforms with the use regulations, use limitations and performance standards for this chapter.
Accessory uses as provided in article III, division 4 of this chapter.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.07(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4202, § 2, 3-12-1985; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4250, § 2, 3-11-1986; Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 8-12-1986;
Ord. No. 4514, § 1, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 4665, § 1, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 11-8-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord.
No. 4857, § I, 11-10-1998; Ord. No. 4948, § I, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 4953, §§ I, II, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 5004, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 5005, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No.
5149, § I, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 5311, § I, 1-24-2005; Ord. No. 5314, § I, 2-14-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 5545, § I, 10-13-2009)


Sec. 56-205. - Additional permitted uses.

The following uses shall be permitted only in nonstreet locations in the CB district along Manchester Avenue between the east right-of-way line of Roseland Terrace and its southern extension on the east and Sutton Avenue on the west. Nonstreet level is defined as any floor situated more than eight feet above grade level at all entrances or any floor situated more than six feet below grade level at all entrances. The following uses shall be permitted in any street level or nonstreet level location throughout the remainder of the CB district:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
 

Business and professional offices.

Business, secretarial and beautification schools.

Display rooms where merchandise sold at wholesale is stored elsewhere, including manufacturing representative offices. Facilities for specialized or higher education.
Dance and music studios and schools.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.07(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4202, § 2, 3-12-1985; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4250, § 2, 3-11-1986; Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 8-12-1986;
Ord. No. 4514, § 1, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 4665, § 1, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 11-8-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord.
No. 4857, § I, 11-10-1998; Ord. No. 4948, § I, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 4953, §§ I, II, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 5004, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 5005, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No.
5149, § I, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 5311, § I, 1-24-2005; Ord. No. 5314, § I, 2-14-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 5545, § I, 10-13-2009)


Sec. 56-206. - Conditional uses.

The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses in accordance with the procedures provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)


(15)
 
Indoor theaters or cinemas, except as provided in  s e c t i o n  5 6 - 2 0 9 (d).

Auditoriums and other assembly halls, including religious, fraternal and union meeting halls. Health care delivery services such as clinics and laboratories.
Antique stores. Caterers.
Music studios or schools that are a part of a retail sales operation. Financial institutions.
Lottery outlets, only if licensed by the state and located in conjunction with an established retail business. Public or commercial off-street parking as a principal use.
Restaurants.

Utility substations. Multifamily residential uses. Health clubs.
Seasonal businesses and office facilities (i.e., businesses and office facilities that do not maintain regular weekly business hours throughout the year, or maintain regular business hours on a seasonal basis).
Buildings or structures exceeding the maximum structure height specified in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 2 0 8 , provided that appropriate setback and buffering from adjacent residential uses is provided.
 

(16)

(17)

(18)
 

Consignment shops that sell high quality, pre-owned apparel and clothing accessories.

Communication towers constructed and operated in compliance with article III, division 8 of this chapter.

Micro-breweries for the production and packaging of beer, cider and soft drinks that meet the following requirements:
 

a.	Micro-breweries must be associated with a retail operation.

b.	Associated retail operation must utilize a minimum of 25 percent of the total gross floor area of the micro-brewery business operations.
 
(19)

(20)
 
Rooftop communication antenna(s), constructed and operated in compliance with article III, division 9 of this chapter. Craft beer stores that meet the following requirements:
 
a.	Craft beer stores that sell only craft beer in bulk and by the drink and specialize in craft beer related items such as craft beer books, barware, bitters, mixers, glassware related to alcoholic beverages, offer classes in craft beer making and offer tastings to customers on-site (in many cases a corkage fee may be associated with this on-site tastings).
b.	No hard alcohol can be sold on the premises.

c.	No lottery tickets can be sold on the premises.

d.	No tobacco products can be sold on the premises.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.07(4), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4202, § 2, 3-12-1985; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4250, § 2, 3-11-1986; Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 8-12-1986;
Ord. No. 4514, § 1, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 4665, § 1, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 11-8-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord.
No. 4857, § I, 11-10-1998; Ord. No. 4948, § I, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 4953, §§ I, II, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 5004, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 5005, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No.
5149, § I, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 5311, § I, 1-24-2005; Ord. No. 5314, § I, 2-14-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 5545, § I, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 5804, § I,
1-26-2016; Ord. No. 5833, § I, 10-11-2016)


Sec. 56-207. - Prohibited uses.

The following uses shall be prohibited in the CB district:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)
 
Pawnshops. Massage parlors. Tattoo shops.
Licensed betting stores.

Other uses which the plan and zoning commission determines to be of an immoral or illegal nature.

Package liquor stores are prohibited, except for craft beer stores that meet the requirements as stipulated in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 2 0 6 (20) above.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.07(5), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4202, § 2, 3-12-1985; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4250, § 2, 3-11-1986; Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 8-12-1986;
Ord. No. 4514, § 1, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 4665, § 1, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 11-8-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord.
No. 4857, § I, 11-10-1998; Ord. No. 4948, § I, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 4953, §§ I, II, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 5004, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 5005, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No.
5149, § I, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 5311, § I, 1-24-2005; Ord. No. 5314, § I, 2-14-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 5545, § I, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 5833, § II,
10-11-2016)


Sec. 56-208. - Use regulations.

 
(a)
 
Lot size requirements.
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet. Minimum lot width: 50 feet. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
 
(b)
 
Bulk regulations.
 

(1)

(2)
 

Maximum structure height: 35 feet.

Maximum building coverage: The total amount of any lot covered by principal and accessory building shall not exceed 40 percent.
 

(c)
 

Yard and setback requirements.
 

(1)


(2)
 

Minimum right-of-way setback: None required, except that no unenclosed motor vehicle parking shall be permitted within 15 feet of a public right-of-way.
Side or rear yard: None required, except that if a rear or side yard is provided, no such yard shall be less than five feet in width.
 

(d)
 

Transitional yard. All structures shall be located as to maintain transitional yards of the same width and with the same screening and fencing as required in article II, division 6 of this chapter (NB district), unless a conditional use permit is obtained.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.07(6), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4202, § 2, 3-12-1985; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4250, § 2, 3-11-1986; Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 8-12-1986;
Ord. No. 4514, § 1, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 4665, § 1, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 11-8-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord.
No. 4857, § I, 11-10-1998; Ord. No. 4948, § I, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 4953, §§ I, II, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 5004, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 5005, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No.
5149, § I, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 5311, § I, 1-24-2005; Ord. No. 5314, § I, 2-14-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 5545, § I, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 5833, § II,
10-11-2016)


Sec. 56-209. - Use limitations.

 
(a)


(b)



(c)


(d)

(e)
 
All business establishments selling goods or providing services on the premises shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced, processed or treated on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
No business establishment may offer goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked automobiles, or sell prepared food or beverages directly to customers for consumption on the premises in parked automobiles or for consumption off the premises without first obtaining a conditional use permit.
Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any property located in a residential district and so that no glare is directly visible to traffic on any public street.
No business establishment shall display or sell pornographic materials that have no socially redeeming value.

All outdoor storage, except the storage of automobiles and other motor vehicles in operating condition and off-street parking and loading spaces, shall be enclosed by screening.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.07(7), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4202, § 2, 3-12-1985; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4250, § 2, 3-11-1986; Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 8-12-1986;
Ord. No. 4514, § 1, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 4665, § 1, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 11-8-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord.
No. 4857, § I, 11-10-1998; Ord. No. 4948, § I, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 4953, §§ I, II, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 5004, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 5005, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No.
5149, § I, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 5311, § I, 1-24-2005; Ord. No. 5314, § I, 2-14-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 5545, § I, 10-13-2009)


Sec. 56-210. - Performance standards.

All uses shall comply with the performance standards provided in article II, division 13 of this chapter. In addition, uses in the CB district shall be established for the primary purposes of creating a retail shopping and personal service commercial district. Preference will be given to approving only those uses which meet this standard.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.07(8), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4202, § 2, 3-12-1985; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4250, § 2, 3-11-1986; Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 8-12-1986;
Ord. No. 4514, § 1, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 4665, § 1, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 11-8-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord.
No. 4857, § I, 11-10-1998; Ord. No. 4948, § I, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 4953, §§ I, II, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 5004, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 5005, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No.
5149, § I, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 5311, § I, 1-24-2005; Ord. No. 5314, § I, 2-14-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 5545, § I, 10-13-2009)


Sec. 56-211. - CB1 district.

 
(a)



(b)






(c)
 
Definitions. The CB1 district shall be defined as follows: Street level locations along Manchester Road between the east right-of-way line of Roseland Terrace and its southern extension on the east and Sutton Avenue on the west. The term "street level" means any floor that does not meet the definition of "nonstreet level" contained in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 2 0 5 .
Intent and purpose. The CB1 district is a subdistrict contained within the CB Community Business District. The CB1 district is intended to accommodate a wide variety of destination type retail commercial uses, with an emphasis toward the retail sale of goods for personal consumption, dining, and entertainment, which attracts shoppers from a trade area beyond the city and, which together, attract and encourage pedestrian traffic. The CB1 district seeks to give the highest priority to uses typically located in nucleated shopping districts which, in turn, serve and are compatible with the contiguous business community and neighborhood.
CB1 district permitted uses. Permitted uses in the CB1 district shall exclude the sale of used merchandise or rental of merchandise unless specifically identified below as permitted. The permitted uses enumerated in sections 5 6 - 2 0 4 and 5 6 - 2 0 5 shall not apply to street level locations within the CB1 district; instead the following uses shall be permitted in any street level location within the CB1 district:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)
 
Home furnishing and accessories stores.

Office products, business equipment and furniture stores. Household appliance and furniture stores.
Floor covering stores. (Except those with a primary emphasis on the sale of remnants, over-runs or closeouts.) Art, handicraft and school supply stores.
Book stores as limited by s e c t i o n 5 6 - 2 0 9 (d).

Tobacco and pipe shops, not to include paraphernalia intended for the use of illegal drugs. Photographic, audiovisual and digital equipment and supply stores.
Consumer electronic stores.
 

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)



(28)
 

Hobby and toy stores.

Jewelry stores, watch and clock stores, including incidental repair. Luggage stores.
Music, musical instrument and recorded music and video stores (rental permitted). Sporting goods stores.
Hardware, paint, glass and wallcovering stores.

Food stores, including grocery stores, meat markets, delicatessens, ice cream stores and bakeries. Apparel and clothing accessories stores.
Bicycle stores, including incidental repair. Drugstores.
Florist, gifts and card stores.

Retail dry cleaning or laundry facilities, not to include self-service laundry or dry cleaning plants. Newsstands, as limited by  s e c t i o n  5 6 - 2 0 9 (d).
Art galleries.

Tuxedo and formal wear stores (rental permitted).

Consignment shops for antiques and collectibles as defined by the zoning code. Accessory uses as provided by article III, division 4 of this chapter.
Any use which, in the judgment of the plan and zoning commission, is similar to one or more of the uses listed in this subsection and which conforms with the intent and purposes of this chapter and which conforms with the use regulations, use limitations, and performance standards for this chapter.
Any restaurant that replaces a previously existing restaurant that in the judgment of the zoning administrator, is similar to the previously existing restaurant in size, scope and impact on adjacent or surrounding properties.
 
(d)
 
Conditional uses. The conditional uses enumerated in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 2 0 6 shall not apply to street level locations within the CB1 district, and instead the following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses, in accordance with the procedures provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter, in any street level location of the CB1 district:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)


(7)



(8)

(9)
 
Indoor theatres or cinemas, except as provided in  s e c t i o n  5 6 - 2 0 9 (d).

Antique, vintage and collectible stores, except as prohibited by subsection (e)(9) of this section. Music and art studios or schools that are a part of a retail sales operation.
Financial  institutions. Restaurants.
Live music establishments offering dueling piano bars, jazz or blues with food service (live entertainment must be available one-half the time the establishment is open to the public).
Day spas: to include hair salons, facials, manicure and pedicure services and massage services from which 30 percent of gross revenue is derived from retail sales generating sales tax and must be open a minimum of five nights per week until 8:00 p.m. No day spa can be located closer than 800 feet to another day spa.
Stores allowing customers to taste wines, liqueurs and spirits from a cask before buying them.

Any restaurant that does not replace a previously existing restaurant or any restaurant that in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator, would require a conditional use permit due to the size, scope and impact on adjacent or surrounding properties.
 
(e)
 
Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the CB1 district:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)
 

Pawnshops. Massage parlors. Tattoo shops.
Licensed betting stores. Package liquor stores. Seasonal businesses. Convenience stores. Rent to own stores.
Used clothing, resale stores and consignment shops (except those that sell antiques and collectibles as defined by the zoning code). Check cashing and payday loan services.
Other uses which the plan and zoning commission determines to be of an immoral or illegal nature.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.07(9), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4202, § 2, 3-12-1985; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4250, § 2, 3-11-1986; Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 8-12-1986;
Ord. No. 4514, § 1, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 4665, § 1, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 11-8-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord.
No. 4857, § I, 11-10-1998; Ord. No. 4948, § I, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 4953, §§ I, II, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 5004, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 5005, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No.
5149, § I, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 5311, § I, 1-24-2005; Ord. No. 5314, § I, 2-14-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 5545, § I, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 5763 § I,
2-10-2015; Ord. No. 5838, § I, 12-13-2016)


Secs. 56-212—56-230. - Reserved.


DIVISION 8. - AB ARTERIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT



Sec. 56-231. - Intent and purpose.

 
(a)



(b)


(c)
 
The AB district is intended to accommodate and regulate those business and commercial uses which draw customers primarily from motorists passing on the street or for whom a location on a highway or arterial street is especially useful or necessary. Such uses function relatively independent of intensive pedestrian traffic and proximity of other businesses.
Because they typically require direct access to automobile traffic and visibility from the street, careful consideration must be given to their effect on the efficiency and safety or traffic movement, as well as to their impact on adjacent areas and residences.
The uses permitted in this district consist primarily of ones which do not ordinarily seek locations in nucleated shopping centers and which therefore must be provided for at independent locations. Although some typical retail uses are permitted in the AB district, most of the uses permitted do not blend well into other retail shopping areas.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.08(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 4647, § 2, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 11-8-1994;
Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 4735, § 1, 6-25-1996; Ord. No. 4953, § III, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 4968, § I, 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 5019, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No.
5187, § I, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-232. - Permitted uses.

The following uses shall be permitted in any location within the AB district:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)


(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)
 
Caterers. Liquor stores.
Restaurants, except for drive-in establishments offering beverages or food to consumers for consumption on the premises or in parked automobiles.
Taverns.

Home and office furniture stores (except for the sale of used merchandise). Carpet, rug and linoleum stores.
Interior decoration stores (including drapery and upholstering). Barber and beauty shops.
Household appliance sales and repair shops (except for the sale of used merchandise). Electronic equipment sales and repair shops.
Self-service laundry and dry cleaning stores.

Laundry and dry cleaning establishments (including pickup stations, package plant and plant type operations). Printing, lithography and publishing (including office duplicating).
Pet shops, pet sales, food and supplies. Garden supplies.
Business and professional offices (including financial institutions). Sales offices and manufacturer's sales representatives.
Medical or dental clinic or laboratory.

Health and sports clubs (including gymnasiums, and sauna or Turkish baths, handball courts, and indoor tennis courts). Animal hospitals, veterinarian office.
Indoor commercial amusements, such as bowling alleys, billiard halls and swimming pools. Indoor theaters and cinemas.
Private business, technical or trade schools. Public facilities.
 

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)



(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)
 

Frozen food locker, ice storage or sales.

Religious, fraternal, union or similar meeting halls. Automotive parts and accessories.
Hardware, paint, glass or wallpaper sales. General contractors' offices.
Building materials equipment sales with storage inside.

Tombstone and monument sales, provided that all display is fully enclosed. Exterminators.
Carpenter, cabinet, furniture refinishing or upholstery shops. Public or commercial off-street parking as a principal use. Hotels or motels.
Food stores.

Research and development establishments engaged in the development and assembly of electronic equipment, precision instruments or miniaturized mechanical prototypes, so long as the occupancy of an establishment at any one period of the day does not exceed one employee per 170 square feet of gross office, laboratory, processing or assembly floor area.
Home occupations as provided in article III, division 3 of this chapter. Accessory uses as permitted in article III, division 4 of this chapter. Antique, vintage and collectible stores.
Conditional uses. The following uses shall be allowed as conditional uses in accordance with the procedures provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter:
 
a.	Mortuary or funeral home, provided that adequate provision is made for the on-site formation of a cortege consisting of one car for each ten chapel or parlor seats.
b.	Carwash, provided that at least 20 standing or queuing spaces for waiting vehicles are available on site for each wash rack or lane.

c.	Utility substations.

d.	Outdoor commercial amusements, such as a swimming pool, skating rink, ice skating or miniature golf, provided that all structures, facilities or activity areas are set back at least 50 feet from any lot line within any commercial or industrial district, or at least 100 feet from any lot line in an adjacent residential district.
e.	Automobile filling stations and service stations, and automobile, motorcycle or truck repair shops other than body shops.

f.	Drive-in or carryout restaurants serving prepared food or beverages to customers for consumption on premises in parked motor vehicles or for consumption off-premises.
g.	Sales, leasing and rental of motor vehicles and trailers, provided that all repairs and painting operations are fully enclosed and comply with the performance standards of s e c t i o n 5 6 - 4 1 .
h.	Consignment shops that sell high quality, pre-owned apparel and clothing accessories.

i.	Communication towers constructed and operated in compliance with article III, division 8 of this chapter.

j.	Auto body shops.

k.	Health care delivery services.

l.	Tattoo and piercing studio. No tattoo and piercing studio can be closer than 1,000 feet to another tattoo and piercing studio.

m.	Day care centers.
 

(42)


(43)
 

Any use which in the judgment of the zoning administrator is identical or similar to one or more of the above listed uses and which conforms with the intent and purpose, use regulations and limitations.
Rooftop communication antennas, constructed and operated in compliance with article III, division 9 of this chapter.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.08(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 4647, § 2, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 11-8-1994;
Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 4735, § 1, 6-25-1996; Ord. No. 4953, § III, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 4968, § I, 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 5019, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No.
5187, § I, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 5723, § I, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 5802, § I, 1-26-2016)


Sec. 56-233. - Use regulations.

 
(a)
 
Lot size requirements.
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

Minimum lot area: 12,500 square feet.

Minimum lot width: 60 feet, except that automobile or service stations and drive-in restaurants shall have a minimum lot width of 150 feet. Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
 

(b)
 

Bulk regulations.
 

(1)


(2)

(3)
 

Maximum structure height: None, provided that structures greater than three stories or 50 feet in height are located in conformance with transitional yard regulations established in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 1 8 1 (d).
Maximum building coverage: None. Maximum floor area ratio: 1.50.
 
(c)
 
Yard and setback requirements.
 

(1)





(2)
 

Minimum right-of-way setback: 35 feet, except that if automobile parking space or driveways are not located between the public right-of- way and any principal or accessory buildings, the minimum required setback (right-of-way) may be reduced to 20 feet. Gasoline pumps, air and water service and other fixtures used in connection with automobile service stations and any motor vehicle, mobile homes, trailers, equipment and boats stored or parked in the open shall be located not less than 15 feet from any public right-of-way.
Minimum side or rear yard: None required, but if a side or rear yard is provided, no such yard shall be less than five feet in width.
 

(d)
 

Transitional yard. All structures shall be located so as to maintain transitional yards of the same width and, with the same screening and fencing as are required in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 1 8 1 (d).
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.08(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 4647, § 2, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 11-8-1994;
Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 4735, § 1, 6-25-1996; Ord. No. 4953, § III, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 4968, § I, 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 5019, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No.
5187, § I, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-234. - Use limitations.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)


(d)

(e)
 
No structure shall be used for residential purposes except for the use of the owner or operator of the business located on the premises and except that accommodations may be offered to the transient public by motels and hotels.
All outdoor storage, except the storage of automobiles and other motor vehicles in operating condition and off-street parking and loading spaces, shall be enclosed by screening.
All repair processing or fabrication of goods and all maintenance service provided shall be conducted wholly enclosed within a building. This provision would include the repair or washing of automobiles.
Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting direct light upon any property located in a residence district. All structures and uses shall comply with the performance standards provided in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 4 1 .
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.08(4), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 4647, § 2, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 11-8-1994;
Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 4735, § 1, 6-25-1996; Ord. No. 4953, § III, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 4968, § I, 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 5019, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No.
5187, § I, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008)


Secs. 56-235—56-261. - Reserved.


DIVISION 9. - PB PLANNED BUSINESS DISTRICT



Sec. 56-262. - Intent and purpose.

 
(a)



(b)
 
The purpose of the PB district is to allow the flexibility of mixing a range of compatible commercial and residential land uses while minimizing potential residential/commercial conflicts through site plan review for all proposed development in the district. Due to the intent and flexibility of the PB district, it is suitable as an overlay for all other zoning districts.
The PB district is intended to provide for the development of large tracts of land with a wide variety of shopping and convenience retail uses, in addition to permitting neighborhood scale convenience retail shopping facilities and apartments which are so designed and located as to be particularly compatible in conjunction with other allowable uses. Site plan review of the PB district will ensure well-integrated developments and design harmony.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.09(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4561, §§ 1—6, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 5155, § III, 2-10-2004; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-
22-2008)


Sec. 56-263. - Permitted uses.

The following uses shall be permitted in any location within the PB district:

 
(1)


(2)
 
Any use specifically permitted within the NB Neighborhood Business District by site plan review pursuant to article IV, division 8 of this chapter.
Any use specifically permitted within the CB Community Business District (article II, division 7 of this chapter) by site plan review in accordance with the provisions contained in  s e c t i o n  5 6 - 1 0 2 6 .
 

(3)



(4)



(5)


(6)

(7)
 

Apartment dwellings and apartments for the elderly may be permitted by site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter, if in accordance with the development standards for townhouse, walkup (garden type) and elevator apartments provided in article II, division 4 o (MR district).
Financial institutions or restaurants with or without drive-through service facilities and/or restaurants with or without carryout operations may be permitted by site plan review in accordance with the provisions contained in article IV, division 8 of this chapter. Other motor vehicle-oriented uses are permitted as conditional uses in accordance with article IV, division 6 of this chapter.
Any use which in the judgment of the zoning administrator is identical or similar to one or more of the uses listed in subsections (1) through
(4)	of this section and which conforms with the intent and purpose and with the use regulations and limitations for the PB district. Accessory uses as provided in article III, division 4 of this chapter.
Conditional uses. The following uses shall be allowed as conditional uses in accordance with the procedures provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter and shall be subject to site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter.
 
a.	Automobile filling station, incidental to a permitted use.

b.	Utility substations.

c.	Child day-care center or day nursery.

d.	Communication towers constructed and operated in compliance with article III, division 8 of this chapter.
 

(8)
 

Rooftop communication antennas constructed and operated in compliance with article III, division 9 of this chapter.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.09(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4561, §§ 1—6, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 5155, § III, 2-10-2004; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-
22-2008)


Sec. 56-264. - Use regulations.

 
(a)

(b)
 
Lot size requirements. Minimum site area: 15 contiguous acres.

Bulk regulations.
 

(1)

(2)


(3)
 

Maximum structure height: None except as provided in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 2 6 4 (d).

Maximum building coverage: Up to 100 percent, provided that adequate provision is made for on-site parking, pedestrian circulation and activity, buffering and building setbacks.
Maximum floor area ratio: 2.0 FAR.
 

(c)



(d)
 

Yard and setback requirements. Minimum right-of-way setbacks: None required, except that any principal structure permitted by site plan approval for residential use shall be set back 30 feet from such right-of-way. In no event, however, shall any unenclosed motor vehicle parking occur within 15 feet of the right-of-way.
Transitional yard.
 

(1)

(2)
 

All structures shall be so located as to maintain transitional yards as required in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 1 8 1 (d).

In the event that any structure in this district exceeds four stories or 50 feet in height, whichever is less, the depth of the required side or rear transitional yards at any lot line coterminous with a residence district shall be increased as follows:
 
a.	Every portion of any structure which is higher than four stories or 50 feet, whichever is smaller, above the existing grade at such a lot line shall be set back at least 80 feet from this lot line.
b.	Every portion of any structure which is higher than seven stories or 86 feet, whichever is smaller, above the existing grade at such a lot line shall be set back at least 80 feet from this lot line.
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.09(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4561, §§ 1—6, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 5155, § III, 2-10-2004; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-
22-2008)


Sec. 56-265. - Use limitations.

 
(a)


(b)

(c)


(d)


(e)
 
All business establishments selling goods or service on the premises shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced, processed or treated on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
All business, service, storage and display of goods shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.

Except as provided for in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 2 6 3 (4), no use is permitted which sells beverages or food for the specific or promoted intent that it be consumed on the premises in parked automobiles.
Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any property located in an residence district and so that no glare is visible to traffic on any public street.
No structure shall be used for residential purposes except by the operator or owner of the business located on the premises, unless a site plan is submitted and approved in accordance with article IV, division 8 of this chapter. Any such residential uses allowed must provide for commonly useable residential open space in accordance with article III, division 5 of this chapter.
 

(f)

(g)
 

All uses shall comply with the performance standards set out in article II, d i v i s i o n 1 3 of this chapter.

The number of motor vehicle-oriented businesses (MVOBs) in a PB district shall be limited according to the following scale:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

Developments with a minimum 15 acres and a maximum of 20 acres shall be limited to two such MVOB use.

Developments with a minimum of 21 acres and a maximum of 30 acres shall be limited to a maximum of three such MVOB uses. Developments with greater than 30 acres may have three MVOB uses and a greater number may be permitted but subject to review in
accordance with the site plan review provisions of article IV, division 8 of this chapter.
 

(h)
 

Motor vehicle-oriented businesses (MVOBs) which are proposed for development as part of a large tract in accordance with the provisions of this section must have their principal vehicular access oriented to use the development's principle entry drives to the larger development tract. All curb cuts to arterial or collector streets for such businesses whose sub-parcel locations within the larger development front to one or more arterial streets may be restricted to right turn in and right turn out configurations.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.09(4), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4561, §§ 1—6, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 5155, § III, 2-10-2004; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-
22-2008)


Secs. 56-266—56-293. - Reserved.


DIVISION 10. - LM LIGHT MANUFACTURING DISTRICT



Sec. 56-294. - Intent and purpose.

The LM district is intended to accommodate light industrial manufacturing and warehousing activities at a scale and intensity of use that is compatible with the city.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.10(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4479, § 2, 12-11-1990; Ord. No. 4519, § 1, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 4876, § I, 3-9-1999; Ord. No. 4911, § I, 10-12-1999; Ord. No. 4929, §§ I, II, 3-28-2000; Ord. No. 5175, §§ I, II, 6-8-2004)

Sec. 56-295. - Prohibited uses.

The following uses and/or operations are specifically prohibited in the LM district:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)
 
Distillation of bones, fat rendering, glue, soap or fertilizer manufacturing. Manufacture of cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris.
Manufacture or storage of explosives or fireworks. Petroleum or asphalt refining or manufacturing. Reduction of garbage, refuse, offal or dead animals.
Smelting or refining of iron, copper, tin, zinc and other metals or ores. Stockyards or slaughterhouses.
Tanning, curing or storage of raw hides or skins. Coal distillation or coke ovens.
Foundries. Drop forging.
Steel mills or furnaces. Tar distillation.
Coal or coke-fired kilns. Wrecking or junkyards.
Petroleum storage tanks except underground storage tanks in conjunction with automobile service and/or filling stations.

Rock pits or quarries for the removal of rock, sand, muck or marl, for any purpose other than the leveling of land for construction or for any necessary excavations for foundations.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.10(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4479, § 2, 12-11-1990; Ord. No. 4519, § 1, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 4876, § I, 3-9-1999; Ord. No. 4911, § I, 10-12-1999; Ord. No. 4929, §§ I, II, 3-28-2000; Ord. No. 5175, §§ I, II, 6-8-2004)

Sec. 56-296. - Permitted uses.

The following uses shall be permitted in any location within the LM district:
 

(1)
 

Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods, or products, and business offices accessory there character and nature to the following activities and which are maintained in conformance with the use regulations, use limitations, and perfor provided below:
 
a.	Dry cleaning and laundry plants.

b.	Electronic and household equipment repair shops.

c.	Printing, lithography and publishing plants.

d.	Sign fabrication and painting.

e.	Building material sales and storage.

f.	Heating, plumbing and air conditioning supplies and equipment fabrication.

g.	Carpenter, cabinet or upholstery shops.

h.	General contractors.

i.	Photographic processing.

j.	Machine parts and tool manufacture including warehouse and other storage establishments and facilities.

k.	Chemical and pharmaceutical supplies.

l.	Research and development industries.

m.	Exterminators.

n.	Sheet metal fabrication.

o.	Office space.
 

(2)





(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)
 

Any business or commercial establishments including warehouse and other storage establishments and facilities which provide supplies and/or services to industrial or manufacturing customers, or which provide sales and services primarily at wholesale, so long as such establishments are maintained in conformance with the performance standards, use regulations and limitations as prescribed in this division.
Frozen food locker and ice storage or sales. Garden supplies and equipment.
Casket and burial vault sites. Animal hospitals. Greenhouses and nurseries.
Gravestone sales and stone cutting.

Public utility and public service uses, including:
 

a.	Bus garages.

b.	Maintenance, storage, repair or warehouse facilities.

c.	Fire and police stations.

d.	Railroad right-of-way and industrial spur tracks.

e.	Telephone exchanges, radio towers and telephone transmission equipment.
 

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)


(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)
 

Parking lots or garages, public and private.

Accessory uses, as permitted by article III, division 4 of this chapter. Caterers.
Restaurants, except for drive-in establishments offering beverages or food to consumers for consumption on the premises or in parked automobiles.
Home and office furniture stores (except for the sale of used merchandise). Carpet, rug and linoleum stores.
Interior decoration stores (including drapery and upholstering). Barbershops and beauty shops.
Household appliance sales and repair shops (except for the sale of used merchandise). Electronic equipment sales and repair shops.
Self-service laundry and dry cleaning stores.

Laundry and dry cleaning establishments (including pick-up stations, package plant and plant type operations). Printing, lithography and publishing (including office duplicating).
Pet shops, pet sales, food and supplies.

Business and professional offices (including financial institutions).
 

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)

(42)
 

Sales offices and manufacturer's sales representatives. Medical or dental clinics or laboratories.
Health and sports clubs (including gymnasiums, and sauna or Turkish baths, handball courts, and indoor tennis courts). Veterinarians' offices.
Indoor commercial amusements, such as bowling alleys, billiard halls and swimming pools. Indoor theaters and cinemas.
Private business, technical or trade schools. Public facilities.
Religious, fraternal, union or similar meeting halls. Automotive parts and accessories.
Hardware, paint, glass or wallpaper sales. General contractors' offices.
Building materials equipment sales with storage inside. Exterminators.
Carpenter, cabinet, furniture refinishing or upholstery shops. Hotels or motels.
Food stores.

Research and development establishments engaged in the development and assembly of electronic equipment, precision instruments or miniaturized mechanical prototypes, so long as the occupancy of an establishment at one period of the day does not exceed one employee per 170 square feet of gross office, laboratory, processing or assembly floor area.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.10(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4479, § 2, 12-11-1990; Ord. No. 4519, § 1, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 4876, § I, 3-9-1999; Ord. No. 4911, § I, 10-12-1999; Ord. No. 4929, §§ I, II, 3-28-2000; Ord. No. 5175, §§ I, II, 6-8-2004)

Sec. 56-297. - Conditional uses.

The following uses shall be allowed as conditional uses in accordance with the procedure provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter:

 
(1)


(2)

(3)

(4)
 
Retail establishments other than those listed as permitted uses in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 2 9 6 which sell goods and services primarily to the employees of industrial or wholesale commercial establishments located in this district.
Utility substations, including electric, gas, water or sewage. Automobile carwashes.
Notwithstanding s e c t i o n 5 6 - 2 9 9 (c), the use of buildings as a residential or outpatient facility for the treatment of alcohol and other drug abuses, subject to the following use regulations:
 
a.	The maximum height for any such facility shall not exceed two stories;

b.	Said facility shall not be located closer than two miles to any other such substance abuse treatment facility;

c.	Said facility shall not contain more than two residents per 600 square feet of livable space, but in no event more than a maximum of 75 residents;
d.	The facility shall provide a minimum of 1½ parking spaces per 600 square feet of livable space;

e.	Such treatment facility shall install and maintain an automatic full fire suppression (sprinkler) system and an automatic fire alarm system which sounds on location and is monitored at a constantly attended location other than the local fire department; and
f.	All other use regulations not specifically defined herein shall be subject to those use regulations in  s e c t i o n  5 6 - 1 3 2 .
 

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)



(9)


(10)


(11)
 

Indoor recreational uses occupying 10,000 square feet or greater.

Communication towers constructed and operated in compliance with article III, division 8 of this chapter. Service stations.
Outdoor commercial amusements, such as a swimming pool, skating rink, ice skating or miniature golf, provided that all structures, facilities or activity areas are set back at least 50 feet from any lot line within any commercial or industrial district, or at least 100 feet from any lot line in an adjacent residential district.
Drive-in or carry-out restaurants serving prepared food or beverages to customers for consumption on premises in parked motor vehicles or for consumption off-premises.
Sales, leasing and rental of motor vehicles and trailers, provided that all repairs and painting operations are fully enclosed and comply with the performance standards of s e c t i o n 5 6 - 4 1 .
Auto body shops.
 

(12)

(13)

(14)
 

Automobile, truck, trailer or motorcycle maintenance and repair shops.

Rooftop communication antennas, constructed and operated in compliance with article III, division 9 of this chapter. No tattoo and piercing studio can be closer than 1,000 feet to another tattoo and piercing studio.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.10(4), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4479, § 2, 12-11-1990; Ord. No. 4519, § 1, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 4876, § I, 3-9-1999;
Ord. No. 4911, § I, 10-12-1999; Ord. No. 4929, §§ I, II, 3-28-2000; Ord. No. 5175, §§ I, II, 6-8-2004; Ord. No. 5723, § I, 1-14-2014)


Sec. 56-298. - Use regulations.

 
(a)
 
Lot size requirements.
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

Minimum lot area: 12,500 square feet. Minimum lot width: 60 feet.
Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
 

(b)
 

Bulk regulations.
 

(1)


(2)

(3)
 

Minimum structure height: None, provided that structures greater than 50 feet in height conform with the transitional yard regulations established in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 1 8 1 (d).
Maximum lot coverage: 50 percent. Maximum floor area ratio: 1.00.
 
(c)
 
Yard and setback requirements.
 

(1)


(2)
 

Minimum right-of-way setback: 35 feet, except that if automobile parking space or driveways are not located between the public right-of- way and any principal or accessory building, the minimum setback may be reduced to 15 feet.
Minimum side or rear yard: None required, but if a side or rear yard is provided, no such yard shall be less than ten feet in width.
 

(d)
 

Transitional yard. All structures shall be located so as to maintain transitional yards of the same width and with the same screening as required in the NB district, as required in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 1 8 1 (d).
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.10(5), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4479, § 2, 12-11-1990; Ord. No. 4519, § 1, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 4876, § I, 3-9-1999; Ord. No. 4911, § I, 10-12-1999; Ord. No. 4929, §§ I, II, 3-28-2000; Ord. No. 5175, §§ I, II, 6-8-2004)

Sec. 56-299. - Use limitations.

 
(a)



(b)

(c)

(d)
 
All operations, activities and storage shall be conducted wholly inside a building or buildings, except that storage may be maintained outside a building in a side or rear yard if such storage is separated from public streets and other property by screening and deemed adequate to site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter.
All premises shall be furnished with all-weather, hard surface walks and, except for parking areas, the grounds shall be planted and landscaped. No building shall be used for residential purposes except that a watchman or custodian may reside on the premises.
Exterior lighting and lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any property located in a residence district.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.10(6), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4479, § 2, 12-11-1990; Ord. No. 4519, § 1, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 4876, § I, 3-9-1999; Ord. No. 4911, § I, 10-12-1999; Ord. No. 4929, §§ I, II, 3-28-2000; Ord. No. 5175, §§ I, II, 6-8-2004)

Sec. 56-300. - Performance standards.

 
(a)
 
Applicability.
 

(1)


(2)






(3)
 

New uses. Any use hereafter established in this LM Light Manufacturing-Warehouse District or in any other use district shall comply with the performance standards of this section.
Existing conforming uses. Any use which as of the date of adoption of this chapter complies with the applicable performance standards of this section shall continue to so comply. If, at such time, the operations of any lawful existing use violates the performance standards of this section, such operations shall not be varied or changed in any way as to increase the degree of such violation. The operation of any lawful existing use in violation of the performance standards of this chapter shall not itself make such use subject to article V of this chapter, relating to nonconformities.
Existing nonconforming uses. Any industrial or manufacturing use that is located in a zoning district in the city in which such use is not permitted but which is a lawful nonconforming use and which complies, as of the date the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and with all the performance standards listed below, shall continue to so comply. If, at any time, the operation of such lawful nonconforming industrial or manufacturing use violated these standards, then such operation shall not be varied or changed in such a way as to increase the degree of such violations.
 
(b)
 
Enforcement of performance standards.
 

(1)
 

Whenever, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, there is a reasonable probability that any use or occupancy violates these
 

performance standards, he is hereby authorized to employ a qualified technician or technicians to perform whatever investigations and analyses as are necessary to determine whether or not they are in fact being violated.
 
(2)



(3)
 
In the event that a violation is found to exist, the violator shall be liable for the reasonable fee for retaining technicians to perform such investigations and analyses. Such fees may be recovered as a penalty in the same manner as, and in addition to, the penalties specified in
 s e c t i o n 5 6 - 4 .

Any violation of this chapter shall hereby be considered as creating a public nuisance. Therefore, in addition to the enforcement procedures specified in this section, the regulations of c h a p t e r 3 4 , article VIII (nuisances) and any other applicable sections of this Code shall apply.
 
(c)
 
Standards. The performance standards set forth in d i v i s i o n 1 3 of this article shall apply in accordance with the above criteria for applicability to any new or existing use in the city. All uses shall be construed, maintained and operated so as to not be injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious waste materials, odors, fire and explosive hazard or glare.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.10(7), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4479, § 2, 12-11-1990; Ord. No. 4519, § 1, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 4876, § I, 3-9-1999; Ord. No. 4911, § I, 10-12-1999; Ord. No. 4929, §§ I, II, 3-28-2000; Ord. No. 5175, §§ I, II, 6-8-2004)

Sec. 56-301. - Greenwood Zoning Overlay District.

 
(a)


(b)



(c)


(d)

(e)
 
Definition. The Greenwood Zoning Overlay District shall be defined as all properties on Greenwood Boulevard between St. Elmo and Kensington and those properties on the west side of the 3200 block of Sutton Boulevard.
Purpose. The Greenwood Zoning Overlay District (GZOD) is a subdistrict contained within the LM Light Manufacturing Business District. The GZOD is intended to combine a wide variety of destination of uses including retail and commercial uses along with those uses presently allowed in the light manufacturing district with an emphasis on design standards.
Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the GZOD shall include the AB Arterial Business District, CB Community Business District, CB1 Community Business District, NB Neighborhood Business District and LM Light Manufacturing District.
Conditional use uses. All uses that are conditional uses in the AB, CB, NB and LM zoning districts require conditional uses in the GZOD district.

Standards. Standards set forth in the GZOD shall apply to the following development types:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)


(4)
 

An infill project proposed for a vacant or substantially vacant lot.

A redevelopment project where all or most of the existing structures would be razed and a new structure or structures built.

An addition/renovation project where the total square footage of the addition/renovation exceeds 50 percent of the existing principal structure.
Where the value of new construction exceeds 50 percent of the current market value of the existing principal structure based on the most recent valuation as established by the St. Louis County Assessor.
 
(f)


(g)


(h)


(i)



(j)
 
Conflicting regulations. Where conflict results between the regulations of the overlay district and the provisions of the base zoning district, the provisions of the overlay district shall control.
First floor uses. All first floor uses must be commercial, retail or professional in nature as allowed in the AB, CB, CB1, NB and LM zoning districts. First floor residential uses are prohibited.
Mixed uses. Mixed uses in the same structure and on the same parcel are encouraged and rewarded with zoning/overlay incentives and planned unit development (PUD) status.
Floor area ratio (FAR). Maximum floor area ratio shall be 1.5. If the proposed project is to be a PUD, the FAR may be increased by 0.1 for each additional 200 square feet of useable open area above the minimum allowable rear yard green space requirement or the FAR may be increased by 0.1 for each additional two feet added to minimum rear yard setback. Maximum FAR to be 2.0.
Building height.
 

(1)

(2)
 

Maximum building height: Three stories and/or 40 feet above average grade (additional allowed under PUD).

Minimum building height: Two stories, or one story and a basement if basement floor level is less than five feet below the average perimeter grade elevation.
 
(k)
 
Setbacks.
 

(1)



(2)


(3)
 

Front yard setback: Zero feet setback preferred, maximum of ten feet is allowable (minimal landscaping requirement in the front yard setback if provided). Regardless of setback, the front elevation of buildings in excess of 22 stories shall be set back at heights above the second story.
Side yard setback: Zero feet side yard setback is allowable assuming rear yard parking is accessible via public alley or on own parcel. Side yard setback is ten feet if abutting an SR or LR district.
Rear yard setback: Not applicable for primary structure. The building coverage, FAR and on-site parking requirements will control this. Accessory structures must maintain a minimum of five feet rear yard setback if no alley, and nine feet setback if public alley is provided.
 
(l)
 
Building coverage. Building coverage shall be a maximum of 50 percent including any accessory structure. Impervious area is not controlled.
 

(m)


(n)


(o)
 

Onsite parking requirements. Onsite parking requirements: 2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of office/retail/manufacturing plus 1.5 spaces per each dwelling, utilizing the sharing factor matrix developed by the city; sum the calculated spaces required for each occupancy and divide by the sharing
Accessory structure. Maximum square footage: 400 square feet. Accessory structure area is included in the building coverage calculation (also, governed by the minimum allowable distance to the primary structure).
Site plan review. Site plan review is required for all projects in the GZOD.
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)



(5)

(6)
 

All structures must be square and true to the property line which coincides with the roadway right-of-way. On-site surface parking shall not be located between the primary structure and the sidewalk/front lot line. No residential occupancies on the first floor.
All equipment, loading and services shall not be visible from the street even if the parcel is a corner lot with street frontages on two sides. Permanent architectural screening consistent in design and detail (including materials) with the primary structure is acceptable to assist in the visibility requirement.
Primary entrances of all structures shall face the street frontage. Townhome construction is prohibited.
 
(p)
 
Architectural requirements.
 

(1)





(2)



(3)


(4)

(5)


(6)

(7)


(8)
 

Exterior design for existing commercial buildings to be rehabilitated/redeveloped and any new commercial buildings to be constructed shall reflect the original design of the building in the case of existing buildings, and in the case of proposed new buildings, the design character of the existing commercial buildings that represent the predominant historic architectural style of the neighborhood. This standard shall not apply to existing structures currently used for industrial purposes.
Acceptable exterior building materials. In keeping with the exterior design requirements of subsection (p)(1) of this section, exterior buildings materials shall be limited to brick, stone, terra cotta, etc. on all four elevations. No EIFS, stucco, jumbo bricks, split-faced masonry units, cmu-sized blocks (eight inches by 16 inches face dimensions) or metal or vinyl siding is permitted.
First floor front elevation shall consist of large show windows and/or storefront construction at regular intervals. The front elevation from grade to second floor structure shall be a minimum of 50 percent glass.
First floor elevation is a maximum of three feet above average curb elevation across street frontage.

Blank walls void of windows and architectural detailing are prohibited. All elevations (not counting the street frontage elevation) visible from the street frontage shall maintain a similar, although secondary, level of architectural detailing as the front facade.
No warehouse style buildings, including blocky forms, flat roof lines and sparse detailing.

Variation of the front facade shall be provided using combinations of accent materials, physical offsets in plan and section, and regular repetition of fenestration, piers, etc.
Total length of building along front facade shall be limited to 80 feet. This can be increased to 150 feet if the overall composition of the elevation reads as a series of smaller masses (through the use of steps in the parapet, recesses (minimum of five feet) in the plane of the facade at grade, etc.).
 
(Ord. No. 5446, § I, 1-22-2008)


Secs. 56-302—56-320. - Reserved.


DIVISION 11. - HM HEAVY MANUFACTURING DISTRICT



Sec. 56-321. - Intent and purpose.

The HM district is intended to accommodate heavy manufacturing and related uses at a scale and intensity of use that is compatible with the city. (Ord. No. 4062, § 903.11(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 5335, § I, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008)

Sec. 56-322. - Prohibited uses.

The following uses and/or operations are specifically prohibited in the HM use district:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)
 
Distillation of bones, fat rendering, glue, soap or fertilizer manufacturing. Manufacture and/or storage of explosives or fireworks.
Petroleum or asphalt refining or manufacturing. Reduction of garbage, refuse, offal or dead animals. Stockyards or slaughterhouses.
Tar distillation.
 

(7)

(8)

(9)


(10)
 

Coal or coke-fired kilns. Wrecking or junkyards.
Rock pits or quarries for the removal of rock, sand, muck or marl for any purpose other than the leveling of land for construction or for any necessary excavations for foundations.
Any residential use except for those quarters necessary for security personnel.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.11(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 5335, § I, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-323. - Permitted uses.

The following uses shall be permitted in any location within the HM district:

 
(1)

(2)
 
Any use permitted in the LM district.

Any other use by site plan review which does not conflict with any ordinance of the city, including the performance standards in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 
 4 1 regulating vibration, noise, odor, smoke, toxic gases, emissions of dirt, dust, fly ash, and other forms of particulate matter, radiation, and glare and heat.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.11(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 5335, § I, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-324. - Conditional uses.

The following uses shall be allowed as conditional uses:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Communication towers constructed and operated in compliance with section article III, division 8 of this chapter. Shortterm loan businesses as defined in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 3 .
Rooftop communication antennas, constructed and operated in compliance with article III, division 9 of this chapter.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.11(3.1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 5335, § I, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-325. - Use regulations.

The regulations regarding lot size, bulk, yard and setback requirements, and transitional yard requirements set forth in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 1 8 1 (d) shall apply to the HM district.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.11(4), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 5335, § I, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-326. - Use limitations.

The regulations set forth in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 2 9 9 shall apply to the HM district.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.11(5), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 5335, § I, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-327. - Performance standards.

 
(a)
 
Applicability.
 

(1)


(2)






(3)
 

New uses. Any use hereafter established in this HM district or in any other use district shall comply with the performance standards of this section.
Existing conforming uses. Any use which as of the date of adoption of this chapter complies with the applicable performance standards of this section shall continue to so comply. If, at such time, the operations of any lawful existing use violates the performance standards of this section, such operations shall not be varied or changed in any way as to increase the degree of such violation. The operation of any lawful existing use in violation of the performance standards of this section shall not in itself make such use subject to article V of this chapter, relating to nonconformities.
Existing nonconforming uses. Any industrial or manufacturing use that is located in a zoning district in the city in which such use is not permitted but which is a lawful nonconforming use and which complies, as of the adoption date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, with all the performance standards listed in subsection (c) of this section, shall continue to so comply. If, at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the operation of such lawful nonconforming industrial or manufacturing use violates the performance standards set forth in article II, d i v i s i o n 1 3 of this chapter, such operation shall not be varied or changed in such a way as to increase the degree of such violations.
 
(b)
 
Enforcement of performance standards.
 

(1)
 

Whenever, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, there is a reasonable probability that any use or occupancy violates these
 

performance standards, he is hereby authorized to employ a qualified technician or technicians to perform whatever investigations and analyses as are necessary to determine whether or not they are in fact being violated.
 
(2)



(3)
 
In the event that a violation is found to exist, the violator shall be liable for the reasonable fee for retaining technicians to perform such investigations and analyses. Such fees may be recovered as a penalty in the same manner as, and in addition to, the penalties specified in
 s e c t i o n 5 6 - 4 .

Any violation of this chapter shall hereby be considered as creating a public nuisance. Therefore, in addition to the enforcement procedures specified in this section, the regulations of c h a p t e r 3 4 , article VIII (nuisances) and any other applicable sections of this Code shall apply.
 
(c)
 
Standards. The performance standards set forth in article II, d i v i s i o n 1 3 of this chapter shall apply in accordance with the above criteria for applicability to any new or existing use located in the city. All uses shall be constructed, maintained and operated so as to not be injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious waste materials, odors, fire, and explosive hazard or glare.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.11(6), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-12-1996; Ord. No. 5335, § I, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 5451, § III, 1-22-2008)


Secs. 56-328—56-357. - Reserved.


DIVISION 12. - PA PUBLIC ACTIVITY DISTRICT



Sec. 56-358. - Intent and purpose.

The PA district is intended to accommodate those uses and groupings of uses which have a distinctly public rather than private character and to encourage the retention of certain properties in a relatively undeveloped state, such as a public or private recreation use or a private cemetery.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.12(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4647, § 3, 4-24-1994; Ord. No. 4965, § I, 10-24-2000)


Sec. 56-359. - Permitted uses.

The following uses shall be permitted in any location within the PA district:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)


(4)

(5)

(6)


(7)


(8)

(9)

(10)
 
Public parks, playgrounds, recreational grounds, including golf courses.

Semipublic or private parks and recreational areas when owned and operated by a nonprofit organization.

Public buildings and properties of a cultural, recreational, administrative or service type, including libraries, but not including repair yards or garages, storage or warehouses.
Private, noncommercial recreational areas and facilities, including swimming pools. Cemeteries.
Churches and other places of worship and associated administrative, teaching, or school buildings may be permitted by site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter.
Public or private schools, including university-level institutional administrative and research facilities, may be permitted by site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter.
Public or private wildlife preservations and conservation areas, including stream valley drainage easements or floodplains. Accessory uses as provided in article III, division 4 of this chapter.
Conditional uses. The following uses shall be allowed as conditional uses in accordance with the procedures provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter:
 
a.	Hospitals and other institutions of a religious, educational, or charitable, or philanthropic nature, provided that such buildings shall not be located upon sites containing less than one acre.
b.	Public utilities and services, including substations, special rights-of-way and easements, provided that the exterior appearance of any building so permitted shall be in keeping with the character of the neighborhood in which it is so located.
c.	Child day-care center or day nursery.

d.	Communication towers constructed and operated in compliance with article III, division 8 of this chapter.

e.	Kitchen commissary for food trucks.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.12(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4647, § 3, 4-24-1994; Ord. No. 4965, § I, 10-24-2000; Ord. No. 5825, § I, 9-13-2016)


Sec. 56-360. - Use regulations.

 
(a)

(b)
 
Lot area. No minimum lot area required.

Height. No building or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height except as permitted by site plan review as provided in article IV, division 8 of this
 

chapter.
 

(c)
 

Yard and setback requirements.
 

(1)

(2)
 

Minimum right-of-way setback: 15 feet.

Minimum side or rear yard: None required, except when such a lot line abuts a residential use located within the same or within a different use district. In such case, side or rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations for transitional yards established in s e c t i o n 
 5 6 - 1 8 1 (d).
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.12(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4647, § 3, 4-24-1994; Ord. No. 4965, § I, 10-24-2000)


Sec. 56-361. - Use limitations.

 
(a)

(b)
 
Parking for any use established in this district shall be provided in accordance with article III, division 2 of this chapter.

The extension of any conforming public or semiprivate use into portions of any PA district occupied predominantly within a predominantly residential use shall occur contiguous to any such previously existing public or semipublic use.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.12(4), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4647, § 3, 4-24-1994; Ord. No. 4965, § I, 10-24-2000)


Secs. 56-362—56-380. - Reserved.


DIVISION 13. - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT


Subdivision I. - In General



Sec. 56-381. - Intent and purpose.

 
(a)



(b)
 
The PUD Planned Unit Development District is intended to provide a means for encouraging ingenuity, imagination and flexibility on the parts of the landowners, engineers, architects, site planners and developers in the planning and design of land areas with sufficient size and shape to allow comprehensive planning.
The ordinance establishing a PUD district shall designate the specific uses that shall be allowed as permitted, conditional or accessory uses in the PUD district, which uses may include any use which is allowed as a permitted, conditional or accessory use in either the:
 
(1)


(2)
 
AB Arterial Business, CB Community Business, NB Neighborhood Business or LM Light Manufacturing districts (collectively, the commercial uses); or
SR Single-Family Residential, LR Limited Family Residential, MR Medium Density Residential or P-RO Planned Residential-Office (collectively, the residential uses).
 
(c)
 
All uses allowed in a PUD district shall comply with the regulations, standards and procedures as outlined in  s e c t i o n  5 6 - 4 4 8  unless the ordinance establishing a particular PUD district provides otherwise.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.13(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4532, §§ 1—13, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 4, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-
12-1996; Ord. No. 4932, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5103, § I, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 5178, § I, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5344, § I, 5-23-2006)


Sec. 56-382. - Minimum acreage.

The tract of land included within a PUD district must be in one ownership or control or be the subject of a joint application by the owners of all property included within the proposal. A tract of land included within a PUD must be a minimum of more than one acre for commercial use and a minimum of 15,000 square feet for residential use.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.13(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4532, §§ 1—13, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 4, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-
12-1996; Ord. No. 4932, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5103, § I, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 5178, § I, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5344, § I, 5-23-2006)


Secs. 56-383—56-407. - Reserved.


Subdivision II. - Procedure for Establishment of a PUD District



Sec. 56-408. - Application.

An application for a PUD district shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. Applications for establishment of a PUD district shall contain the following information:
 

(1)
 

Name, address and phone numbers of the applicant and all property owners within the proposed PUD district, and evidence of unified
 

control of the entire area of the PUD district or the consent and authorization of all owners of property within the proposed PUD district to process and implement such application;
 
(2)


(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)





(7)


(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)


(12)


(13)

(14)
 
Name, address and phone number of the registered surveyor, registered engineer, licensed architect and/or professional urban planner assisting in the preparation of the concept plan;
A legal description of the property included in the proposed PUD district;

A description of all existing land uses both within and surrounding such area;

A vicinity map illustrating the existing zoning districts within and surrounding the proposed PUD district;

A general topographic map of the proposed PUD district illustrating project and property boundaries, ground elevations, existing structures, existing utility lines and/or easements, existing streets, wooded areas, streams, lakes, marshes, floodplains and other significant physical features within the proposed PUD district. A maximum contour interval of two feet and a minimum scale of one inch to 60 feet shall be permitted;
The proposed general location of arterial, collector or other major streets within the proposed PUD district, including proposed ownership of such streets;
The proposed general location of water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage facilities within the PUD district; The location of all uses proposed within the PUD district with the proposed density and floor area ratios; The proposed general types of screening where required between abutting districts or uses;
The proposed order and timing of development stages, including a demonstration that each stage would complement any previously completed stage and would form a reasonably independent unit in the event that succeeding stages were delayed;
Any additional information which the zoning administrator, the plan and zoning commission or the city council feels necessary for the proper review of the proposed PUD district;
An application fee as established by the city; and A preliminary subdivision plat, if applicable.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.13(3a), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4532, §§ 1—13, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 4, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-
12-1996; Ord. No. 4932, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5103, § I, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 5178, § I, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5344, § I, 5-23-2006)


Sec. 56-409. - Preliminary development plan.

 
(a)






(b)
 
An applicant for a proposed PUD district shall submit a preliminary development plan, provided that an applicant may request and the ordinance approving a PUD district may provide, in the city's sole discretion, that specific outlots or other portions of the proposed PUD district with respect to which preliminary development plans are not proposed are included within the PUD district but are reserved for future development and shall be subject to future approval by the city council of a preliminary development plan for such areas. Approval of a preliminary development plan may also be considered approval of the preliminary subdivision plat where applicable.
Applications to the plan and zoning commission for rezoning to a PUD district or for preliminary development plan approval shall be submitted to the zoning administrator at least ten working days prior to the commission meeting at which it is to be considered together with:
 
(1)
 
Four copies of a survey of the site in question illustrating:
 

a.	Boundaries and acreage of the property;

b.	Corporation, township or county lines;

c.	Names of adjacent subdivisions and owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land;

d.	Existing streets, alleys and/or railroads;

e.	Existing easements;

f.	Existing utility lines and storm drainage facilities;

g.	Existing land uses and structures;

h.	Existing contours at two-foot intervals for predominant ground slopes within the project area between level and ten percent grade and five-foot intervals for predominant ground slopes over ten percent grade;
i.	North arrow and scale; and

j.	Any wooded areas, wet or flood-prone areas, streams, lakes and/or other significant natural features.
 

(2)
 

Twelve copies of a preliminary development plan drawn to scale not smaller than one inch equals 200 feet, illustrating:
 

a.	The proposed name of the subdivision or development;

b.	The location dimensions, height, gross floor area, entrances and setbacks of all proposed structures;

c.	An indication of the principal types of uses, gross leasable floor area and proposed entrances;

d.	The rights-of-way, pavement widths and names of all existing and proposed streets, designated either public or private;

e.	The proposed location of all driveway cuts, parking areas, loading areas, trash disposal containers and the proposed number of
 

parking and loading spaces;

f.	The proposed location of all walkways and bikeways;

g.	The proposed location and type of any public or common open space and any proposed improvements thereto;

h.	Any proposed recreational facilities or school sites;

i.	The proposed general location and size of all utility lines, showing their connection to existing systems and supporting engineering studies demonstrating the reasonableness and feasibility of such connections and to include locations of all fire hydrants and water mains;
j.	The proposed system of storm drainage and erosion/sediment abatement, including engineering calculations and the proposed location and size of any system facilities;
k.	A landscaping plan, including the types and location of proposed vegetation and/or manmade screening devices;

l.	If phasing is proposed to complete some portion of the development later than other portions, a staged development schedule including the boundaries of each stage and the proposed starting and completion dates of each development stage shall be included by the applicant; and
m.	Proposed elevations of structures, including architectural materials.
 

(3)

(4)
 

Twenty copies of the preliminary development plan in summary form at any scale fitting an 8½-inch by 11-inch sheet of paper. Additional preliminary development plan requirements are:
 
a.	If private streets or open space areas are proposed, a report shall be included containing proposals for the maintenance and management of such streets or open space;
b.	A calculation of the percentage of land to be occupied by structures;

c.	Any additional information deemed necessary by the zoning administrator, the plan and zoning commission or the city council for the proper review of the proposal; and
d.	A fee as established by the city.

Private streets may be permitted within a proposed development upon approval by city council after review and recommendation by the plan and zoning commission.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.13(3b), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4532, §§ 1—13, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 4, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-
12-1996; Ord. No. 4932, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5103, § I, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 5178, § I, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5344, § I, 5-23-2006)


Sec. 56-410. - Plan and zoning commission recommendation.

The commission shall prepare and transmit to the city council and to the applicant a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval on the proposed ordinance establishing a PUD district, the preliminary development plan and the preliminary subdivision plat, as applicable. A recommendation of approval for rezoning to a PUD district shall include recommended conditions to be included in the ordinance authorizing the establishment of the PUD district. Such conditions shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)
 

Permitted uses, conditional uses and accessory uses, including maximum floor area, if any; Performance standards and hours of operation;
Height limitations;

Minimum yard requirements;

Off-street parking and loading requirements; Minimum requirements for final development plans; Time limitations for commencement of construction.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.13(3c), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4532, §§ 1—13, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 4, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-
12-1996; Ord. No. 4932, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5103, § I, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 5178, § I, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5344, § I, 5-23-2006)


Sec. 56-411. - Public hearing.

The city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed rezoning to a PUD district and the preliminary development plan. Such public hearing shall consider all aspects of the development plan, including all proposed stages and/or units of development.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.13(3d), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4532, §§ 1—13, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 4, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-
12-1996; Ord. No. 4932, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5103, § I, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 5178, § I, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5344, § I, 5-23-2006)


Sec. 56-412. - Council adoption.
 

The city council may adopt an ordinance to approve, with such amendments, conditions or restrictions as the council may deem appropriate, the establishment of the proposed PUD district zoning, the preliminary development plan and the preliminary subdivision plat, as applicable, or shall deny such approval. Upon approval of the PUD district rezoning, such ordinance shall become the specific zoning regulations for the property, and all development shall be in conformance with the preliminary development plan approved for the property, and any amendments thereof.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.13(3e), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4532, §§ 1—13, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 4, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-
12-1996; Ord. No. 4932, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5103, § I, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 5178, § I, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5344, § I, 5-23-2006)


Sec. 56-413. - Final development plan.

 
(a)

(b)
 
All PUD districts shall be required to submit a final development plan.

After passage by the city council of an ordinance authorizing the establishment of a PUD district, and approving a preliminary development plan, a final development plan shall be submitted in accordance with the following provisions. No building permits or authorization for improvement or development for any use requested under provisions of this division shall be issued prior to approval of such final development plans, except for permits necessary for installation of subdivision improvements pursuant to the subdivision ordinance. Final development plans shall be submitted to the plan and zoning commission for review and approval. These plans shall contain the minimum requirements established in the conditions of the specific ordinance governing the PUD district, and further, shall comply with provisions of the subdivision ordinance and other applicable city ordinances. The final development plan shall further contain:
 
(1)



(2)


(3)


(4)


(5)


(6)



(7)



(8)


(9)

(10)

(11)
 
The name, address and phone numbers of the applicant and all property owners within the proposed development, evidence of unified control of the entire area of the development and tentative agreements of all owners to plan or to provide adequate sureties for completion;
Name, address and phone numbers of the registered surveyor, registered engineer, licensed architect and/or professional urban planner assisting in the preparation of the final development plan;
A vicinity map drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals 800 feet, showing the relationship of the site in question to the existing pattern of development;
Twelve copies of a survey of the site as required for the preliminary development plan approved if no preliminary development plan has been previously approved;
Twelve copies and one sepia of a final subdivision plat record plan in the form required by the subdivision regulations for final plat submissions;
Twelve copies of a site plan which would include elevation drawings of proposed structures, including the configuration and exterior colors of the buildings, location and type of landscaping and any other aboveground improvements to include sidewalks, streets, stormwater retention areas and other information as may be required by the director of public works;
Twelve copies of construction drawings showing the exact location, dimensions and type of all major structures, utility lines, landscaping, private or public common open space, approved setback requirements, approved parking, loading and trash disposal areas and other information as required by the director of public works;
Deed restrictions, private covenants, agreements and all other legal statements to be used to control the use, construction and maintenance of common open space, recreational facilities, private streets and other such improvements within the development;
Architectural elevations;

A final plat under the subdivision ordinance, if applicable; and

Any other such information determined necessary by the zoning administrator or the plan and zoning commission.
 

(c)
 

If phasing is proposed to complete some portion of the development later than other portions, a staged development schedule to include the boundaries of each proposed development stage and the proposed starting and completion dates of each development stage shall be included by the applicant.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.13(3f), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4532, §§ 1—13, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 4, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-
12-1996; Ord. No. 4932, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5103, § I, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 5178, § I, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5344, § I, 5-23-2006)


Sec. 56-414. - Plan and zoning commission recommendation.

The plan and zoning commission shall review the final development plan for conformance to the approved preliminary development plan and vote to recommend either approval, approval with amendments, conditions or restrictions, or disapproval.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.13(3g), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4532, §§ 1—13, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 4, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-
12-1996; Ord. No. 4932, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5103, § I, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 5178, § I, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5344, § I, 5-23-2006)


Sec. 56-415. - City council approval.
 

The recommendation of the commission shall be presented to the council. If the final development plan conforms to the approved preliminary development plan and if matters relating to required improvements are found in order, the council shall approve the final development plan by resolution. If such is not the case, the final development plan shall not be approved. The applicant shall be informed in writing of the action of the council. The approval of the final development plan may also be considered subdivision final plat approval if applicable.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.13(3h), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4532, §§ 1—13, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 4, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-
12-1996; Ord. No. 4932, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5103, § I, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 5178, § I, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5344, § I, 5-23-2006)


Sec. 56-416. - Recording.

The applicant shall cause the approved final development plan to be executed and notarized by the owners, lienholders, and holders of any other interest in any property included in the proposed PUD district, following which the final development plan shall be submitted for execution by the mayor and the city clerk. The applicant shall then record the plan with the recorder and deliver to the public works director a recorded copy showing the book and page within 60 days of council approval at the applicant's expense.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.13(3i), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4532, §§ 1—13, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 4, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-
12-1996; Ord. No. 4932, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5103, § I, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 5178, § I, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5344, § I, 5-23-2006)


Secs. 56-417—56-445. - Reserved.


Subdivision III. - Requirements Governing PUD District Development



Sec. 56-446. - Adherence to approved plan and modiication thereof.

 
(a)







(b)


(c)
 
Applicant agreement. The applicant shall agree in writing to be bound, for himself and his successors in interest, by the conditions prescribed for the approval of a development. The approval of the ordinance adopting PUD zoning and the final development plan and stage development schedule shall control the issuance of all building permits and shall restrict the nature, location and design of all uses. Minor changes in an approved preliminary or final development plan may be approved by the plan and zoning commission if such changes are consistent with the purpose and general character of the development plan. All other modifications, including extension or revisions of the staged development scheduled, shall be processed in the same manner as the original application and shall be subject to the same procedural requirements.
Limitation on resubmission. Whenever an application for a PUD district has been denied, no application for the same area or any portion thereof shall be filed by the same applicant within six months after the date of denial.
Revocation. In the event of a failure to comply with the approved plan or any prescribed condition of approval, including failure to comply with the staged development schedule, the city council may, after notice and hearing, revoke the zoning, and the property thereafter shall revert to the zoning that existed immediately prior to rezoning to the PUD district.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.13(4), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4532, §§ 1—13, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 4, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-
12-1996; Ord. No. 4932, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5103, § I, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 5178, § I, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5344, § I, 5-23-2006)


Sec. 56-447. - Guarantee of improvements.

Unless otherwise provided for in the conditions of the ordinance governing a particular PUD district, and in addition to the requirements of c h a p t e r 4 4 , no building permits, or permits authorizing the occupancy or use of a building, facility, commercial establishment or service concern may be issued until required improvements under the jurisdiction of the city are constructed or a performance bond, escrow, or other acceptable instrument is posted covering their estimated cost as determined by the public works director. Required improvements under the jurisdiction of the city shall include, but not be limited to, streets, sidewalks, sanitary and storm sewers, street lights and street trees. If a PUD district is developed in sections, the requirement shall also apply to all major improvements necessary to the proper operation and function of the section in question, even though such improvements may be located outside of the section in question.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.13(5), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4532, §§ 1—13, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 4, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-
12-1996; Ord. No. 4932, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5103, § I, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 5178, § I, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5344, § I, 5-23-2006)


Sec. 56-448. - Use regulations, limitations and standards.

 
(a)
 
Use regulations.
 

(1)
 

Lot size requirements.
 

a.	Maximum lot area: None.

b.	Minimum lot area: None.
 

c.	Minimum lot depth: None.
 

(2)
 

Bulk regulations.
 

a.	Minimum structure height: None, provided that structures greater than 50 feet in height conform with the transitional yard regulations established in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 1 8 1 (d).
b.	Maximum lot coverage: 50 percent for all commercial uses.

c.	For residential uses, a PUD district shall not contain more residential units than would be permitted under the regulations of the most dense of the following residential districts: SR, LR, MR or P-RO residence district within which the development lies. The maximum number of lots or units allowable shall be calculated by dividing the area of the development by the minimum lot area requirements of the most dense or intense residential district.
 
(3)
 
Yard and setback requirements.
 

a.	Minimum right-of-way setback: Shall be established as part of the preliminary and final development plan approval process.

b.	Minimum side or rear yard: None required, but if a side or rear yard is provided, no such yard shall be less than ten feet in width for commercial uses and five feet for residential uses.
 
(4)
 
Transition yard. When any PUD district includes a use which is either permitted, conditional or accessory use in the AB, CB, NB or LM zoning districts and is located adjacent to any residential district, a minimum width of 20 feet along the exterior property line shall be retained in natural woods; or planted and maintained with a dense planting of evergreens not less than four feet in height at the time of planting and reaching a mature height of not less than ten feet. The plan and zoning commission may approve some other arrangement of plantings, mounds and/or walls may be approved if such an arrangement meets the intent of this requirement.
 
(b)
 
Use limitations.
 

(1)



(2)


(3)

(4)

(5)
 

Unless the ordinance for a particular PUD district provides otherwise, all operations, activities and storage shall be conducted wholly inside a building or buildings, except that storage may be maintained outside a building in a side or rear yard if such storage is separated from public streets and other property be adequate screening.
All premises shall be furnished with all-weather, hard surface walks and, except for parking areas, the grounds shall be planted and landscaped.
Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon adjoining properties. All signs shall be in accordance with c h a p t e r 6 , article II.
All unpaved areas of a lot shall be landscaped or a bond or letter of credit submitted to guarantee the installation of the landscaping prior to the occupancy of the principal building. Sizes and types of vegetation shall be subject to approval.
 
(c)





(d)



(e)
 
Performance standards . Unless the ordinance for a particular PUD district provides otherwise, the performance standards set forth in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 
 4 1 shall apply in accordance with this Code for any new or existing use located within a PUD district in the city. All uses shall be construed, maintained and operated so as to not be injurious or offensive to the occupants of the adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious waste materials, odors, fire and explosive or hazard or glare.
Parking. The minimum number of off-street parking and loading spaces shall be recommended by the plan and zoning commission and established in the city council ordinance adopted pursuant to s e c t i o n 5 6 - 4 4 6 ; unless the ordinance for a particular PUD district provides otherwise, all other provisions of article III, division 2 of this chapter shall apply.
Exterior design standards. The exterior design and materials for any building constructed or modified in a PUD shall be approved by the design and review board.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 903.13(6), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 4532, §§ 1—13, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 4647, § 4, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4721, § 3, 3-
12-1996; Ord. No. 4932, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 5103, § I, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 5178, § I, 6-22-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § I, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 5344, § I, 5-23-2006)


Secs. 56-449—56-479. - Reserved.


ARTICLE III. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Secs. 56-480—56-496. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



Sec. 56-497. - Applicability.
 

For every use hereafter established there shall be provided sufficient space for access and off-street standing, parking and unloading of motor vehicles that may be expected to come to an establishment at any time under normal conditions for any purpose, whether as patrons, customers, employees, guests or otherwise; or when a use is expanded, accessory off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations for the area or capacity of such expansion.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.01(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4187, § 1, 6-26-1984; Ord. No. 4545, §§ 1, 2, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 4668, § 1, 10-25-1994; Ord. No. 4908, § I, 9-28-
1999; Ord. No. 5017, §§ I, II, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5018, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5046, §§ I, IV, 3-26-2002)


Sec. 56-498. - General provisions.

The following general provisions shall apply to all parking, standing and loading space that is provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter:

 
(1)
 
Location of parking or loading space. All required off-street parking or loading spaces shall be provided on the same parcel of land occupied by the use or building to which it is appurtenant; provided, however, that where there are practical difficulties in the way of such location of parking space and/or if the public safety or convenience would be better served by another location, the zoning administrator may  authorize an alternative location as will adequately serve the public interest, subject to the following conditions:
 
a.	Such space shall be located on land in the same ownership as that of the land on which the use to which it is appurtenant is located.

b.	A pedestrian entrance to such space shall be located within a distance of 300 feet by the shortest route of effective pedestrian access.

c.	Such space shall be useable without causing unreasonable traffic congestion, detriment to any residential neighborhood, or hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
d.	It shall be unlawful to utilize any required off-street parking or loading facilities for motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind, except as expressly permitted herein.
 
(2)
 
Computation of parking spaces.
 

a.	For the purpose of computing required off-street standing and parking or loading space in relation to floor area, the gross floor area shall be used.
b.	When computing parking space requirements on the basis of the number of occupants, practitioners or employees, the maximum number of said occupants on the premises at any period of the day shall be used.
c.	When the application of parking or loading requirements would result in a fractional space, any such fraction shall be counted as one space.
d.	In those instances where it is necessary to translate gross parking area into parking spaces, a factor of 350 square feet per gross automobile parking space shall be applied.
e.	In calculating any required parking area, other than for detached single-family dwellings, sufficient access and maneuver space shall be provided to permit the parking and removal of any vehicle without moving other vehicles.
f.	Space allocated for any off-street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off- street parking facilities or portions thereof.
g.	If there is any uncertainty with respect to the amount of parking space required by the provisions of this ordinance as a result of any indefiniteness as to the proposed use of a building or of land, the maximum requirement for the general type of use that is involved shall govern.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.01(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4187, § 1, 6-26-1984; Ord. No. 4545, §§ 1, 2, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 4668, § 1, 10-25-1994; Ord. No. 4908, § I, 9-28-
1999; Ord. No. 5017, §§ I, II, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5018, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5046, §§ I, IV, 3-26-2002)


Sec. 56-499. - Design and maintenance standards for automobile parking or maintenance areas.

All areas providing off-street parking shall conform with the following standards:

 
(1)


(2)


(3)



(4)
 
Area of parking spaces. All required off-street parking spaces shall be at least nine feet in width and at least 19 feet in length, exclusive of any driveways appurtenant and giving access thereto, with a vertical clearance of not less than seven feet.
Access to parking spaces. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient means of access to a street or public service drive.
Surfacing and drainage of parking areas. All open off-street parking areas shall be graded and paved with a durable, dust-free and hard material such as bituminous hot mix or Portland cement concrete, or some comparable material. All parking areas will be properly drained so as to control surface ponding and avoid any nuisance or damage to adjacent property.
Curbs and delineations. Fixed and permanent wheel bumpers or curbs of concrete or some comparable material at least four inches high shall be installed for each parking area, except for parking areas accessory to single-family dwellings. Parking spaces shall be delineated and markings shall be periodically restored to maintain a clear identification of separate parking stall spaces at all times.
 

(5)







(6)
 

Screening. All open off-street parking areas containing five or more parking spaces shall be effectively screened by a wall, fence, earth berm or compact hedge not less than 2½ feet in height on each side that adjoins any street or public right-of-way or adjacent property. A plan demonst screening shall be subject to the review and approval of the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator may require the review of said pla landscape architect to be chosen by the city. The applicant shall incur all costs of plan review by said landscape architect. If the zoning adminis applicant cannot come to an agreement on the appropriate method of screening, the plan and zoning commission shall determine the approp screening and the screening plan shall be subject to the review and approval of the plan and zoning commission.
Landscaping.
 

a.	All open off-street parking areas containing 20 or more parking spaces shall be landscaped to effectively reduce heat and glare and to minimize wind blowing of dust and other residue, and reduce oppressive visual effects of large open parking areas. Any application for a building permit to develop or construct a parking area for 20 or more vehicles, either as a separate use of land or accessory to another use, shall be accompanied by a landscape plan. A landscape plan demonstrating said landscaping must be reviewed by the zoning administrator for sufficiency and appropriateness and shall be subject to the review and approval of the plan and zoning commission. The zoning administrator may require the review of said plan by a certified landscape architect to be chosen by the city. The applicant shall incur all costs of plan review by said landscape architect.
b.	Landscape plans submitted shall contain such detailed information as is necessary to evaluate the quality of the proposed treatment and determine compliance with specific landscape standards provided by the plan and zoning commission and/or certified landscape architect for all such parking areas. These standards shall include but not be limited to requirements relating to size, type, spacing and amount of plant material, including trees, shrubbery and ground cover, the size, construction, maintenance protection, watering and drainage of landscaped areas or planting beds, and spatial functional relationships between landscaped areas, parking spaces, automobile circulation and pedestrian movement.
 
(7)
 
Lighting. Any light used to illuminate any parking area shall either be so arranged and shielded, as to confine all direct light rays entirely within the boundary lines of such areas, or be a low intensity, highly diffused, luminous light source.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.01(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4187, § 1, 6-26-1984; Ord. No. 4545, §§ 1, 2, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 4668, § 1, 10-25-1994; Ord. No. 4908, § I, 9-28-
1999; Ord. No. 5017, §§ I, II, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5018, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5046, §§ I, IV, 3-26-2002)


Sec. 56-500. - Minimum number of spaces.

The following shall be the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for each of the various uses of a given lot or parcel subject to the modifications permitted by the site plan review procedure as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter:
 

(1)
 

Public and community service activities.
 

a.	Nursery schools and day care centers, public or private: one space for each staff member or employee.

b.	Elementary and junior high schools, public or private: one space for each 20 students of building design capacity.

c.	High schools: one space for each ten students based upon the maximum number of students attending the school at any one period of the day.
d.	Any auditorium or other facility for public assembly associated with the above school: one space for each ten seats or other accommodation for spectators in addition to required student/faculty parking.
e.	Business, commercial or trade school, including secretarial or beautician school: one space for each three students.

f.	Facilities used for public assembly but having no fixed seating arrangement specified: one space per 50 square feet of floor area.

g.	Noncommercial places of public assembly with fixed seats, (including church or synagogue sanctuaries): one space for each four seats.

h.	Private clubs and lodges: at least one parking space for each three persons, based on the maximum number of persons that can be accommodated at the same time.
i.	Swimming pools and associated clubs: one parking space for each 40 square feet of pool area.
 

(2)
 

Residential and housing uses. Parking for residential uses shall be governed by the use regulations for the district in which the use is
located, except that in cases where there are no such applicable parking regulations stated, parking shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum standards:
 
a.	Attached or detached single-family dwellings: Two spaces for each dwelling unit which may include up to one space per unit located with an adjacent street or public right-of-way.
b.	Multifamily apartment dwelling consisting of five or more dwelling units: 1½ spaces for each dwelling unit, except that two spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit containing three or more bedrooms.
c.	Motel or hotel: One space for each dwelling unit or guest room plus one space for each two employees or permanent residents, plus such additional spaces as required herein for affiliated uses such as restaurants and the like.
d.	Apartment dwelling for the elderly: One space for each four dwelling units specifically provided for occupancy by elderly persons or couples and allowed under site plan review procedures or as a specified conditional use.
 

(3)
 

Business and commercial uses.
 

a.	Office developments not otherwise specified. A parking space shall be provided for each 300 square feet of floor area including basement or other areas useable or adjustable without structural alterations.
b.	Retail business developments not otherwise specified. A parking space shall be provided for each 200 square feet of floor area including basement or other areas useable or adjustable without structural alterations.
c.	Requirements for parking at newly constructed restaurants.

1.	Sit down restaurants: one space for every three seats for patrons and two spaces for every three employees on maximum shift.

2.	Fast food restaurants: one space for every two seats and two spaces for every three employees on maximum shift.

d.	Commercial and business developments. Commercial and business developments with 100 or more required parking spaces may provide for ten percent of those spaces as "compact car only" spaces with a size of 8.5 feet wide by 18 feet long. These spaces must be located in areas as approved by the director of public works.
 
(4)



(5)
 
Warehousing, wholesale and manufacturing uses. For uses consisting of the manufacture, processing, assembly, storage, warehousing or wholesale and distribution of products: one space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area or one space for each two employees, whichever is greater.
Other similar uses and uses not limited. The zoning administrator shall determine to which of the above categories of parking regulation
any unlisted but similar use, including designated conditional uses, shall belong or determine other applicable standards consistent with the above whenever the above prove inapplicable.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.01(4), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4187, § 1, 6-26-1984; Ord. No. 4545, §§ 1, 2, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 4668, § 1, 10-25-1994; Ord. No. 4908, § I, 9-28-
1999; Ord. No. 5017, §§ I, II, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5018, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5046, §§ I, IV, 3-26-2002)


Sec. 56-501. - Standards for the design and maintenance of of-street loading areas.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)


(d)
 
Area of loading berths or space. A required off-street loading berth or space shall be at least 12 feet in width and at least 25 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuver space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
Access to loading areas. Each required off-street loading space or berth shall be afforded appropriate means of vehicular access to a street, highway or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movement.
Surfacing. All open off-street loading shall be improved with a compacted select gravel base, not less than seven inches thick, and surfaced with all-weather dustless material, such as bituminous hot mix or Portland cement concrete, suitably designed for intended use.
Screening. All loading berths or spaces which abut or are adjacent to a residence district shall be completely screened therefrom by building walls, or a uniformly painted, solid fence, wall or door, or any combination thereof, not less than eight feet in height.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.01(5), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4187, § 1, 6-26-1984; Ord. No. 4545, §§ 1, 2, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 4668, § 1, 10-25-1994; Ord. No. 4908, § I, 9-28-
1999; Ord. No. 5017, §§ I, II, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5018, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5046, §§ I, IV, 3-26-2002)


Sec. 56-502. - Loading berth requirements.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)


















(d)
 
Offices and personal or community service establishments. One loading space shall be provided for each such establishment, including schools, medical or dental clinics, auditoriums or clubs, etc., having greater than 6,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Residential or housing uses. Any building containing more than 50 apartment dwelling units shall provide one loading berth to facilitate refuse collection and large volume pickup and delivery functions.
Business, commercial or industrial uses. Every building or use of land consisting of over 3,000 square feet of gross floor area designed or adaptable for retail business purposes, or warehouse, wholesale or manufacturing use shall be provided with loading space as follows:
















Other similar uses. The zoning administrator shall determine to which of the above categories of loading regulation any specific use, including
 

designated conditional uses, shall belong or determine other applicable standards whenever the above regulations prove inapplicable.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.01(6), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4187, § 1, 6-26-1984; Ord. No. 4545, §§ 1, 2, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 4668, § 1, 10-25-1994; Ord. No. 4908, § I, 9-28-
1999; Ord. No. 5017, §§ I, II, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5018, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5046, §§ I, IV, 3-26-2002)


Secs. 56-503—56-527. - Reserved.


DIVISION 3. - HOME OCCUPATIONS



Sec. 56-528. - Term deined; authorization.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Definitions. The term "home occupation" means a business, profession, occupation or trade conducted for gain or support entirely within a residential building or accessory structure thereto.
Authorization. Any home occupation that is customarily incidental to the principal use of a building as a dwelling shall be permitted in any dwelling unit.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.02(1), (2), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-529. - Use limitations.

In addition to all use limitations applicable to the district in which it is located, no home occupation shall be permitted unless it complies with the following provisions:
 

(1)

(2)


(3)

(4)


(5)
 

The business shall not employ persons other than members of the family residing on the premises.

No more than 25 percent of the total enclosed floor area, including basement, garage or attic spaces, of a dwelling unit may be used for such business.
No alteration of a principal residential structure shall be made which changes the character thereof as a dwelling.

No mechanical equipment or process shall be used which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses outside the place of business.
There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or material used in connection with the business.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.02(3), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-530. - Permitted home occupations.

Customary home occupations include, but are not limited to, the following list of occupations; provided, however, that each listed occupation shall be subject to the limitations of  s e c t i o n  5 6 - 2 9 9 :
 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)


(7)
 

Dressmakers, seamstresses, tailors.

Music teachers, provided that instructions shall be limited to one pupil at a time, except for occasional groups. Artists, sculptors and authors or composers.
Office facilities for architects, engineers, lawyers, realtors, insurance agents, brokers and members of similar professions. Ministers, rabbis, priests.
Office facilities for salesmen, sales representatives, manufacturers representatives, when no retail or wholesale sales are made or transacted on the premises or where no warehousing occurs.
Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving, lapidary work, cabinetmaking, etc., provided that no machinery or equipment is used or employed, other than that which would customarily be found in the home. Machinery or equipment which would customarily be found in the home shall include machinery or equipment that would customarily be employed in connection with a hobby or a vocation not conducted for gain or profit.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.02(4), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-531. - Prohibited home occupations.

Permitted home occupations shall not in any event be deemed to include:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Barbershops and beauty parlors. Dancing schools.
Funeral homes.
 

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)
 

Nursery schools and day-care centers. Restaurants.
Stables, kennels or animal hospitals.

Medical or dental offices or clinics, including chiropractors, veterinarians, podiatrists, etc. Tourist home.
Motor vehicle repair or service.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.02(5), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-532. - Allowable signing.

A dwelling unit containing an allowable home occupation shall provide no name plate announcing said occupation exceeding one square foot in area. (Ord. No. 4062, § 904.02(6), 10-14-1980)

Secs. 56-533—56-557. - Reserved.


DIVISION 4. - ACCESSORY USES



Sec. 56-558. - Term deined; authorization.

 
(a)
 
Definitions. The term "accessory use" means a structure or use which meets all of the following criteria:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)


(4)
 

It is subordinate to and serves a principal building or a principal use;

It is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or principal use served;

It contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants, business or industry in the principal building or principal use served; and
It is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use served.
 

(b)
 

Authorization. Accessory uses are permitted in any zoning district in connection with any principal use which is permitted within such district.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.03(1), (2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4647, § 5, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 5003, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 5018, § II, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5046, §§ II, III, 3-
26-2002; Ord. No. 5207, § II, 9-28-2004; Ord. No. 5312, § I, 1-24-2006)


Sec. 56-559. - Permitted accessory uses.

A permitted accessory use is any use or structure which complies with the above definition, including, but not limited to, the following typical uses:

 
(1)


(2)


(3)

(4)










(5)






(6)

(7)
 
Private garages or carports, provided the structure is not constructed with a lightweight, temporary frame or is covered with canvas, vinyl, corrugated fiberglass, tin or similar material.
Off-street parking and loading spaces as required by article III, division 2 of this chapter, and any additional off-street parking or loading spaces which are devoted exclusively to the principal use or activity, unless specifically prohibited under  s e c t i o n  5 6 - 5 6 0 .
Private or public parking of motor vehicles in any nonresidential zoning district, subject to the provisions of this division.

Private parking of private passenger automobiles or motorcycles in the front, side or rear yards in any residential zoning district, subject to the provisions of this chapter; provided that such front yard parking shall not be used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this chapter. The parking area shall be located behind the front building line of the residence. The front building line shall not be considered to include any porch or other projection. The minimum area for parking of each vehicle shall be nine feet in width by 19 feet in length. The parking area shall not exceed 30 percent of the required rear yard. The parking area and access drive shall be paved with asphaltic or Portland cement concrete, bricks, paving blocks, and such paving shall extend the full width of the parking area and access drive. The parking area and access drive from the street or public service drive shall be constructed in a manner approved by the director of public works.
Private parking or storage of major recreational equipment or commercial vehicles, not exceeding 6½ feet in height or 20 feet in length, in any residential zoning district, provided such parking or storage takes place in a garage or carport in a manner that screens the vehicle or equipment from view at normal eye level from any street or private property; or provided such parking or storage takes place in a rear yard in a manner that screens the vehicle or equipment from view at normal eye level from any street or private property; further provided that any such parking or storage does not encroach upon the required off-street parking.
Parking of commercial vehicles during the actual performance of a service at the premises on which it is parked.

A structure for storage incidental to a permitted use, provided no such structure that is accessory to a residential building shall exceed 250 square feet in gross floor area and 12 feet in height.
 

(8)

(9)



(10)










(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)
 

A child's playhouse.

A private park or recreation facilities including swimming pools and bath houses, or private tennis courts, provided that such facilities are set back at least 15 feet from any lot line and screened from adjacent residential property with a fence or dense planting at least six and not more than eight feet in height.
Convenience/service retail uses may be provided as an accessory use to a permitted use in any district except an SR or LR Single-Family District, provided that there are no window displays or extraneous advertisements, other than identification signage or service that shall not be visible from outside the building. Such strictly incidental convenience retail uses may include personal services such as barbershops, beauty parlors, photographic studios, or drycleaning and laundry pick-up or self-service facilities, and restaurants, cafes, or soda fountains, provided the area used for all such uses does not exceed an amount equal to five percent of the gross (residential or other non-retail commercial) floor area of the building or project (exclusive of maintenance and parking areas) in which the same are contained. Because of its incidental and accessory character, no such floor space need be included in the calculation of parking requirements for a given building  or project.
Greenhouses.

Statuary, arbors, trellises, barbecue stoves, dog houses, flagpoles, fences, walls, hedges. Auditoriums and other public assembly halls within MR, HR, P-RO and PA districts. Health clubs, including baths and gymnasiums in P-RO districts.
Required setback for air conditioning units is 15 feet but in those cases where the requirement cannot be met, the setback may be reduced to a minimum of seven feet. In all cases the setback must be the maximum available so that the condensing unit is furthest away from the neighboring property. Under no circumstances can an air conditioning unit be located in a front yard.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.03(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4647, § 5, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 5003, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 5018, § II, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5046, §§ II, III, 3-26-
2002; Ord. No. 5207, § II, 9-28-2004; Ord. No. 5312, § I, 1-24-2006)


Sec. 56-560. - Specifcally prohibited uses.

 
(a)


(b)
 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to occupy or use any land, building, or part thereof for any accessory use which is specifically prohibited herein.
The following are specifically prohibited as accessory uses:
 

(1)



(2)

(3)

(4)


(5)
 

Repair or service of any motor vehicle in any residential zoning district unless the activities are confined within a completely enclosed building or unless the repairs are limited to those defined herein as minor motor vehicle repairs and are fully completed within a period of 24 hours or less; provided that all such repairs shall be limited to the vehicles of the resident or residents living within the principal building.
Storage of mobile homes or use for dwelling proposes in any residential zoning district. The use of major recreational equipment for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes.
Outdoor storage of major recreational equipment in residential zoning districts, unless the equipment is in condition for safe and effective performance of the function for which it is intended or can be made so at cost not exceeding the value of the equipment in its existing state.
Any outdoor parking or storage, except as specifically permitted by the regulations of this chapter.
 

(c)
 

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to occupy an accessory building for purposes of residency or any other use resulting in systematic human occupancy.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.03(4), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4647, § 5, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 5003, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 5018, § II, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5046, §§ II, III, 3-26-
2002; Ord. No. 5207, § II, 9-28-2004; Ord. No. 5312, § I, 1-24-2006)


Sec. 56-561. - Bulk regulations.

 
(a)

(b)


(c)


(d)
 
Accessory structures and uses shall be set back at least five feet from the rear lot line.

Accessory structures and uses shall maintain the same side yard as is required for the principal structure located on the zoning lot, except that off-street parking, fences, walls and hedges may be located in required side yards.
No part of any accessory structure shall be located closer than ten feet to any principal structure or other accessory structure, unless it is attached to or forms a part of such principal structure.
Accessory structures and uses shall otherwise comply with the bulk regulations applicable to the district in which they are located.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.03(5), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4647, § 5, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 5003, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 5018, § II, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5046, §§ II, III, 3-26-
2002; Ord. No. 5207, § II, 9-28-2004; Ord. No. 5312, § I, 1-24-2006)


Sec. 56-562. - Use limitations.

All accessory structures and uses shall comply with the use limitations applicable in the zoning district in which they are located and with the following additional use limitations:
 

(1)

(2)
 

No accessory structure shall be constructed and occupied on any lot prior to the time of the completion of the construction of the principal str it is accessory.
No accessory structure or use shall be permitted in any required front yard, in any residential district, unless specifically permitted elsewhere in this ordinance or by site plan review with patio and townhouse dwellings as provided in article IV, division 8 of this chapter.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.03(6), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4647, § 5, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 5003, § I, 8-14-2001; Ord. No. 5018, § II, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 5046, §§ II, III, 3-26-
2002; Ord. No. 5207, § II, 9-28-2004; Ord. No. 5312, § I, 1-24-2006)


Secs. 56-563—56-587. - Reserved.


DIVISION 5. - REQUIRED COMMONLY USEABLE RESIDENTIAL OPEN SPACE



Sec. 56-588. - Multifamily apartment dwellings.

 
(a)




















(b)
 
Commonly useable residential open space shall be provided within each lot devoted in whole or in part to multifamily apartment dwellings in accordance with the following graph relating the required square feet of useable space for each dwelling unit to the residential density of any given lot.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY, DWELLING UNIT/ACRE

 

The amount of required commonly useable residential open space may be reduced by an amount equal to twice the total area of private balconies or patios provided they are accessible to individual dwelling units, so long as any such balcony or patio consists of at least 60 square feet of outdoor area and has a least dimension of six or more feet. At no time, however, shall an area equal to less than ten percent of the lot be devoted to commonly useable open space.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.04, 10-14-1980)


Secs. 56-590—56-611. - Reserved.


DIVISION 6. - RETAIL BUSINESS HOURS OF OPERATION



Sec. 56-612. - Conditional use permit required for certain hours and locations.

 
(a)



(b)


(c)
 
All retail business operations located within any zoning district of the city allowed in this chapter that operates its business between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., within 500 feet of a residential zoning district, shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit as provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter to conduct said business between those hours.
This requirement shall not be applicable to existing retail business operations located within the allowed zoning district of this zoning code or those retail business operations that are a nonconforming use in a zoning district where such use is not allowed.
This requirement is applicable to new retail business operations allowed in various zoning districts.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.05, 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4215, § 1, 6-11-1985)


Secs. 56-613—56-642. - Reserved.


DIVISION 7. - SATELLITE DISH INSTALLATION



Sec. 56-643. - Requirements for SR and LR districts.
 

All satellite dish installations installed in an SR or LR zoning district must conform to the following standards:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)
 
Maximum allowable height of satellite dish to be 16 feet from ground level. Location to be in rear yard of property.
A five-foot setback from side and rear property lines must be maintained. Rooftop mountings and front yard installations are strictly prohibited.
All satellite dishes to be erected to withstand wind velocity of 70 mph.

All satellite dishes to be landscaped as approved by the design and review board.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.06(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4233, § 1, 9-10-1985)


Sec. 56-644. - Requirements for MR, AB, NB, CB, LM, HM, PA and PB districts.

All satellite dish installations installed in an MR, AB, NB, CB, LM, HM, PA or PB zoning district must conform to the following standards:

 
(1)


(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)
 
All satellite dish installations on commercial property other than the rear yard must first obtain a conditional use permit as provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter.
Maximum allowable height of a satellite dish to be 16 feet from ground level or, if dish is installed on roof, 16 feet from roof mounting site. Location to be in rear of property, unless the rear and side yard is not large enough to accommodate a satellite dish.
A five-foot setback from side and rear property lines must be maintained if mounted at ground level.

Rooftop mountings will be permitted only if the rear or side yard is not large enough to accommodate a satellite dish. Front yard installations are strictly prohibited.
All satellite dishes to be erected to withstand wind velocity of 70 mph.

All satellite dishes installed at ground level must be landscaped and all dishes mounted on rooftops must be screened and approved by the design and review board.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.06(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4233, § 1, 9-10-1985)


Secs. 56-645—56-661. - Reserved.


DIVISION 8. - COMMUNICATION TOWER REQUIREMENTS



Sec. 56-662. - Standards.

All communication towers erected, placed in operation or modified after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived must  conform to the standards of this division. To the extent of a conflict between the requirements of this division and any requirements contained elsewhere in this chapter, the provision most restrictive against the applicant shall apply.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.07, 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 3-12-1996)


Sec. 56-663. - Violation.

Communication tower operators possessing conditional use permits for a communication tower shall at all times comply with these regulations and with the terms of the applicable conditional use permit; communication tower operators who violate these regulations or the terms of the applicable conditional use permit shall be subject to prosecution and/or conditional use permit revocation as otherwise specified in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.07(11), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 3-12-1996)


Sec. 56-664. - Height.

A conditional use permit may authorize a height for a communication tower in excess of any height limitation on buildings or structures contained in the applicable zoning district in which the communication tower will be located, but not to exceed 75 feet.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.07(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 3-12-1996)


Sec. 56-665. - Setback.

All communication towers shall be set back (measured from the tower base):
 

(1)

(2)
 

From all yard lines, at least one foot for each foot of tower height; and

From the boundary of any residential district or any structure or property used for residential purposes, an additional two feet for each foot of tower height (total three feet).
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.07(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 3-12-1996)


Sec. 56-666. - Collocation.

 
(a)
 
Applications for new communication towers shall be considered only when an existing or approved communication tower cannot accommodate the communications equipment planned for the proposed communication tower.
 
(1)
 
An existing or approved communication tower cannot accommodate planned communications equipment if:
 

a.	Planned communications equipment would exceed the structural capacity of an existing or approved communication tower, and the communication tower cannot be reinforced to accommodate planned communications equipment at a reasonable cost;
b.	Planned communications equipment will cause radio frequency interference with other existing or planned communications equipment for that communication tower and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;
c.	Existing or approved towers do not have space on which planned communications equipment can be placed so it can function effectively and at least in parity with other similar communications equipment in place or approved by the city;
d.	Addition of planned equipment to an existing or approved transmission tower would result in radio frequency emission levels on the tower in excess of those permitted under s e c t i o n 5 6 - 6 7 1 ; or
e.	Other reasons that make it impracticable to place the communications equipment planned by the applicant on an existing or approved communication tower.
 
(2)
 
No application for a new communication tower shall be considered unless the applicant demonstrates to the city that the applicant is unable to lease or otherwise secure space on:
 
a.	An existing or approved communication tower; or

b.	On any other structure (building rooftop, water tower, etc.) that would be capable of housing or supporting the planned communications equipment.
 
(3)






(4)
 
Shared use of an existing or approved tower or such other structure shall be conditioned upon the applicant's agreement to pay reasonable fees and costs associated with adapting existing facilities to the proposed use, including, but not limited to, reasonable costs for reinforcing or modifying a tower or structure, for preventing radio frequency interference, and other changes reasonably required to accommodate shared use. The fees and costs for shared use are unreasonable, among other reasons, if they exceed the cost of the proposed communication tower. The city may consider expert testimony to determine whether the fees and costs are reasonable.
Once the city finds that communications equipment proposed by the applicant cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or other structure, each tower or other structure so found is presumed unable to accommodate similar equipment that may be proposed in the future, unless evidence is introduced to demonstrate otherwise.
 
(b)
 
A communication tower operator, defined as any person or entity that owns or has a legal interest in a communication tower subject to the requirements of this division, and the owner of land upon which a communication tower is located or is proposed to be located pursuant to a pending application, but excluding any person or entity who is permitted to place particular equipment on a communication tower but otherwise has no ownership or general possessory interest in the communication tower, shall be required to:
 
(1)

(2)



(3)



(4)

(5)
 
Respond in a timely manner to any request from a potential user with information about the available capacity of the communication tower. Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request, required under this division, for information from a potential shared-use
applicant; the communication tower operator may charge a party requesting information under such section to pay a reasonable fee not in
excess of the actual cost of preparing a response.

Negotiate in good faith for shared use of a communication tower by applicants. Communication tower operators shall negotiate in the order in which requests for information are received, except a communication tower operator generally may negotiate with a third party applicant who has received an FCC license or permit before doing so with other applicants.
Allow shared use of a communication tower if an applicant agrees in writing to pay charges specified in subsection (b)(5) of this section. Make no more than a reasonable charge for shared use, based on generally accepted accounting principals and pricing practices generally
reflective of the St. Louis area. The charge may include but is not necessarily limited to a pro rata share of the cost of site selection,
planning, project administration, land costs, site design, construction and maintenance, financing, return on investment, and depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing electromagnetic interference or causing uses on the site to emit radio frequency emissions in excess of levels permitted under s e c t i o n 5 6 - 6 7 1 .
 
(c)
 
Communication towers shall structurally accommodate the maximum number of foreseeable users technically practicable and shall be designed to comply with the following standards:
 
(1)
 
Television towers shall be designed to accommodate at least two high-power television antennas, four microwave antennas, one FM radio antenna, one radio antenna, and space for one public safety two-way radio antenna.
 

 
(2)


(3)

(4)


(5)





(6)
 
FM towers shall be designed to accommodate at least two FM antennas, four microwave antennas and space for one public safety two-way radio antenna.
Cellular, PCS or similar mobile or wireless telephony towers shall be designed to accommodate at least three potential users. Communication towers that are not for television or FM antennas shall be designed to accommodate at least two microwave antennas and
space for one public safety two-way radio antenna.

The city may reduce the required shared capacity of a tower if fewer or different antennas should be accommodated based on the number of FCC licenses that are potentially available for the area, kind of tower site or structure proposed, the number of existing and potential licenses without tower space, and space available on existing and approved towers; or if a tower necessary to provide for such sharing dominates and alters the visual character of the area adversely such that property values are diminished.
Antennas on a shared tower shall be arranged as follows, except as needed to prevent electromagnetic interference or to accommodate topographic or other physical or functional constraints:
 
a.	Transmitting and receiving equipment serving similar kinds of uses shall be placed on a shared-use tower so one of the users in a group can operate roughly equal to other users in the group with similar equipment.
b.	A TV tower shall have two side-mounted and one top-mounted TV antenna or one top-mounted, one mounted below it, and one side- mounted. Triangular, T-shaped, or other platforms or candelabra may be used if required communications equipment cannot be mounted as safely or economically without such structures.
c.	Microwave antennas and FM and two-way radio antennas can be placed anywhere on a tower above surrounding obstacles subject to the restrictions contained in these regulations.
(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.07(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 3-12-1996)


Sec. 56-667. - Accessory uses.

Equipment shelter structures or buildings, fencing and other similar structures or improvements, all meeting the definition of accessory uses contained in division 4 of this article, shall be deemed permitted accessory uses, subject to the limitations contained in division 4 of this article and to the following additional limitations:
 

(1)


(2)


(3)
 

Such accessory uses may not include offices, sales activities, long-term vehicle storage, outdoor storage, broadcast studios (except for emergency purposes), or other uses that are not needed to send or receive transmissions.
All accessory uses, and any guy wire anchors, shall be subject to height and setback requirements generally applicable to principal uses in the zoning district in which they are located.
All guy wire anchor locations, equipment shelter structures or buildings, fencing and similar structures or improvements constituting structures or accessory uses shall be located on the same parcel of land occupied by the communication tower.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.07(4), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 3-12-1996)


Sec. 56-668. - Fencing; architectural and design compatibility; landscaping; screening.

 
(a)
 
A fence shall be installed around the base of the communication tower, guy anchors and buildings in compliance with the following standards:
 

(1)

(2)
 

Fences shall be a minimum of six feet in height and shall be constructed of such material as is compatible with surrounding structures. Guy anchors shall be fenced to allow a clear zone around the guy anchors such as to provide a 14-foot minimum vertical clearance.
 
(b)


(c)


(d)



(e)


(f)
 
All buildings or structures shall be constructed of such exterior material as is compatible with surrounding structures or areas from which such buildings or structures are visible.
A sign shall be installed on the gate to the facility and on the door of any buildings to indicate "High Voltage" on the premises. No other signage shall be allowed.
Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. Ground disturbed by construction shall be seeded and mulched within 45 days of the completion of construction, except in cases where the applicant has requested and received an extension of this time from the director of public works.
Landscaping and screening to adequately screen the tower base and accessory uses from view from adjoining properties shall be provided, subject to approval under site plan review pursuant to article IV, division 8 of this chapter.
In addition to the criteria enumerated in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 8 7 7 , the plan and zoning commission and city council shall consider whether the proposed communication tower and accessory uses, including without limitation tower type, color and design, are compatible with uses and structures located on surrounding properties and on all properties from which the proposed communication tower or accessory uses would be visible, and may impose conditions or requirements to address such compatibility, including without limitation painting, lighting, design (for example, monopole, lattice), camouflage requirements (including towers designed to appear like trees or other stealth towers), and building materials and finishes.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.07(5), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 3-12-1996)
 

Sec. 56-669. - Parking.

At least one off-street parking space shall be provided, subject to approval pursuant to site plan review. (Ord. No. 4062, § 904.07(6), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 3-12-1996)

Sec. 56-670. - Inspection.

The communication tower operator shall cause the tower to be safety inspected every two years from the date of construction. The inspection shall be performed by a licensed engineer who shall provide a certified copy of the inspection report to the director of public works of the city. Deficiencies noted in inspection reports shall be corrected within 90 days and shall be certified as corrected by the engineer unless for good cause an extension is granted by the director of public works of the city.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.07(7), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 3-12-1996)


Sec. 56-671. - Nonionizing electronic radiation (radio frequency emission) standards.

 
(a)
 
All communication towers and any equipment or facilities located thereon or installed or used in connection therewith shall conform to:
 

(1)



(2)
 

The relevant sections of the American National Standard Safety Levels with respect to Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields, 300 kHz to 100 GHz. This standard is identified as ANSI-C95.1-1982 and is published by the American National Standards Institute; and
Any more rigorous standards governing radio frequency emissions as may be adopted by federal, state or county governmental entities.
 

(b)
 

Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, to the extent expressly required by law, the city will not regulate the placement, construction or modification of communication towers or communication equipment based on the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such towers or equipment comply with FCC regulations regarding such emissions.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.07(8), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 3-12-1996)


Sec. 56-672. - Application procedures.

In addition to the requirements of article IV, division 6 (conditional uses) and article IV, division 8 (site plan review) of this chapter, an application for a conditional use permit for a communication tower shall include:
 

(1)






(2)

(3)
 

A site plan or plans drawn to scale and identifying: the site boundary; tower; guy wire anchors; proposed type, number and location of antennas or other transmission equipment to be located on the tower; existing and proposed structures; vehicular parking and access; existing vegetation to be retained, removed, or replaced; uses, structures, and land-use designations on the site and abutting parcels; and the location of any adjoining residential districts or structures used for residential purposes. Such site plan shall be subject to site plan review pursuant to section article IV, division 8 of this chapter.
A plan drawn to scale showing proposed landscaping, including species type, size, spacing, and other features. A report from a licensed professional engineer. The report shall:
 
a.	Describe the tower and the technical, economic, and other reasons for the tower design;

b.	Demonstrate that the tower complies with the current building code;

c.	Describe the capacity of the tower, including the number and type of antennas that it can accommodate and the basis for the calculation of capacity; and
d.	Demonstrate that the proposed sources of radio frequency emissions will comply with s e c t i o n 5 6 - 6 7 1 .
 

(4)


(5)

(6)


(7)
 

The FAA determination of no hazard and FCC construction permit (if required), or a written statement from those agencies that the tower is exempt from such requirements.
For a communication tower in any zoning district, evidence that the tower complies with the design requirements of s e c t i o n 5 6 - 6 6 6 . Evidence of its legal ownership or possessory interest in the land for which the conditional use permit for a communication tower is being
sought.

Documentary evidence that it complies with s e c t i o n 5 6 - 6 6 6 (a), as follows:
 

a.	The applicant has contacted the communication tower operators of all existing or approved towers that are reasonably likely to be capable of accommodating the planned communications equipment (except owners of those towers presumed unable to accommodate the proposed antenna under s e c t i o n 5 6 - 6 6 6 (a) and provided each contacted operator with the engineer's report required under subsection (3) of this section.
b.	The applicant shall request each contacted operator to:

1.	Identify the site by address and legal description;
 

2.	Describe tower height and existing tower users;

3.	Assess whether the existing tower could accommodate the communications equipment/antenna to be attached to the proposed tower without causing structural instability or electromagnetic interference; and
4.	If the communications equipment/antenna to be attached to the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on each existing tower, assess whether the existing tower could be structurally strengthened or whether the antennas, transmitters, and related equipment could be protected from electromagnetic interference and generally describe the means and projected cost of shared use of the existing tower.
c.	Document in writing the response to each contact for each communication tower operator contacted.

d.	The applicant has contacted the owners or managers of all other structures (building rooftops, water towers, etc.) that are reasonably likely to be capable of accommodating the planned communications equipment, offering reasonable market compensation for the right to install and operate such equipment, and the applicant shall document the responses of such owners or managers.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.07(9), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 3-12-1996)


Sec. 56-673. - Abandonment.

If use of a communication tower is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six consecutive months (regardless of any reservation of intent not to abandon or to resume such use), the conditional use permit for such communication tower shall be deemed revoked and the communication tower operator shall immediately remove the tower and all accessory structures from the site.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.07(10), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 3-12-1996)


Sec. 56-674. - Existing towers.

The installation of additional or the replacement of existing antennas on a communication tower in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall not be permitted unless the communication tower operator shall agree to comply with the provisions of sections 5 6 - 6 6 6 ,  5 6 - 
 6 7 0 and 5 6 - 6 7 1 .

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.07(12), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 3-12-1996)


Sec. 56-675. - Accessory antenna.

An antenna and supporting structure for the following use is permitted in any district if accessory to a permitted use and if it complies with applicable regulations of the district in which it is situated:
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

Amateur radio. Citizen band radio.
A communication device that only receives a RF signal.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 904.07(13), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 3-12-1996)


Secs. 56-676—56-693. - Reserved.


DIVISION 9. - ROOFTOP COMMUNICATION ANTENNA REQUIREMENTS



Sec. 56-694. - Standards.

A communication antenna that is mounted or installed on any building or structure other than a communication tower (including, for example, a billboard, water tower, or office building), together with supporting or mounting equipment, is sometimes in this chapter referred to as a "rooftop communication antenna." All rooftop communication antennas erected, placed in operation or modified after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived must conform to the standards of this division. To the extent of a conflict between the requirements of this division and any requirements contained elsewhere in this chapter, the provision most restrictive against the applicant shall apply.

(Ord. No. 5451, § I, 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-695. - Violation.

Rooftop communication antenna operators possessing conditional use permits for a rooftop communication antenna shall at all times comply with these regulations and with the terms of the applicable conditional use permit; rooftop communication antenna operators who violate these regulations or the terms of the applicable conditional use permit shall be subject to prosecution and/or conditional use permit revocation as otherwise specified in this chapter.
 

(Ord. No. 5451, § I(9), 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-696. - Height.

A rooftop communication antenna shall not protrude more than ten feet above the highest point of the building or structure on which it is located. Notwithstanding s e c t i o n 5 6 - 3 4 (height exception), the building height limitations provided in this chapter shall apply to rooftop communication antennas. A conditional use permit may authorize a height for a rooftop communication antenna in excess of any height limitation on structures contained in the applicable zoning district in which the rooftop communication antenna will be located, but not to exceed 75 feet. The height and location of the rooftop communication antenna shall be such that if the rooftop communication antenna falls, it will not fall on any adjacent parcel of land, public street or right-of-way.

(Ord. No. 5451, § I(1), 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-697. - Accessory uses.

Equipment shelter buildings, communications support equipment, and other similar structures, equipment or improvements, all meeting the definition of accessory uses contained in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 5 5 8 , shall be deemed permitted accessory uses, subject to the limitations contained in division 4 of this article and
 s e c t i o n 5 6 - 6 6 7 , and to the following additional limitations:

 
(1)


(2)


(3)
 
All equipment shelter structures or other improvements constituting accessory uses shall be located on the same parcel of land occupied by the building or structure on which the rooftop communication antenna is mounted.
All accessory equipment shelter buildings or other structures shall be constructed of such exterior material as is compatible with the surrounding structures or area from which such structures are visible.
Any communications support equipment must be contained within the building, or within an equipment shelter building or cabinet, or screened as approved by the plan and zoning commission.
 

(Ord. No. 5451, § I(2), 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-698. - Collocation.

An application for installation of a rooftop communication antenna on a building or structure on which a communication antenna is not then already mounted shall be considered only when the applicant demonstrates to the city that such communication antenna cannot be accommodated on a building or structure already supporting a rooftop communication antenna, or on an existing communication tower.

(Ord. No. 5451, § I(3), 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-699. - Architectural and design compatibility.

 
(a)





(b)


(c)





(d)


(e)


(f)
 
Rooftop communication antennas attached to a building or other structure, and all accessory uses, shall be of a color identical to or closely compatible with the surface to which they are mounted or shall be concealed by screening or by architectural elements as approved by the plan and zoning commission. No rooftop communication antenna shall extend down from the roof or over the side of the building or structure to which it is attached in such a manner that it is visible against any exterior wall of the building or structure.
All rooftop communication antennas and accessory uses shall meet or exceed the standards and regulations contained in applicable state and local building and electrical codes, as amended from time to time.
All rooftop communication antennas and accessory uses shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC and any other federal or state agency with the authority to regulate rooftop communication antennas. Should such standards or regulations be amended, then the owner shall bring such rooftop communication antennas and accessory uses in compliance with the revised standards or regulations within six months of the effective date of the revision unless an earlier date is mandated by the controlling agency.
All rooftop communication antennas and accessory uses shall be protected from unauthorized access by appropriate security devices. A description of proposed security devices shall be made a part of the application for conditional use permit.
Rooftop communication antennas shall not be lighted unless required by the FAA or any other federal or state agency with authority to regulate, in which case a description of the required lighting scheme will be made a part of the application for conditional use permit.
In addition to the criteria enumerated in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 8 7 7 , the plan and zoning commission and city council shall consider whether the proposed rooftop communication antenna and accessory uses, including without limitation antenna type, color and design, and set-back from the edge of the building or structure, are compatible with, harmonize with and are integrated into the design and architecture of the building or structure on which they are located and are compatible with the uses and structures located on surrounding properties and on all properties from which the proposed rooftop communication antenna or accessory uses would be visible, and may impose conditions or requirements to address such integration and compatibility, including without limitation mounting height or location, painting, lighting, design, camouflage requirements, screening and building materials and finishes.
 
(Ord. No. 5451, § I(4), 1-22-2008)
 

Sec. 56-700. - Inspection.

The rooftop communication antenna operator (defined as any person or entity that owns or has a legal interest in a rooftop communication antenna subject to the requirements of this article III, division 9, and the owner of the building or structure upon which a rooftop communication antenna is located) shall cause the rooftop communication antenna and accessory uses to be safety inspected every two years from the date of installation. The inspection shall be performed by a licensed engineer who shall provide a certified copy of the inspection report to the director of public works of the city. Deficiencies noted in inspection reports shall be corrected within 90 days and shall be certified as corrected by the engineer unless for good cause an extension is granted by the director of public works of the city.

(Ord. No. 5451, § I(5), 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-701. - Nonionizing electronic radiation (radio frequency emission) standards.

All rooftop communication antennas and any accessory uses or other equipment or facilities located thereon or installed or used in connection therewith shall comply with the provisions of s e c t i o n 5 6 - 6 7 1 requiring limitations on nonionizing electronic radiation (radio frequency emission) standards. Notwithstanding the foregoing, to the extent expressly required by law, the city will not regulate the placement, construction or modification of rooftop communication antennas or rooftop communication equipment based on the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such rooftop communication antennas or equipment comply with FCC regulations regarding such emissions.

(Ord. No. 5451, § I(6), 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-702. - Application procedures.

In addition to the requirements of article IV, division 6 (conditional uses) and article IV, division 8 (site plan review) of this chapter, an application for a conditional use permit for a rooftop communication antenna shall include:
 

(1)







(2)
 

A plan or plans drawn to scale and identifying the site boundary and any guy wire anchors; an elevation drawing and description of the proposed type, number, dimensions and exact location of antennas, support structures and other accessory uses or equipment; a drawing or photograph showing the color and appearance of the antennas, support structures and accessory uses; a description of the proposed security devices, the uses, structures, and land-use designations on the site and abutting parcels; the location of any adjoining residential districts or structures used for residential purposes; and such other information as the city may request to determine compliance with this division. Such plan shall be subject to site plan review pursuant to article IV, division 8 of this chapter.
A report from a licensed professional engineer. The report shall:
 

a.	Describe the rooftop communication antenna and the technical, economic, and other reasons for the antenna design;

b.	Demonstrate that the rooftop communication antenna complies with the current building code;

c.	Demonstrate that the proposed sources of radio frequency emissions will comply with s e c t i o n 5 6 - 7 0 1 .
 

(3)

(4)


(5)
 

In any zoning district, evidence that the rooftop communication antenna complies with the design requirements of s e c t i o n 5 6 - 6 9 9 . Evidence of the applicant's legal ownership or possessory interest in the land, building or structure to which the rooftop communication
antenna is to be affixed and for which the conditional use permit is being sought.

Documentary evidence that it complies with s e c t i o n 5 6 - 6 9 8 , as follows:
 

a.	The applicant has contacted the operators of all existing towers, and of all buildings or structures already supporting a rooftop communication antenna, which towers or buildings are reasonably likely to provide adequate reception to and from the proposed communication antenna and reasonably likely to be capable of accommodating the planned rooftop communications antenna, and the applicant has requested the right to lease or otherwise secure the right to install the proposed rooftop communications antenna or such tower, building or structure upon payable of reasonable fees and costs; and
b.	The applicant has documented in writing the response to each contact for each operator.

(Ord. No. 5451, § I(7), 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-703. - Abandonment.

If use of a rooftop communication antenna is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six consecutive months (regardless of any reservation of intent not to abandon or to resume such use), the conditional use permit for such rooftop communication antenna shall be deemed revoked and the rooftop communication antenna operator shall immediately remove the antenna and all accessory structures from the site.

(Ord. No. 5451, § I(8), 1-22-2008)


Sec. 56-704. - Existing antennas.
 

The replacement of existing rooftop communication antennas on a building or structure shall not be permitted unless the rooftop communication antenna operator shall agree to comply with the provisions of sections 5 6 - 7 0 0 and 5 6 - 7 0 1 .

(Ord. No. 5451, § I(10), 1-22-2008)


Secs. 56-705—56-721. - Reserved.


DIVISION 10. - SOLAR PANEL INSTALLATIONS



Sec. 56-722. - Solar panel installations.

 
(a)
 
Solar panels are permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts subject to the following standards:
 

(1)

(2)
 

Such panels must be located on the premises.

Such panels may be mounted on roofs or walls subject to:
 

a.	Such panels may be installed at any angle, provided they are not visible from the public right-of-way or other public places immediately adjacent to the lot. If they are visible from such locations, they must be installed with an equivalent pitch angle as the roof itself.
b.	Such panels may not project beyond any wall, roof edge or roof ridge.

c.	Prior to the building permit being issued the proposed installation must be approved by the design and review board.

d.	Exterior plumbing and electrical lines should not be installed in any portion of the front of the property.

e.	Panels installed on flat roofs shall not be more than three feet higher than the finished roof to which it is mounted.
 

(3)

(4)
 

No solar panel may cause a reflection onto other property.

Free standing panels may only be authorized by conditional use permit if roof or wall mounted panels are shown to be infeasible.
 

(b)

(c)
 

Solar panels may be mounted on light poles as a source of power for the light fixtures if they are designed as part of the fixtures.

Exceptions to these standards may be considered for approval through conditional use permit, if the city, at its' sole discretion determines that sufficient evidence exists demonstrating there will be no ill effects detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare, or public interest.
 
(Ord. No. 5722, § I, 11-12-2013)


ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY



Secs. 56-723—56-740. - Reserved.


DIVISION 2. - ZONING ADMINISTRATION



Sec. 56-741. - Appointment.

A zoning administrator shall be appointed by the city manager to administer and enforce this chapter. Said zoning administrator may fill any other positions within the city government of the city so long as it does not interfere or conflict with his duties as zoning administrator for the city.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.01(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4327, § 1, 10-13-1987)


Sec. 56-742. - Duties.

The zoning administrator, or his duly designated and acting deputy, shall enforce this chapter, and in addition thereto and in furtherance of this authority shall:
 

(1)

(2)


(3)

(4)

(5)
 

Approve all zoning issues incident to applications for building permits as provided in division 3 of this article.

Furnish to the various departments, officers or employees of the city vested with the authority to issue permits or licenses, such information as will ensure the proper administration of this chapter.
Approve and issue all use permits as provided in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 7 7 2 .

Conduct inspections of all buildings, structures and uses of land to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Receive, check for compliance with the various submission requirements contained herein and forward to the appropriate body all
applications for:
 

a.	Amendments to the text of this chapter;

b.	Rezoning;

c.	Site plan review.
 

(6)

(7)

(8)


(9)
 

Receive, file and forward to the board of adjustment all papers constituting the record upon which actions appealed from are taken. Perform the duties of executive secretary to the plan and zoning commission and the board of adjustment.
Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including all maps, site plan submissions, appeals, amendments, variances, conditional uses and use permits.
Notify in writing if he finds that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions or alterations; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.01(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4327, § 1, 10-13-1987)


Sec. 56-743. - Notice of public hearing.

Whenever a public hearing is required by this chapter, notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by posting a copy of same on the premises. Such notice shall be given not less than 15 days prior to the public hearing, and all owners within 300 feet of same posted premises shall be notified by first class mail of said public hearing.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.01(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4327, § 1, 10-13-1987)


Secs. 56-744—56-769. - Reserved.


DIVISION 3. - PERMITS



Sec. 56-770. - Building permit.

 
(a)


(b)



(c)
 
Required. It shall be unlawful to construct, enlarge, alter or repair any project, building or structure without first obtaining a building permit as required by the building code.
Application and submission requirements. Every application for a building permit shall comply with all the applicable provisions of the city building code and any regulations issued by the zoning administrator, and filed with the city clerk requiring such other information as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
Issuance. No building permit shall be issued by the building inspector unless the application for such permit has been examined by the zoning administrator and he has affixed to it his approval that the application is in proper form, contains all necessary information and the proposed building or use of land, building or structure, complies in all respects with the provisions then in effect with respect to zoning or with a written order from the board of adjustment in the form of an administrative review decision on an appeal as provided in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 7 7 2 .
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.02, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-771. - Demolition permits.

See s e c t i o n 1 2 - 2 9 8 .

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.02A, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-772. - Use permits.

 
(a)



(b)



(c)
 
Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to hereafter occupy or use any land, building or part thereof for any non- residential purpose until a use permit has been issued by the zoning administrator, stating that the use complies with all the provisions of this chapter.
Application. Every application for a use permit shall be filed at the office of the zoning administrator and shall comply with any regulations issued by the zoning administrator and filed with the city clerk requiring the submission of such information as may be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Issuance. No use permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator until the building inspector has caused the premises to be inspected and affixes to the application for such permit his approval that the proposed use and any buildings or structures involved comply in all respects with the provisions of the city building code and the use is certified to be in compliance with all the provisions of this chapter by the zoning administrator, provided that, pending the issuance of a regular permit, a temporary permit may be issued to be valid for a period not to exceed
 

six months during the completion of any work on the premises or during partial occupancy of the premises. A use permit shall be issued or written notice shall be given to the applicant stating the reasons why a permit cannot be issued not later than 14 days after the office of the zoning administrator has been notified in writing that the building or premises is ready for occupancy.
(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.03, 10-14-1980)


Secs. 56-773—56-797. - Reserved.


DIVISION 4. - PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION



Sec. 56-798. - Establishment.

The establishment of a city plan and zoning commission is hereby authorized. It shall consist of seven members who shall serve without compensation and who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council for terms of four years.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.04(1), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-799. - Membership; chairperson and staf.

 
(a)

(b)
 
Membership. The membership of the plan and zoning commission shall consist of seven members who are citizens and residents of the city.

Chairperson and staff. The plan and zoning commission shall elect its chairperson annually from among the appointed members with voting rights and shall have authority to employ such assistants and technical advisors as it considers necessary within the limits of its budget appropriations.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.04(2), (3), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-800. - Powers and duties.

The plan and zoning commission shall have the following powers and duties:

 
(1)


(2)



(3)


(4)

(5)

(6)
 
To prepare and submit to the city council for its approval a master plan for the physical development of the city and recommend modifications of this plan from time to time as it deems in the community's best interest.
To prepare, adopt and recommend to the city council for enactment into ordinance a comprehensive plan for the zoning of the city with such regulations as to the location, height, width and bulk of buildings and other structures, and land as it shall determine to be necessary or desirable for the promotion of the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city.
To hear applications for amendments, modifications or revisions of this chapter or any part thereof in the manner prescribed in division 5 of this article.
To consider all requests for conditional use permits in the manner prescribed in division 6 of this article.

To petition the council on its own initiative to amend, supplement, change or repeal this chapter of any part thereof.

To initiate from time to time a comprehensive review of the provisions of this chapter and to make a written report of its findings and recommendations to the city council. Yearly, following receipt and examination of the zoning administrator's report of this chapter, the plan and zoning commission shall present a written annual report to the city council. This report shall contain the recommendations of the plan and zoning commission concerning this chapter as well as a summary of its activities during the past year and its opinion on community development goals for the future.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.04(4), 10-14-1980)


Secs. 56-801—56-823. - Reserved.


DIVISION 5. - AMENDMENTS



Sec. 56-824. - Applications.

 
(a)


(b)
 
Textual amendments. An application for amendment to the written text of this chapter may be filed by any government commissioner, agency or any interested resident of the city.
Rezoning. An application for rezoning may be filed by any government, commission, agency or any person with a financial, contractual or proprietary interest in the property to be affected by the proposed amendment.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.05(1), 10-14-1980)
 

Sec. 56-825. - Submission requirements.

 
(a)


(b)

(c)

(d)
 
An application for amendment to the text of this chapter or for rezoning any property in the city shall be filed in the office of the zoning administrator.
The application shall be signed by the applicant, and shall state his name and address.

Text amendments. An application for textual amendments to this chapter shall set forth the new text to be added and existing text to be deleted. Rezoning. An application for rezoning shall comply with the regulations governing rezoning as adopted by the plan and zoning commission and
filed with the city clerk.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.05(2), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-826. - Limitations on iling.

 
(a)
 
An application for amendment or rezoning shall not be accepted by the zoning administrator:
 

(1)

(2)
 

If it does not comply with all the requirements of this section and any regulations published under it.

If the application is for rezoning of any property which has been the subject of a previous application which was approved or denied within three months of this new application, except upon verification of the zoning administrator that substantial new facts which warrant re- application have been established.
 
(b)


(c)
 
An application for amendment or rezoning filed by the city council, plan and zoning commission or any other government, commission or agency may be accepted at any time regardless of the time limitations stated in subsection (a) of this section.
After acceptance for filing of an application by a private person for rezoning, the application may not be modified as to the area proposed to be rezoned as to the class of zone requested except with the approval of the zoning administrator or the plan and zoning commission.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.05(3), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-827. - Application review procedure.

 
(a)



(b)


(c)



(d)



(e)
 
Staff review. Before any final action may be taken by the plan and zoning commission or city council on an application for amendment or rezoning, including an application originating with the plan and zoning commission, the application shall be referred to the zoning administrator who shall coordinate analysis of the application by the planning staff and any other affected city departments.
Staff review report. The coordinated review of an application for amendment or rezoning shall be completed within 60 days of filing an application. The results of the review shall be compiled by the zoning administrator and reported by him to the plan and zoning commission.
Plan and zoning commission report. The plan and zoning commission shall report to the city council its decision on an application not originating with it within 60 days after receipt of the zoning administrator's report. In the event that the council does not receive the plan and zoning commission's report within this time period, the council shall consider the application to be recommended for disapproval.
Public hearing. In the event that the city council shall determine to proceed with an application submitted to it for amendment or rezoning, it shall hold a public hearing thereon. The council shall set a date for the hearing on the application and public notice of it shall be given. No application for amendment or rezoning may be approved until after such hearing is held.
Council action. Any ordinance that would amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the boundaries of zoning districts, or the uses, regulations or restrictions thereof, shall require five affirmative votes of the council in the case of an adverse report by the plan and zoning commission, or if a protest against such proposed amendment, change, modification or repeal shall be presented in writing to the city clerk, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of ten percent or more either of the area of the land (exclusive of streets, places and alleys) included within such proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal, or within an area of land determined by lines drawn parallel to and 300 feet (exclusive of streets, places and alleys) distance from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed or affected by amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal. Any ordinance that would amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the boundaries of zoning districts, the uses, regulations or restrictions and which receives an affirmative recommendation from the plan and zoning commission shall require four affirmative votes by the council.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.05(4), 10-14-1980)


Secs. 56-828—56-847. - Reserved.


DIVISION 6. - CONDITIONAL USES


Subdivision I. - In General



Sec. 56-848. - Purpose.
 

The principal objective of this division is to provide for an orderly arrangement of compatible building and land uses, and for the proper location of all types of uses required for the social and economic welfare of the city, and this chapter is based on the division of the entire city into districts in each of which are permitted specified uses that are basically compatible. In addition to such permitted, compatible uses, however, there are certain other uses which it may be necessary or desirable to allow in a given distinct, but which, because of their potential impact upon neighboring uses or public facilities or the planned development of the community, need to be carefully regulated with respect to location or operation for the protection of the community. Such uses are classified in this chapter as conditional uses, and are established and controlled by the provisions of this division.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.06(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 2, 6-10-1986; Ord. No. 4524, § 1, 3-24-1992; Ord. No. 4560, § 1, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4646, § 1, 5-24-
1994)


Sec. 56-849. - Authority.

The city council shall have the authority to issue by ordinance conditional use permits for uses of land and structures as designated in the regulations for each zoning district classification subject to the conditions, standards and procedures contained in this division as well as in such district regulations.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.06(2), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 2, 6-10-1986; Ord. No. 4524, § 1, 3-24-1992; Ord. No. 4560, § 1, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4646, § 1, 5-24-
1994)


Secs. 56-850—56-876. - Reserved.


Subdivision II. - Permits



Sec. 56-877. - Procedures for conditional use permit.

 
(a)






(b)
 
Applications. Applications for a conditional use permit shall include a site plan or an aerial depiction of the site in question and any necessary descriptive material relating to the intensity and extent of use and such other information as shall be required by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator may waive the site plan or aerial depiction requirement if it is determined that no exterior modifications, site modifications, parking issues or any other matters relating to the intensity and extent of use would necessitate said site plan or aerial depiction. An application for a conditional use permit may be filed only by the owner of the property in question or by a tenant, with the owner's permission.
Standards for conditional use permit approval. The zoning administrator shall post the property and mail notices to inform the public of the date, time and place of the plan and zoning commission meeting at which the conditional use permit application shall be considered, and of the date, time and place of the public hearing on such application to be held by the city council pursuant to this division. The zoning administrator shall refer the application to the plan and zoning commission to investigate and make a report and recommendation as to whether the following criteria are true with respect to the proposed conditional use:
 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)
 
Complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter;

At the specific location will contribute to and promote the community welfare or convenience; Will not cause substantial injury to the value of neighboring property;
Complies with the overall neighborhood development plan and existing zoning district provisions;

Will provide, if applicable, off-street parking and loading areas in accordance with the standards contained in this chapter; Will not substantially increase traffic hazards;
Will not substantially increase fire hazards; Will not overtax public utilities; and
Will not place an undue burden on municipal services.
 

(c)



(d)



(e)





(f)
 

Report and recommendation. Without unreasonable delay, and in all cases within 40 days after the first meeting at which the proposed conditional use is considered, the plan and zoning commission shall render to the city council a written report and recommendation on the proposed conditional use.
Hearing. Upon receipt of the report and the recommendation of the plan and zoning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the application and shall give notice of the date, time and place thereof by causing a notice thereof to be published at least one time, 15 days before the date of the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
Authorization. After such hearing, the city council shall, by majority vote, make a determination as to whether the proposed conditional use satisfies the criteria listed in subsection (b) of this section for the plan and zoning commission report and recommendation. If the city council makes an affirmative determination as to all of the criteria, a conditional use permit shall be granted. If the city council makes a negative determination as to any of the criteria, a conditional use permit shall not be granted.
Conditions. The plan and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may provide such terms, conditions or restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of the conditional use, as the plan and zoning commission or the city council may determine in order to
 

further the general objectives of this division and to minimize the possibility of injury to the value of property in the neighborhood.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.06(3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 2, 6-10-1986; Ord. No. 4524, § 1, 3-24-1992; Ord. No. 4560, § 1, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4646, § 1, 5-24-
1994; Ord. No. 5858, § I, 8-8-17)


Sec. 56-878. - Period of validity.

No conditional use permit granted by the council shall be valid for a period longer than 180 days from the date it grants the conditional use permit, unless within such period:
 

(1)

(2)
 

A building permit is obtained and the erection or alteration of the structure is commenced; or

A use permit or certificate of occupancy is obtained and the use commenced. The council may grant extensions not exceeding 180 days each, upon written application, without notice or hearing.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.06(4), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 2, 6-10-1986; Ord. No. 4524, § 1, 3-24-1992; Ord. No. 4560, § 1, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4646, § 1, 5-24-
1994)


Sec. 56-879. - Applicant's written acceptance of conditions, stipulations.

Upon approval of the conditional use permit by city council ordinance, the applicant must sign an affidavit accepting the conditions and/or stipulations of the conditional use permit. Failure to sign the affidavit will render the conditional use permit null and void.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.06(5), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 2, 6-10-1986; Ord. No. 4524, § 1, 3-24-1992; Ord. No. 4560, § 1, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4646, § 1, 5-24-
1994)


Sec. 56-880. - Group living facilities, group homes.

Group living facilities/group homes must comply with the following as conditions on a conditional use permit for such use:

 
(1)

(2)


(3)
 
Must meet adequate safety, sanitation and program standards and be properly licensed;

There shall be at least 1,500 feet between any two group living facilities/group homes, or between a group living facility/group home and any residential institution serving the mentally or physically handicapped;
The total population permitted to live in a group living facility/group home shall not exceed two percent of the city's population.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.06(6), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 2, 6-10-1986; Ord. No. 4524, § 1, 3-24-1992; Ord. No. 4560, § 1, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4646, § 1, 5-24-
1994)


Sec. 56-881. - Compliance and amendment.

All uses of property or structures which require a conditional use permit under the terms of the zoning district in which they are located may be used only in compliance with the conditional use permit authorizing such use or structure. Existing conditional use permits may be amended, provided that all applications for amendment must be granted or denied by the same procedures and standards contained in this division for new applications for conditional use permits.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.06(7), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 2, 6-10-1986; Ord. No. 4524, § 1, 3-24-1992; Ord. No. 4560, § 1, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4646, § 1, 5-24-
1994)


Sec. 56-882. - Transfer of conditional use permit.

All conditional use permits shall be approved for the original applicant only and for the specific location stated in the original application. Conditional use permits are not transferable to any other location, and conditional use permits may not be transferred to any person other than the original applicant prior to the commencement of the use. In the event a person or entity other than the original applicant desires to operate the use for which the conditional use permit was issued after the commencement of such use, a new conditional use permit shall be required in those instances in which:
 

(1)


(2)
 

The new person or entity proposes changes in the operations allowed under the conditional use permit that might affect the standards listed in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 8 7 7 (b); or
Changes are proposed in the site improvements or structures from those depicted in the site plan presented by the original applicant in connection with the issuance of the conditional use permit.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.06(8), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 2, 6-10-1986; Ord. No. 4524, § 1, 3-24-1992; Ord. No. 4560, § 1, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4646, § 1, 5-24-
1994)


Sec. 56-883. - Revocation of conditional use permit.
 

(a)



(b)
 

Authorization. A conditional use permit may be surrendered by the owner of the property for which it is issued, or by a tenant operating under the c use permit and in whose name the permit was issued (the "holder"), in which case it shall be deemed revoked and of no further force or effect. Furt council may revoke a conditional use permit in accordance with the procedure described below if the terms of the conditional use permit have been
Procedure for revocation by city council.
 

(1)







(2)





(3)





(4)



(5)



(6)
 

In addition to any other penalty or remedy provided in this chapter, in the event that the terms of a conditional use permit have been violated, a revocation of such permit may be initiated by the zoning administrator, the plan and zoning commission or the city council. Any proposition to revoke a conditional use permit on the grounds that the terms of the permit have been violated shall be referred to the plan and zoning commission, which shall give 15 days notice by certified mail to the property owner and to any holder of the conditional use permit, of the date, time and place of the meeting at which it will consider revocation of such permit, and of the reasons for considering revocation of the conditional use permit.
Any such notice shall be directed to such property owner at his last known address shown on the tax records for said property in the city offices, or if no such address is listed in the city offices, in the office of the county department of revenue. If no address of the property owner is indicated in the records of either the city or the county, no notice need be mailed to the property owner. In any event, the failure of the any party entitled to notice hereunder to receive the same, shall not invalidate any proceeding to revoke a conditional use permit.
The plan and zoning commission shall offer the property owner and any interested party an opportunity to be heard at any meeting at which it shall consider a proposition for revocation of a conditional use permit. The plan and zoning commission shall make its report and recommendation to the city council on the revocation of a conditional use permit within 80 days after such proposed revocation is submitted to the plan and zoning commission.
Upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the plan and zoning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed revocation. At least 15 days notice of the date, time and place of such hearing shall be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
Any revocation of a conditional use permit against the recommendation of the plan and zoning commission may be adopted only on the affirmative vote of three-fourths of the entire membership of the council. A conditional use permit revocation recommended by the plan and zoning commission may be effected by a majority vote of all members of the council.
Upon revocation of any conditional use permit, the property in a designated zoning district may be used only for such uses as are authorized for that property in that zoning district as though the revoked conditional use permit had not been granted.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.06(8), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4258, § 2, 6-10-1986; Ord. No. 4524, § 1, 3-24-1992; Ord. No. 4560, § 1, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4646, § 1, 5-24-
1994)


Secs. 56-884—56-914. - Reserved.


Subdivision III. - Sexually Oriented Businesses



Sec. 56-915. - Purpose.

Certain establishments and businesses are acknowledged to have special characteristics which may affect the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties; and it is the intent of these regulations to provide for the confinement of these establishments and businesses to those areas in the city in which these special impacts are judged to be least disruptive to the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties; and these regulations are further intended to require that these establishments and businesses shall not be permitted to be located in such concentration that their operational features may establish the dominant character of any area; and these regulations are further intended to protect and balance lawful rights of expression with other lawful rights to the enjoyment and the use of properties and these uses are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly if several such uses are concentrated, thereby having a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas and could contribute to blight and degradation of the surrounding neighborhood; and the special regulation of these establishments and businesses is necessary to ensure that the secondary effects of such uses will not contribute to the blighting of surrounding neighborhoods, whether residential or nonresidential but are restricted in use and concentrated so as to ensure the stability of such neighborhood.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.06A(A), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 5332, § II, 4-11-2006)


Sec. 56-916. - Deinitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited, wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by matters exhibiting specified sexual activities or
 

specified anatomical areas.

Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store means a commercial establishment which has ten percent or more of its stock-in-trade, or derives ten percent or more of its revenues or devotes ten percent or more of its interior business or advertising, or maintains ten percent or more of its sales or display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:
 

(1)



(2)
 

Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual representations, which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.
 

Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
Persons who appear seminude;

Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or

Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
 

Adult motel means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment, which:

 
(1)





(2)

(3)
 
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; and either
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or

Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
 

Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear nude or seminude, or live performances which are distinguished or characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.

Distinguished or characterized by means the dominant or principal theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas," the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

Escort means a person who, for consideration, and for another person, agrees or offers:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
To act as a companion, guide, or date; To privately model lingerie; or
To privately perform a striptease.
 

Escort agency means a person or business association that for a fee, tip, or other consideration, furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish, escorts as one of its primary business purposes.

Nude, nudity or state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.

Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.

Regularly featured or regularly shown means a consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business.

Seminude or in a seminude condition means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
 

Seminude model studio means a commercial establishment which regularly features a person who appears seminude and is provided to be observed, sketched, painted, sculptured, or photographed by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration, but shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; or a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.

Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial establishment, that as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities. The definition of sexual encounter center or any sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licenses by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.

Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, seminude model studio, or sexual encounter center.

Specified anatomical areas means:

 
(1)

(2)
 
The human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or

Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
 

Specified sexual activities means any of the following:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)
 
The fondling of another person's genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts;

Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.06A(B), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 5332, § II, 4-11-2006)


Sec. 56-917. - Special conditions.

In the case of any establishment or business described in this section, the following special conditions shall apply:

 
(1)







(2)






(3)

(4)
 
No sexually oriented business shall be permitted within 300 feet of any religious institution, school, public park or any property zoned or used for residential use. Such distance shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening properties from the closest point on any property line of the property in which such use shall propose to be located to the closest point on any property line of the religious institution, school, or public park, or the property zoned or used for residential use. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter a sexually oriented business which shall only be permitted in the HM Heavy Manufacturing District and only upon the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of this division.
No sexually oriented business shall be allowed to locate or expand within 300 feet of the property on which is situated any other sexually oriented business or of any business licensed to sell or serve alcoholic beverages whether or not such business is also a sexually oriented business. The distance between any two such establishments or between such establishment and a business selling or serving alcoholic beverages shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures from the closest point on any property line of the property on which any such establishment or business is located.
All access to and from sexually oriented business shall be provided from a street classified as a public right-of-way.

The facility in which the sexually oriented business is located shall be designed in such a fashion that all openings, entries and windows prevent view into such facilities from any pedestrian, sidewalk, walkway, street or other public area. No activity shall take place partially or totally outside the sexually oriented business.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.06A(C), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 5332, § II, 4-11-2006)


Sec. 56-918. - Subdivision additional to regulations elsewhere in Code.

The regulations contained in this subdivision shall be in addition to any and all regulations contained elsewhere in this Code. (Ord. No. 4062, § 905.06A(D), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 5332, § II, 4-11-2006)

Sec. 56-919. - Permitted only in HM district; conditional use permit required.

A sexually oriented business shall be permitted only in the HM district and only upon the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.06A(E), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 5332, § II, 4-11-2006)
 

Secs. 56-920—56-941. - Reserved.


DIVISION 7. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT


Subdivision I. - In General



Sec. 56-942. - Establishment.

The establishment of a board of adjustment is hereby authorized. It shall consist of five members, who shall serve without compensation and who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.07(1), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-943. - Membership.

 
(a)

(b)



(c)
 
The board of adjustment shall consist of five members who shall be freeholders of the city.

The term of office of the members of the board of adjustment shall be for five years, excepting that the five members first appointed shall serve respectively for terms of one year, two years, three years, four years and five years each. All members shall be removable for cause by the city council upon written charges and after a public hearing.
Vacancies upon the board shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant in the same manner as provided for the appointment of such member. The board of adjustment shall elect its own chairperson who shall serve for one year.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.07(2), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-944. - Powers and duties.

The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties:

 
(1)

(2)


(3)
 
To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under this chapter.

To hear appeals in the manner prescribed in subdivision II of this division where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator in the enforcement of this chapter.
To vary or modify in the manner prescribed in subdivision III of this division the application of any of the provisions of this chapter where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.07(3), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-945. - Review and procedure.

 
(a)

(b)
 
Meetings. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine.

Hearings and rules.
 

(1)

(2)

(3)
 

All hearings on appeals and applications for variances that this chapter requires of this board shall be open to the public. The board shall set a date for any required hearings and public notice of them shall be given to the parties in interest.
All testimony at such hearings shall be given under oath. The chairperson, or in his absence the acting chairperson, shall administer the oaths and may compel the attendance of witnesses.
 
(c)
 
Minutes. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed with the city clerk. A summary of all testimony, objections thereto and rulings thereon, shall be prepared by a reporter employed by the board for this purpose. The findings of the board shall be complete, detailed and set forth for its decision.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.07(4), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-946. - Finality and judicial review of decisions.

All decisions of the board of adjustment shall be final decisions and shall in all instances be subject to judicial review in the manner provided by the applicable state statutes.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.07(5), 10-14-1980)


Secs. 56-947—56-965. - Reserved.
 

Subdivision II. - Appeals



Sec. 56-966. - Authorization.

Appeals to the board of adjustment concerning the interpretation or administration of this chapter may be taken by any aggrieved person, administrative body, officer, agency or commission of the city affected by any decision of the zoning administrator.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.08(1), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-967. - Time for appeals.

Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days from the time the incident appealed from occurred. (Ord. No. 4062, § 905.08(2), 10-14-1980)

Sec. 56-968. - Filing.

The aggrieved party shall file his appeal, specifying the grounds thereof with the city clerk or directly with the board of adjustment all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.08(3), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-969. - Stay of proceedings; hearing and procedural rules.

 
(a)





(b)
 
Stay of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator certifies by
letter to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal is filed with him that, by reason of specific facts stated in the letter, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. Otherwise, proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be
granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the zoning administrator and on due cause shown.

Hearing and procedural rules. See s e c t i o n 5 6 - 9 4 5 (b).
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.08(4), (5), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-970. - Decisions.

 
(a)


(b)
 
The board of adjustment may affirm or reverse, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the zoning administrator.
The concurring vote of four members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator under this chapter. The board shall render a written decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay after the close of the public hearing, and in all cases within 60 days after the close of the public hearing.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.08(6), 10-14-1980)


Secs. 56-971—56-998. - Reserved.


Subdivision III. - Variances



Sec. 56-999. - Authorization.

The board of adjustment may authorize variances where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. However, no variance shall be authorized unless the board of adjustment determines that the standards set forth in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 1 0 0 1 have been complied with.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.09(1), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 10-8-1991)


Sec. 56-1000. - Filing and submission requirements; hearing and procedural rules.

 
(a)
 
Filing and submission requirements. An application for a variance shall be filed in the office of the zoning administrator, who shall forward the application to the board of adjustment. The application shall contain the following information as well as such additional information as the board of adjustment may prescribe by regulation filed with the city clerk:
 
(1)

(2)
 
The particular requirements of this chapter which prevent the proposed use or construction;

The characteristics of the subject property which prevent compliance with the requirements of this chapter;
 

(3)

(4)
 

The particular hardship which would result if the particular requirements of this chapter were applied to the subject property; and The reduction of the minimum requirements of this chapter which would be necessary to permit the proposed use or construction.
 
(b)
 
Hearing and procedural rules. See s e c t i o n 5 6 - 9 4 5 (b).
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.09(2), (3), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 10-8-1991)


Sec. 56-1001. - Standards.

The board of adjustment shall not grant a variance as authorized in this division unless it shall, in each case, make specific written findings of fact directly based upon the particular evidence presented to it that support the following conclusions:
 

(1)


(2)

(3)


(4)

(5)
 

The variance requested arises from a condition which is unique to the property in question and which is not ordinarily found in the same zoning district, and is not created by an action or actions of the property owner or the applicant;
The granting of the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or residents;

The strict application of the provisions of this chapter from which a variance is requested will constitute unnecessary hardship upon the property owner represented in the application;
The variance desired will not adversely affect the public health, safety, order, convenience or general welfare of the community; and Granting the variance desired will not violate the general spirit and intent of this chapter.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.09(4), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 10-8-1991)


Sec. 56-1002. - Review considerations.

In determining whether the evidence presented supports the conclusions required by s e c t i o n 5 6 - 1 0 0 1 , the board of adjustment shall consider the extent to which the evidence demonstrates that:
 

(1)



(2)


(3)


(4)
 

The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical condition of the property involved would result in a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship upon or for the owner, lessee or occupant, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the provisions of this chapter were literally enforced;
The request for a variance is not based exclusively upon the desire of the owner, lessee, occupant or applicant to secure a greater financial return from the property;
The granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located; and
The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light or air to adjacent property, substantially increase the congestion in the public streets, increase the danger of fire, endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.09(5), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 10-8-1991)


Sec. 56-1003. - Conditions and restrictions.

In granting a variance, the board of adjustment may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the property benefited by the variance as may be necessary to comply with the standards set out in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 1 0 0 1 to deduce or minimize any potentially injurious effect of such variance upon other property in the neighborhood, and to carry out the general purpose and intent of this chapter. Failure to comply with any of these conditions or restrictions shall constitute a violation of this chapter punishable as provided in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 4 .

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.09(6), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 10-8-1991)


Sec. 56-1004. - Decisions and records.

The board of adjustment shall render a written decision on an application for a variance without unreasonable delay and in no case after more than 30 days of the public hearing.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.09(7), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 10-8-1991)


Sec. 56-1005. - Period of validity.

 
(a)
 
No variance granted by the board of adjustment shall be valid for a period longer than 180 days from the date on which it grants the variance, unless within such period:
 
(1)

(2)
 
A building permit is obtained and the construction, alteration or moving of the structure is commenced (division 3 of this article). A use permit is obtained and a use commenced (section 5 6 - 7 7 2 ).
 

 
(b)
 
The board of adjustment may grant extensions not exceeding 180 days each, upon written application, without notice or hearing.
 

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.09(8), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 10-8-1991)


Sec. 56-1006. - Reconstruction.

In circumstances involving the reconstruction of any previously existing accessory use to an existing residential structure, the zoning administrator, may, but shall not be required to, grant an administrative variance from the applicable side and rear yard setback requirements subject to and in accordance with the standards, considerations and limitations contained in sections 5 6 - 1 0 0 1 through 5 6 - 1 0 0 4 . In the event that the zoning administrator declines to consider, denies an administrative variance, or approves an administrative variance with modifications or conditions unacceptable to the applicant, the applicant shall be entitled to seek a variance directly from the board of adjustment. In addition, any person aggrieved by a decision of the zoning administrator granting an administrative variance may appeal to the board of adjustment as provided in subdivision II of this division. No variance granted by the zoning administrator shall remain valid unless the authorized reconstruction of the accessory use commences within 12 months after demolition of the previously existing structure.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.09(9), 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 10-8-1991)


Secs. 56-1007—56-1025. - Reserved.


DIVISION 8. - SITE PLAN REVIEW



Sec. 56-1026. - Applications.

Applications for site plan review may be filed by any person with a financial, contractual or proprietary interest in the property to be developed according to the submitted plan.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.10(1), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-1027. - Filing and submission requirements.

All applications for site plan review shall be filed in the office of the zoning administrator. The application for site plan review shall contain the following information as well as such additional information as the plan and zoning commission may prescribe by any regulations filed with the city clerk:
 

(1)

(2)



(3)
 

All applications shall be signed by the applicant and shall state his name and address.

The site plan shall include all necessary data and drawings in order that the zoning administrator can determine if the proposed use complies with the district requirements and that the other city departments affected by the project may assess the impact of the proposed development on public facilities and services and on the surrounding area.
The data and drawings required shall include, but not be limited to:
 

a.	The location of the site and its relationship to surrounding uses;

b.	The location and size of each building on the site;

c.	The height, number of stories and form of the proposed building or buildings;

d.	The number of square feet of lot area;

e.	The ratio of floor area to the site area and the residential density;

f.	The location and general design and width of driveways, curbcuts and sidewalks;

g.	The location, area and number of proposed parking spaces;

h.	The general use and development of the site, including all recreation and open space areas, plazas, all major landscaping and all buffering from adjacent activities or uses;
i.	The location and identification of any other proposed facilities. More specific submission requirements shall be separately published as administrative regulations and filed with the city clerk; and
j.	Topography of site and contiguous edges of adjacent parcels.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.10(2), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-1028. - Review procedure.

 
(a)


(b)
 
The zoning administrator shall coordinate the analysis of the site plan application by the planning staff and any other affected city departments before any final action may be taken by the city council on the application.
This coordinated administrative review of the application shall be completed within 60 days of filing. The results of this review shall be compiled by the zoning administrator and reported by him to the city council for its consideration.
 

(c)
 

When an application for site plan approval is filed in conjunction with an application for rezoning, the city council must await the recommendations and zoning commission as to the rezoning before it may act upon the site plan application. After the city council receives this site plan application a associated documents, the council shall review the application and report it has received from the zoning administrator. The city council may then e approve, disapprove or conditionally approve the site plan application.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.10(3), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-1029. - Conditions and restrictions.

 
(a)


(b)


(c)
 
In approving a site plan application the city council may impose conditions and restrictions and may vary the standards set forth in this chapter so long as the general intent of this chapter is carried out. However, use regulations shall not be varied so as to make them less restrictive.
If the city council so acts, it shall designate specific requirements which must be met before an applicant may be granted final site plan approval and a building permit.
The city council may then delegate to the zoning administrator the power to grant the final approval of the site plan application when he has determined that the specifically prescribed conditions have been met by the applicant. Failure to comply with any of these conditions or restrictions shall constitute a violation of this chapter punishable as provided in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 4 .
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.10(4), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-1030. - Period of validity.

No site plan approval by the city council shall be valid for a period longer than 12 months from the date it approves the site plan application, unless within such period a building permit is obtained and construction is commenced. The city council may grant extensions not exceeding 12 months each upon written request of the original applicant if the application submitted is substantially the same as the initially approved application. However, the city council has the power in such cases to attach new conditions to its re-approval or disapprove the re-application. Where the application for re-approval contained changes which the city council concludes materially alter the initial application, it shall refer the application to the zoning administrator who shall initiate a new site plan review procedure as stated in this division.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.10(5), 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-1031. - Site plan and building use permits.

The zoning administrator shall not certify an application for a building permit or issue a use permit for any building or structure within a project that has undergone site plan approval unless that building or structure is in substantial compliance with the site plans which were approved by the city council.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 905.10(6), 10-14-1980)


Secs. 56-1032—56-1060. - Reserved.


ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMITIES



Sec. 56-1061. - Nonconforming lots of record.

 
(a)
 
Residential districts.
 

(1)
 

In any residential district, notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a single-family detached dwelling which complies with the restrictions in subsection (a)(2) of this section may be erected on a lot that is not less than 40 feet fronting on a public right-of-way or private street and that consists entirely of a tract of land that:
 
a.	Has less than the prescribed minimum lot area or minimum average dimension, or both, for the district;

b.	Is shown by a recorded plat or deed to have been owned separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when the creation of a lot of such size and width at such location would not have been prohibited by any zoning chapter; and
c.	Has remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining tracts of land continually during the entire time that creation of such lot has been prohibited by the applicable zoning chapter or chapters.
 
(2)
 
Construction permitted by subsection (a)(1) of this section shall comply with all of the provisions, except lot area and/or minimum average dimension applicable; provided, however, that the following side yard requirements shall apply in place of the side yard requirements otherwise applicable:
 
a.	The dwelling shall be placed on the lot so as to provide a yard on each side of the dwelling;

b.	The sum of the widths of the two side yards on each lot shall be not less than 25 percent of the width of the lot; or

c.	No side yard shall be less than ten percent of the width of the lot and in no case less than five feet, except in a district allowing zero lot line development (row houses, patio houses, duplexes), in which case the regulations of the district shall apply.
 

(b)
 

Nonresidential districts. In any district other than a residential district, notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a building entirely devot use may be located on a lot that is not less than 40 feet in width and that consists entirely of a tract of land that:
 
(1)

(2)


(3)
 
Has less than the prescribed minimum lot area or minimum average dimension or both for the district;

Is shown by a recorded plat or deed to have been owned separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when the creation of a lot of such size and width at such location would not have been prohibited by this chapter; and
Has remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining tracts of land continually during the entire time that creation of such lot has been prohibited by this chapter.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 906.01, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-1062. - Nonconforming structures.

 
(a)


(b)






(c)
 
Authority to continue. Any nonconforming structure which is devoted to a use which is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the restrictions in subsections (b) through (d) of this section.
Enlargement, repair, alterations. Any such structure described in subsection (a) of this section may be enlarged, maintained, repaired or remodeled; provided, however, that no such enlargement, maintenance, repair or remodeling shall either create any additional nonconformity or increase the degree of existing nonconformity of all or any part of such structure, except that structures located on a lot that does not comply with the applicable lot size requirements, the side yard requirements shall be as determined by s e c t i o n 5 6 - 1 0 6 1 (a)(2) or (b), whichever is applicable.
Decayed, damaged or destroyed.
 

(1)





(2)
 

In the event that a nonconforming structure is decayed, damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost, such structure shall not be restored unless it shall thereafter conform to the provisions for that zoning district in which it is located, provided that a structure located on a nonconforming lot of record may be restored in accordance with requirements for construction set forth in s e c t i o n 5 6 - 1 0 6 1 .
When a structure is decayed, damaged or destroyed to the extent of between 25 and 50 percent of replacement cost, no repairs or restoration shall be made unless a building permit is obtained and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date such partial destruction occurred and is diligently pursued to completion.
 
(d)
 
Moving. No structure described in subsection (a) of this section shall be moved in whole or in part for any distance whatever to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the zoning district in which it is located after being moved.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 906.02, 10-14-1980)


Sec. 56-1063. - Nonconforming uses.

 
(a)



(b)
 
Authority to continue. Any lawful existing nonconforming use of part or all of a structure or any lawfully existing nonconforming use of land, not involving a structure or only involving a structure which is accessory to such use of land may be continued, so long as otherwise lawful, subject to the provisions contained in subsections (b) through (j) of this section.
Ordinary repair and maintenance.
 

(1)
 

The following normal maintenance and incidental repair may be performed on any structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be deemed to authorize any violation of subsections (c) through (i) of this section:
 
a.	Repair, replacement, installation or relocation of nonbearing walls, nonbearing partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing;

b.	Replacement or installation of floor covering, wall covering or paint, ceiling materials, or lighting; or

c.	Any repair, maintenance, replacement or installation required to comply with applicable federal, state or local laws or ordinances.
 

(2)
 

Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring of a structure to a safe condition in accordance with an order of a public official who is charged with protecting the public safety and who declares such structure to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition (where such restoration will not be in violation of s e c t i o n 5 6 - 1 0 6 2 ).
 
(c)


(d)
 
Remodeling. No structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use shall be remodeled, unless the entire structure and use thereof shall thereafter conform to all provisions of the zoning district in which it is located.
Extension. A nonconforming use shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged or increased in intensity. Such prohibited activities shall include, without being limited to:
 
(1)



(2)
 
Extension of such use to any structure or land area other than one occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (or on the effective date of a subsequent amendment hereto that causes such use to become nonconforming).
Extension of such use within a building or other structure to any portion of the floor area that was not occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (or on the effective date of a subsequent amendment hereto that
 

causes such use to become nonconforming); provided, however, that such use may be extended throughout any part of such building or other structure that was lawfully and manifestly designed or arranged for such use on such effective date.
 
(3)
 
Operation of such nonconforming use in such manner as to conflict with, or to further conflict with if already conflicting on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (or on the effective date of a subsequent amendment hereto that results in such use becoming nonconforming), any performance standards established for the district in which such use is located.
 
(e)


(f)
 
Enlargement. No structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged or added to in any manner, unless such structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the district in which it is located.
Decayed, damaged or destroyed.
 

(1)



(2)
 

In the event that any structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use is decayed, damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost, such structure and use thereof shall thereafter conform to all the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
When such damage, decay or destruction is between 50 and 25 percent of replacement cost, no repairs or restoration shall be made, unless a building permit is obtained and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
 
(g)








(h)


(i)



(j)


(k)





(l)
 
Moving. No structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part for any distance whatever to any other location on the same or any other lot, unless the entire structure and use thereof shall thereafter conform to all provisions of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved. No nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part for any distance whatever to any other location on the same or any other lot, unless the entire structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all provisions of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved. No nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part for any distance whatever to any other location on the same or any other lot, unless such use shall thereafter conform to all provisions of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved.
Change in use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any use other than a use permitted in the zoning district in which the use is located. When a nonconforming use has been changed to any permitted use, it shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use.
Abandonment or discontinuance. When a nonconforming use of land is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six consecutive months (regardless of any reservation of intent not to abandon or to resume such use), such use shall not thereafter be reestablished or resumed, and any subsequent use or occupancy of such land or building shall comply with the provisions of the zoning district in which such land is located.
Nonconforming accessory uses. No use which is accessory to a principal nonconforming use shall continue after such principal use shall cease or terminate.
Nonconforming residential. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (d) and (e) of this section, any structure which is devoted exclusively to a residential use and which is located in a business or manufacturing district may be remodeled, extended, expanded and enlarged; provided that, after any such remodeling, extension, expansion or enlargement, such structure shall not be used to accommodate a greater number of dwelling or lodging units than such structure accommodated prior to work.
Nonconforming use of an existing structure. Notwithstanding provisions of s e c t i o n 5 6 - 8 4 8 and subsections (h) and (i) of this section, upon the recommendation of the plan and zoning commission, the council may issue a conditional use permit for a nonconforming use of an existing structure, if, following a public hearing, the city council shall determine that:
 
(1)

(2)
 
The proposed use is consistent with the design, construction and original intended use of the structure; and

The proposed use serves a community need, and no detrimental effect will be made upon the character of the zoning district in which the conditional use is proposed.
 
The council may limit the term of the conditional use permit. The granting of a conditional use permit shall not be construed as continuing the nonconforming use beyond the term of the permit, nor extended to any other nonconforming use nor to any other occupant or use.

(Ord. No. 4062, § 906.03, 10-14-1980; Ord. No. 4200, § 1, 2-26-1985; Ord. No. 4280, § 1, 1-27-1987; Ord. No. 4647, § 6, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 4858, § I, 11-10-1998)


Sec. 56-1064. - Status of conditional uses.

 
(a)





(b)



(c)
 
Status of existing conditional uses. Where a use exists at the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and is permitted by this section only as a conditional use in the zoning district in which it is located, such use shall not be deemed to be a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a lawful conforming conditional use in such zoning district, unless there is a failure to comply with the conditions of use.
Status of future conditional uses. Any use for which a conditional use permit has been issued as provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter shall not be deemed to be a nonconforming use but shall, without further action, be deemed a lawful conforming use, unless there is a failure to comply with the conditions of use.
Termination of conditional uses. Any use for which a conditional use permit has been issued as provided in article IV, division 6 of this chapter shall, upon termination of said use, return to the designated zoning district and shall be subject to the regulations of that district.
 
(Ord. No. 4062, § 906.04, 10-14-1980)
 

