CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF MARSHALL, MISSOURI 
____________ 
CONTAINING 
THE GENERAL ORDINANCES 
OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Published in 1984 by Order of the City Council 

PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Marshall of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1967 Code as supplemented through November 5, 1979, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1967 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table, also appearing in the back of the volume, any ordinance included herein can be readily found in the Code. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the third section of Chapter 4 is 4-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places simply, by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 4-2 and 4-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-2.1, 4-2.2 and 4-2.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Bill Carroll, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Donald Stouffer, City Counselor and Mrs. Dorothy Hughes, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 6057 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances for the City of Marshall; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
    Be It Ordained by the Council of the City of Marshall, Missouri, as follows: 
    Section 1. The Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 32, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Marshall, Missouri" which Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the city adopted on or before September 6, 1983, to the extent provided in section 2 hereof. 
    Section 2. All provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after February 4, 1985, and all conflicting provisions of ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on final passage on or before September 6, 1983, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of such Code. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Any person convicted of a violation of such Code shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-10 thereof, or as provided in any other applicable section of such Code. 
    Section 5. Any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code, so that reference to such Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-10 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section 7. Any ordinance adopted after September 6, 1983, which amends or refers to ordinances which have been codified in such Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of such Code. 
    Section 8. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
    Sections 9-24. 
Editor's note- Sections 9-24 of this ordinance amend, add or repeal the following Code sections: §§ 2-1, 2-51, 2-85(16), 2-86, 2-87, 2-100(2), 2-101, 2-349, 4-66(5), 11-6, 11-7, 17-1(2), 18-86, 22-33, 31-6(5), 28-1-28-3 and 31-50-31-58, to which the interested user should turn, inasmuch as §§ 9-24 of this ordinance have not been set out herein due to their length. See also the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume for the complete disposition of this ordinance. 
    Section 25. The City of Marshall has heretofore provided for the assessment of taxes by the county assessor and, as of April 15, 1985, for the collection of city taxes by the county collector. The collection and assessment of taxes for the City of Marshall, by the county collector and the county assessor, shall be as provided by the Revised Statutes of Missouri. Nothing contained herein which operates to repeal any ordinance relating to the performance of the duties by the city collector shall become effective until April 15, 1985. 
    Section 26. This ordinance and the Code adopted hereby, shall become effective February 4, 1985. 
    Passed by the Council of the City of Marshall, Missouri, this 4th day of February, 1985. 
/s/Shirley J. Martin
President
    Approved by the Mayor this 4th day of February, 1985. 
SEAL 
/s/Shirley J. Martin
Mayor
    Filed this 4th day of February, 1985. 
/s/Dorothy Hughes
  City Clerk 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Marshall, Missouri," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1967, § 1-1)
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction.[1] 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council: 
    City; corporation. Whenever the words "the city," "this city," "the corporation" or "this corporation" are used they shall be construed as if the words "of Marshall, Missouri" followed them. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be counted. If the last day is Sunday it shall be excluded. 
State Law reference- Similar construction, RSMo 1.040. 
    Corporate limits, corporation limits. Whenever the words "corporate limits," "corporation limits" or "city limits" are used they shall mean the legal boundary of the City of Marshall. 
    Council. Whenever the word "council" is used, it shall be construed to mean the council of the City of Marshall. 
    Councilman. The word "councilman" shall mean any person elected to that office and shall include those persons who hold other offices and who are ex officio. 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Saline in the State of Missouri. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference- Similar construction, RSMo 1.030. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such, persons or officers. 
State Law reference- 
Similar construction, RSMo 1.050. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms; associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Mayor. Whenever the word "mayor" is used it shall mean the mayor of the City of Marshall. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Marshall" were added. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
State Law reference- Similar construction, RSMo 1.030. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, RSMo 1.020(10). 
    Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, RSMo 1.020(11). 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, and all beaches, canals or other waterways. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, RSMo 1.020(12). 
    Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
    Seal. Whenever the word "seal" is used it shall mean the city or corporate seal. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Missouri. 
    Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
    Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such buildings or lands, either alone or with others. 
    Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days. 
    Written, in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, RSMo 1.020(17). 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2)
State Law reference- Similar definition, RSMo 1.020(6). 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Definitions, rules of construction, etc., RSMo 1.020 et seq.

Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; other headings. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, or as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. Chapter, article and division headings shall be treated in the same manner. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3)
Sec. 1-4. - History notes and references. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses following most sections, and the references and notes appearing in 8-point type throughout the Code, are inserted to assist the user of the Code and shall carry no legal import. 
Sec. 1-5. - Certain ordinances not affected by code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)	Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)	The administrative ordinances of the city;
(3)	Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city;
(4)	Any appropriation ordinance;
(5)	Any right or franchise granted by the city council of the city to any person;
(6)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(7)	Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(8)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor;
(9)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city, or providing regulations for the same; 
(10)	Any ordinance annexing property to the city;
(11)	Any zoning ordinance;
(12)	Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as but not limited to: Prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(13)	Any ordinance fixing utility rates and charges;
nor shall such repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance which is repealed by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4583, § 3, 2-6-67)
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1967, § 1-4)
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the council. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Marshall, Missouri, is hereby amended to read as follows: ____________(Set out new provisions in full) ____________" 
(c)	When the council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the council desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language shall be made a part of the ordinance: "Section ... It is the intention of the governing body, and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Marshall, Missouri, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1967, § 1-6)
Sec. 1-8. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1967, § 1-7)
State Law reference- Tampering with a public record, RSMo 575.210. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1967, § 1-5)
Sec. 1-10. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code, ordinance or resolution the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance or resolution shall constitute disorderly conduct and shall be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months or both, as may be just for any offense, recoverable with costs of suit, together with judgment of imprisonment, until the fine and costs are paid or satisfied; and any person committed for the nonpayment of fine and costs, or either, may be compelled to work out the same as herein provided; but, in any case wherein the penalty for an offense is fixed by any statute, the same penalty shall be used for the punishment of such offense, except that imprisonments when made under city ordinances, may be in the city jail or workhouse instead of the county jail. 
(b)	Each day any violation of any provision of this code or of any such ordinance or resolution shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)	In addition to the penalty hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code or any such ordinance or resolution shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city, abated as provided, by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1967, § 1-8)
State Law reference- Limitation upon penalty, RSMo 77.590. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administrative ordinances saved from repeal, § 1-5(2); ordinances fixing salaries of officers or employees saved from repeal, § 1-5(3); contractors board, § 7-18 et seq.; electrical inspector, § 7-31 et seq.; board of examiners of electricians, § 7-66 et seq.; board of plumbing examiners, § 7-116 et seq.; housing board of adjustments and appeals, § 7-128; local disaster planning organization, § 8-11 et seq.; affirmative action plan adopted, § 9-1; commission on human relations, § 9-18; court, Ch. 10; municipal judge, § 10-16 et seq.; elections, Ch. 11; fire department, § 12-16 et seq.; grievance committee for fire department, § 12-28; health officer § 15-16 et seq.; offenses against public administration, § 18-16 et seq.; park board, § 19-21 et seq.; park board advisory council, § 19-42 et seq.; police, Ch. 22; police department, § 22-16 et seq.; personnel board for police, § 22-46 et seq.; policemen's advisory committee, § 22-86 et seq.; subdivision and development board, § 27-3; taxation, Ch. 28; administration and enforcement of traffic and motor vehicles, § 29-26 et seq.; traffic commission, § 29-29; traffic violations bureau, § 29-56 et seq.; parking control department, § 29-237; board of public works, § 30-21 et seq.
State Law reference- Cities of the 3rd Class generally, RSMo Ch. 77; provisions relative to all cities, RSMo 71.010 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Departments of city government designated. 
    For the purpose of properly conducting the government of the city, the council hereby creates the departments of police, fire, emergency management, inspection, city clerk, finance, municipal services, band and airport. 
(Code 1967, § 2-5; Ord. No. 5947, § 3, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 6047, § 3, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 6676, § 1, 2-1-93) 
Sec. 2-2. - Removal of documents from city clerk's office. 
    No member of the council or other person shall take any paper or document from the clerk's office without leave, and all papers and documents withdrawn therefrom with leave, shall be returned by the person withdrawing the same uninjured and not defaced. All papers and documents delivered to a committee of council or officer by the clerk for the purpose of reporting thereon, shall be returned by the committee or officer at the time of making report. 
(Code 1967, § 2-3)
Secs. 2-3-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to compel attendance of witnesses, production of papers, RSMo § 77.100; semiannual statements, RSMo 77.110; powers and duties of mayor and council generally, RSMo 77.260; city council to approve appointments by mayor, RSMo 77.330; removal of elective appointive officers, RSMo 77.340; authority to fix compensation of officers and employees, RSMo 77.440; prohibited financial interests of city officers, RSMo 77.470.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-16. - Membership of council; election by wards. 
    Until otherwise provided by ordinance, the city council shall consist of eight (8) members, two (2) of whom shall be chosen from each ward of the city in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the state governing cities of the third class. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-23, 11-6)
State Law reference- Councilmen to be elected by wards, annually and in alternate years, RSMo 77.030. 
Sec. 2-17. - Qualifications of councilmen. 
    No person shall be councilman unless he is at least twenty-one (21) years of age prior to taking office, a citizen of the United States, and an inhabitant of the city for one year next preceding his election, and a resident of the ward from which he is elected six (6) months next preceding his election. 
(Code 1967, § 11-7)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 77.060. 
Sec. 2-18. - Effect of removal from ward. 
    Whenever a councilman removes from the ward in which he is councilman, such office shall thereby become vacant and the council shall so declare of record. 
(Code 1967, § 2-24)
Sec. 2-19. - Oath of office. 
    Before entering upon the duties of their office, each councilman shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation before some court of record in the county, or the city clerk or municipal judge, that he possesses all the qualifications prescribed for his office by law, that he will support the Constitution of the United States, and of the State of Missouri, the provisions of all laws of this state affecting cities of the third class and the ordinances of the city, and faithfully demean himself in office. 
(Code 1967, § 2-25)
State Law reference- Oath of office of councilman, RSMo 77.390. 
Sec. 2-20. - Compensation. 
    Each member of the council shall receive as compensation for his services such sum as shall be provided by resolution or ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 2-26)
Sec. 2-21. - Resignation from office. 
    Resignations of councilmen shall be in writing and addressed to the president of the council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-27)
Secs. 2-22-2-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 

Sec. 2-26. - Meetings generally. 
    All meetings of the city council shall be held at such times as the city council may prescribe by resolution. Adjourned meetings shall be held whenever the council shall deem it necessary. 
(Code 1967, § 2-28)
Sec. 2-27. - Special meetings; notice; conduct of business. 
    The mayor, or person acting as mayor, or any three (3) members of the city council, shall have the power and are hereby authorized to call a special meeting of the city council, by serving a notice in writing on each member of the council and the mayor, or person acting as mayor, by delivering to each of them a copy of such notice, or by leaving such copy at his usual place of abode with some inhabitant thereof over the age of fifteen (15) years; and such notice shall state the object of such meeting and the time for holding the same, and such notice shall be written out at length and copied upon the journal of the council proceedings; provided that no business other than that specified in such written notice shall be transacted at such special meeting. 
(Code 1967, § 2-29)
Sec. 2-28. - Duty to attend meetings. 
    No member of the city council shall absent himself from any regular meeting thereof, nor from any adjourned or special meeting after due notice thereof, unless he has leave, or is sick and unable to attend, or is otherwise prevented by circumstances beyond his control; and any member absenting himself without having such excuse, shall be fined not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five dollars ($5.00) unless such fine be remitted by a two-thirds majority of the members elected to the council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-30)
Sec. 2-29. - Chief of police as ex officio sergeant-at-arms. 
    The chief of police shall be ex officio sergeant-at-arms of the city council and shall attend its meetings and execute all its orders. 
(Code 1967, § 2-31)
Sec. 2-30. - Quorum prescribed; authority in absence of quorum. 
    A majority of the members elected to the council shall constitute a quorum to do business, but any two (2) members, including the mayor, may have a roll call of the council, send for and compel the attendance of absent members, and make an order for their censure or fine. 
(Code 1967, § 2-32)
Sec. 2-31. - Order of business at regular meetings. 
    The city council shall prescribe by resolution its own rules of procedure for conducting its business at its regular meetings. 
(Code 1967, § 2-33)
Sec. 2-32. - Order of business at special meetings. 
    The business of special meetings shall be disposed of in the following order: 
(1)	Message or statement from the president of the council as to the cause of convening the council in special sessions. 
(2)	Consideration and disposition of the business mentioned in the president's message or statement. 
(Code 1967, § 2-34)
Sec. 2-33. - Application of Robert's Rules of Order. 
    In the event a matter should arise during a regular or special meeting of the city council, to which the rules of procedure of the city council do not apply, then the rules of procedure outlined in Robert's Rules of Order governing parliamentary procedure, insofar as the same are applicable, shall control. 
(Code 1967, § 2-35)
Sec. 2-34. - Duty of mayor to sign commissions, appointments, approve bonds; execution, record of warrants. 
    The mayor shall sign the commissions and appointments of all officers elected or appointed in the city, and approve all official bonds. He shall sign all licenses issued and warrants drawn upon the city treasury for money and cause the city clerk to attest the same, and affix thereto the seal of the city to keep proper record thereof in books to be provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9)
State Law reference- Provisions as to mayor of third class city, RSMo 77.230 et seq.; mayor to sign commissions, appointments, approve official bonds, RSMo 77.320. 
Secs. 2-35-2-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LEGISLATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Enactment of ordinance generally, RSMo 77.080; approval of mayor, veto, becoming law without signature of mayor, RSMo 77.270.

Sec. 2-41. - Title of bill. 
    The title of every bill shall indicate the purposes or objects sought to be accomplished thereby. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2)
Sec. 2-42. - Procedure for enactment of ordinances. 
    All bills proposed as ordinances shall have their separate readings: 
(1)	The first reading, by title or in full, at which time amendments may be presented and discussion may be had; and 
(2)	The second reading, at which time the names of the members voting for and against the same shall be entered on the journal. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1; Ord. No. 6360, § 1, 10-17-88; Ord. No. 6676, § 2, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-43. - Effective date of ordinances. 
    All ordinances shall take effect upon their adoption unless an ordinance shall otherwise specify the time when it shall go into effect. 
(Code 1967, § 1-11)
Sec. 2-44. - Recording by city clerk; certificate of publication. 
    All ordinances passed by the council shall be recorded by the city clerk in a proper book or books, with indexes. The originals shall be filed in the city clerk's office; and due proof of the publication of all ordinances requiring publication, by the certificate of the publisher or printer, shall be procured by the clerk, and attached thereto, or written and attested upon the face of the record of such ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 1-10)
Secs. 2-45-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-51. - Designation of committees to administer business of departments. 
    At the first regular meeting of the city council in May of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the mayor shall appoint the following committees to administer the business of the departments created in section 2-1: municipal services and personnel; property, finance, budget and audit; community development and code; and public relations and public safety. The mayor shall name and designate the chairman of each committee, and prescribe the duties thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 2-6; Ord. No. 5685, § 1, 4-20-81; Ord. No. 5947, § 4, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 6057, § 9, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 6676, § 3, 2-1-93; Ord. No. 6897, § 1, 8-7-95; Ord. No. 7672, § 1, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 2-52. - Duties, meetings. 
    The committees designated in section 2-51 shall meet at such times and perform such duties as the mayor shall prescribe. 
(Code 1967, § 2-7)
Sec. 2-53. - Mayor as ex officio member of committees. 
    The mayor of the city shall be an ex officio member of each cominittee of the city government and while serving therewith shall be chairman thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 2-8)
Secs. 2-54-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees saved from repeal, § 1-5(3); electrical inspector, § 7-31 et seq.; affirmative action plan adopted, § 9-1; director of mixed refuse and disposal, § 14-2; health officer, § 15-16 et seq.; city traffic engineer, § 29-28.
State Law reference- Appointment, removal of officers by mayor, RSMo 77.330, 77.340; terms of elective officers, RSMo 77.370; officers to be residents of city, RSMo 77.380; bond, oath of officer, RSMo 77.390; fixing compensation of officers and employees, RSMo 77.440; officer prohibited from being interested in contracts, etc., RSMo 77.470; prescribing duties, powers of officers, authority to require bond, RSMo 77.480.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-61-2-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REMOVAL OF ELECTIVE OFFICERS FROM OFFICE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to impeach elective officers, RSMo 77.340; removal and impeachment of municipal officers, RSMo 106.220 et seq.

Sec. 2-66. - Grounds for removal from office. 
    An elective officer of the city may be removed from office for any one of the following causes: 
(1)	Wilfull violation of any of his official duties;
(2)	Culpable official negligence or dereliction of official duty;
(3)	Any conduct inconsistent with his official character and duty;
(4)	Official incompetency;
(5)	Intoxicated while in the performance of any official act or duty, or shall become so intoxicated as to be incapacitated to perform any official act or duty at the time or in the manner required by law. 
(Code 1967, §§ 21-5, 21-18)
Sec. 2-67. - Institution of impeachment proceedings. 
(a)	Preparation of charges, notice. The mayor, or any member of the council may prefer charges against any elective officer by filing with the city clerk a written statement of the charges together with a notice directed to the accused, apprising him of the nature of the charges, and of the time when the accusation will be heard by the council setting as a court of impeachment; whereupon the city clerk shall file the same and cause a copy thereof to be served upon the accused at least five (5) days before the date set for the hearing. 
(b)	Service of notice. Such notice shall be served by any regular policeman of the city, provided, that if for any reason such notice cannot be personally served within the limits of the city, service may be had by posting not less than three (3) copies thereof in as many public places in the city. 
(c)	Return of service. Such notice and charges, with the return of service thereof, shall be laid by the city clerk before the council at its next meeting. 
(Code 1967, § 21-19)
Sec. 2-68. - City council to hear evidence. 
    At the time set for the hearing provided for herein, if due notice has been given the accused, the council shall meet and proceed to hear evidence against and in favor of the accused, and may adjourn from time to time, if necessary, until all the evidence is heard. 
(Code 1967, § 21-20)
Sec. 2-69. - Conduct of proceedings; issuance, service of subpoenas. 
(a)	The city attorney, or in case he be the accused, some attorney selected by the council, shall conduct the prosecution, and the accused shall be entitled to be represented by such counsel as he may employ to conduct his defense. 
(b)	The mayor or if he be the accused, then the president pro tempore of the council, shall issue subpoenas for such witnesses as may be called for by either party, and such subpoenas may be served by the proper officer of the city or by the sheriff or constable of the county and such officers and witnesses shall be entitled to the same fees as would be allowed for like services in the municipal court. 
(Code 1967, § 21-21)
Sec. 2-70. - Right of accused to be heard; prosecution to be by city attorney. 
    Upon any trial under this division, the accused shall be entitled to be heard by himself and his counsel in his defense, and the city attorney, or attorney acting for the city in the case shall attend and prosecute on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 21-22)
Sec. 2-71. - Compelling attendance of witnesses, production of papers; administering oaths. 
    The council shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of papers, relating to any subject under consideration under this division, in which the interest of the city is involved, and shall have the right to issue attachments for witnesses and call on the proper officers of the city or the sheriff or any constable of the county, to execute such process. The president of the council shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses in all proceedings before the council under this division. 
(Code 1967, § 21-23)
Sec. 2-72. - Depositions of witnesses. 
    Depositions of witnesses beyond the jurisdiction of the council, or witnesses, prevented by sickness or other sufficient cause from attendance, may be read at the trial and instigation provided for herein, if taken in conformity to the laws of the state. The notice of this taking thereof, when taken on behalf of the accused, shall be served on the attorney representing the city. 
(Code 1967, § 21-24)
Sec. 2-73. - Vote, decision of council after hearing evidence. 
    As soon as the evidence at impeachment proceedings under this division has all been heard and the case submitted the council shall vote by ayes and noes upon the charges and specifications separately. The question upon each charge shall be, "Is the accused guilty?" If the charges that have been preferred by the mayor and the council by a majority vote of all the members elected to the council find the accused guilty of any one of the charges preferred, or, if the charges have been preferred by any member of the council and the council by a two-thirds majority vote of all the members elected thereto find the accused guilty of any one of the charges preferred, he may by resolution be removed from office; and if such resolution receive a vote of not less than two-thirds of the members elected to the council the office shall thereupon become and be vacant; provided, that if the charges preferred be that the accused is or has been directly or indirectly interested in any contract involving the city, or in any work done by said city or any of its institutions, the accused shall be dismissed from, and his office shall become and be vacant if the council by a majority vote of all the members elected find the accused guilty. 
(Code 1967, § 21-25)
Sec. 2-74. - Record of proceedings. 
    The proceedings of the council acting under this division shall be entered at large upon the journal of the proceedings of the council. 
(Code 1967, § 21-26)
Secs. 2-75-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Appointment of officers, RSMo 77.330; duties of city clerk, RSMo 77.410; appointment of temporary clerk, RSMo 77.420; compensation of officers and employees, RSMo 77.440; officer to be resident, RSMo 77.380; bond, oath of officer, RSMo 77.390.

Sec. 2-81. - Creation, authority of office; duties generally. 
    The office of city clerk of the city is hereby created and established, and it shall be the duty of the mayor, subject to the concurrence of the city council, to select a competent and suitable person, qualified as the law requires, to fill and hold such office; and the duties of such officer shall be such as are prescribed by the statutes of the state; namely: 
(1)	Maintain the journal of the proceedings of council;
(2)	Safely and properly keep all records and papers belonging to the city;
(3)	Empowered to administer official oaths; also oaths to demand or claims against the city; 
(4)	Perform all duties required by ordinances of the city;
(5)	Provide other services as directed by the mayor.
(Code 1967, § 21-37; Ord. No. 6676, § 4, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-82. - Term of office to be at pleasure of the mayor, subject to the concurrence of the city council. 
    The term of office of the city clerk shall be at the pleasure of the mayor, subject to the concurrence of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 21-38)
Sec. 2-83. - Disqualification from office, grounds; bond. 
    No person shall be selected to the position of city clerk who at the time of such selection is in arrears for any unpaid city taxes, or forfeiture of defalcation in office. A bond of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall be filed with the premium paid by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 21-39; Ord. No. 6676, § 5, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-84. - Additional compensation prohibited. 
    The salary of the city clerk shall be the only compensation the city clerk shall receive. 
(Code 1967, § 21-40)
Sec. 2-85. - Duties enumerated. 
    The city clerk shall: 
(1)	Control and check all payrolls, issue payroll checks. Maintain the personnel files on all city employees. Deposit and disburse all federal and state withholding taxes and social security deductions as required by law. Maintain the records and initiate the reporting and disbursing of retirement deductions for employees and the city's contribution. Prepare quarterly unemployment reports. Respond to all inquiries for workers' compensation claims. Disburse funds; 
(2)	Attend all meetings of the council and keep a correct record of its proceedings, and enter the same upon the journal; 
(3)	Affix the seal of the city to all instruments or documents, and official acts of the mayor, which by law or ordinance are required to be so attested, and countersign the same, and shall affix the seal of the city to and certify any record, document, copies of papers or ordinances, that may be required by any individual for any purpose, or that may be required for the use of any officer of the city; 
(4)	Prepare all certificates of elections, commissions and appointments or other official documents required by ordinance to be issued, or which the mayor in the discharge of his official duty is required to issue, and shall countersign the same and affix the seal of the city thereto; 
(5)	Prepare blank licenses for all purposes for which licenses are required or authorized to be issued, sign as city clerk and affixing the seal of the city thereto, collecting for the same and receipting therefor; 
(6)	Maintain a register of all licenses thus issued, including the date, to whom issued, and the amount of the tax due thereon, for what issued, and the date of expiration; 
(7)	Serve as ex officio license inspector of the city, and as such he shall see to it that all persons in the city doing business for which a license for the city is required, have licenses for such business as provided by ordinance, and report to the proper officials every person doing business without license; and if such person fails or refuses to take out a license as required by the ordinances of the city, the city clerk shall so inform the city attorney whose duty it shall be to prosecute said person for doing such business without a license from the city; 
(8)	Maintain the custody of all bonds of all officials any other bonds given to the city;
(9)	Maintain a register of all bonds and obligations of the city, date of issue, for what purpose issued, rate of interest, time of maturity, and the registered number of each bond and coupon, and as said bonds or coupons are paid or redeemed, he shall note such fact upon the register, giving the date of payment, the name of the party to whom payment was made, and file said bond or coupon in his office; 
(10)	Record all city ordinances passed, except such as are published in a revision, and shall neatly label and file for safekeeping, the original rolls of all ordinances or resolutions of the city council, and such other vouchers, papers and documents as may be delivered into his custody; 
(11)	Whenever any ordinance is passed amending or repealing any preexisting ordinance, or section or article thereof, by number or title thereof, the city clerk, at the time of recording such ordinance, shall note on the margin of the record thereof, so repealed or amended the number of the ordinance affecting such repealed or amended ordinance, or section thereof, the word "Repealed" or "Amended" as the case may be, by Ordinance No. _____; 
(12)	Organize and maintain a proper index of all records, ordinances, resolutions and other documents required by law or ordinance; 
(13)	Upon request, carefully and promptly execute every official duty that may be required by virtue of the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city; 
(14)	Serve as the general custodian of all books; papers, records, documents, belonging to the city, and at all times all records, accounts, transactions, documents or books of the city in his custody or control shall be subject to inspection by the public, or any citizen, but shall not be subject to be removed from the city hall, except by the city clerk; 
(15)	The city clerk shall not allow any of the records, papers, documents, etc., to be removed from the city hall, except by some officer of the city. Should any other responsible person desire to remove any of said records, documents, papers, etc., from the city hall, the city clerk shall allow such person to remove said papers for a time not to exceed thirty (30) days, but in such case the city clerk shall take a receipt from such person for such papers, and shall be held responsible for the return of such papers; 
(16)	Maintain the custody of the seal of the city, the public records including the journal of the proceedings of the council, the original ordinances and resolutions of the city council, and such other records and documents and papers as may be delivered for custody by the council. 
(Code 1967, §§ 21-41, 21-51; Ord. No. 6057, § 10, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 6676, § 6, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-86. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 11 of Ord. No. 6057, adopted Feb. 4, 1985, repealed § 2-86, which section pertained to the keeping of tax records by the city clerk, and was derived from Code 1967, § 21-43. 
Sec. 2-87. - Deputy; appointment, function. 
    The mayor shall have the power, subject to approval of a majority of the council, to designate the city accountant to perform certain duties of the city clerk in the event of absence or illness. 
(Code 1967, § 21-44; Ord. No. 6057, § 12, 2-4-85)
Secs. 2-88-2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FINANCE DIRECTOR AND CITY ACCOUNTANT 

Sec. 2-96. - Creation, authority of office. 
    The office of finance director and city accountant of the city is hereby created and established, and it shall be the duty of the mayor subject to the concurrence of the city council to select a competent and suitable person, qualified as the law requires, to fill and hold such office. The terms finance director and city accountant shall be used interchangeably in this code. The position shall provide professional accounting management to the city's financial operations. The position shall initiate accounting guidelines, controls, procedures and practices to all departments and activities of the city's business. The position shall be under the direction of the mayor and shall perform in accordance with accepted and established accounting practices and conform to applicable city ordinances. 
(Code 1967, § 21-47; Ord. No. 5604, § 1, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 6676, § 8, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-97. - Term of office to be at pleasure of the mayor, subject to the concurrence of the city council. 
    The term of office of the finance director shall be at the pleasure of the mayor, subject to the concurrence of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1-48; Ord. No. 5604, § 2, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 6676, § 11, 8-21-93)
Sec. 2-98. - Disqualification from office, grounds; bond. 
    No person shall be selected finance director who at the time of such selection is in arrears for any unpaid city taxes, or forfeiture of defalcation in office. A bond of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall be filed with the premium paid by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 21-49; Ord. No. 6676, §§ 9, 11, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-99. - Additional compensation prohibited. 
    The salary of the finance director shall be the only compensation the finance director shall receive. 
(Code 1967, § 21-50; Ord. No. 6676, § 11, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-100. - Duties enumerated. 
    The finance director shall: 
(1)	Be the general accountant of the city, and shall have the custody of all public account books, accounts, contracts, vouchers, documents, bonds and coupons paid or redeemed and all papers relating to accounts and contracts of the city and its revenues, debts and fiscal affairs, which are not required by law or ordinance to be kept by some other person or officer, and shall prepare all payrolls and quarterly unemployment reports; 
(2)	Conduct and maintain an inventory of all city-owned property, to include equipment, machinery, real estate and other facilities; 
(3)	Maintain a set of books at the city's expense, shall keep a true and current record of the city's fiscal affairs, and shall open an account thereon, between the city and all officers charged with the collection, custody or disbursement of public moneys, entering thereon all receipts and payments, from what sources derived and upon what account paid; 
(4)	Manage a complete record of all branches of the city revenue, opening an account with every fund which by law or ordinance is made a separate fund, crediting the same with all money paid into the city treasury on account thereof, and charging the fund with all warrants drawn thereon; 
(5)	Record and file away and preserve all accounts and claims presented against the city, and such as are allowed or payment by the city thereof authorized, shall be entered by said officer upon a record kept therefor, giving the date of allowance, the amount, the name of the claimant, and the general nature of the claim; and shall also keep a register of all warrants drawn upon the city accounts, specifying the number, date, and to whom payable, the amount and the fund against which the same was drawn; 
(6)	Prepare and draw all warrants, and shall express in the body of every warrant, the particular fund out of which same is paid; 
(7)	Provide information to the mayor or city council, when requested, upon questions relating to the fiscal affairs of the city, or concerning any of the duties of the office. 
(Code 1967, §§ 21-41, 21-51; Ord. No. 5604, § 3, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 6057, § 13, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 6676, §§ 10, 11, 2-1-93) 
Sec. 2-101. - Execution of warrants. 
    When any sum of money has been appropriated or ordered paid by the council, the finance director shall draw a warrant for such amount, which warrant shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk, with the seal of the city thereto affixed. 
(Code 1967, § 21-42; Ord. No. 6057, § 14, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 6676, § 11, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-102. - Financial report to be given. 
(a)	At the regular meeting of the city council in January, April, July and October of each year, the finance director shall prepare for submission to the mayor and city council a report upon the financial affairs of the city, the report to contain a full and complete statement of all receipts and expenditures for the past fiscal year; including also a statement of the bonded indebtedness of the city, the amount of funds remaining in the treasury, the separate funds to which the same belongs, the amount of interest to be paid in the next fiscal year, and the bonds falling due during such time. 
(b)	The finance director shall in January and July of each year, make out a full and detailed statement of receipts and expenditures of the city for the half year ending December thirty-first and June thirtieth, preceding the date of the report, and file the same with the city council, which shall cause the same to be published in some newspaper published in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 21-52; Ord. No. 6676, § 12, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-103. - Misuse of funds, warrants, other obligations. 
    The finance director shall be and is hereby prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, for his own benefit or that of any other person, any money, warrant or other obligations of the city for safe custody or keeping, and any violations of this provision shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 21-53; Ord. No. 5604, § 4, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 6676, § 11, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-104. - Misconduct in office. 
    It shall be unlawful for the finance director to willfully neglect or refuse to perform any of the duties enjoined by ordinance or by resolution of the mayor and council, or to be guilty of any oppression or extortion in the discharge of fiscal duties, or by cause of the position to do any act not authorized by ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 21-54; Ord. No. 6676, § 11, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-105. - Deputy; appointment, function. 
    The mayor shall have the power, subject to approval of a majority of the council, to designate the city clerk to perform certain duties of the finance director in the event of absence or illness. 
(Code 1967, § 21-55; Ord. No. 5604, § 5, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 6676, § 11, 2-1-93)
Secs. 2-106-2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CITY TREASURER[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Election of city treasurer, RSMo 77.370; duties, RSMo 95.295-95.305; residence requirements of city officers, RSMo 77.380; officers oath, bond of city officer, RSMo 77.390; filling vacancy in office, RSMo 77.450.

Secs. 2-111-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CITY ATTORNEY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Election of city attorney, RSMo 77.370; duties, RSMo 98.330, 98.340; qualifications of city attorney, RSMo 77.370(2); residence requirements, RSMo 77.380; oath of city officers, RSMo 77.390; vacancy in office, RSMo 77.450.

Sec. 2-116. - Compensation. 
    The city attorney shall receive as compensation for his services the salary prescribed by the city council; and in addition thereto he shall receive in each case in which the city is a party in any court of record in the state or the United States, or in any hearing before the public service commission of the state, or in any other case in which the city attorney shall be directed by the city council or the mayor to appear and represent the city, a reasonable attorney's fee to be fixed by the city council and to be paid by the city; and provided that in each case appealed from the municipal court to the circuit court of the county, the city attorney shall receive an additional fee to be taxed as costs in the case; the attorney shall also receive as compensation for his services in suits on back taxes a commission of ten (10) percent of the amounts actually collected and paid into the treasury, and in suits in collections for back taxes against real estate, an additional fee for each suit instituted where publication is not necessary, and a fee for each suit instituted where publication is necessary, all such commissions and fees to be taxed as costs in such suit and paid by the party paying the taxes, and in no event shall the city be liable for the payment of any of such commissions or fees. 
(Code 1967, § 21-72)
Sec. 2-117. - Additional compensation prohibited. 
    The city attorney shall receive no compensation for his services other than that provided by this division. 
(Code 1967, § 21-73)
Sec. 2-118. - Duties enumerated. 
(a)	The city attorney shall prosecute all persons charged with violating the ordinances of the city, and to that end he shall attend the municipal court daily and prosecute all complaints, suits or proceedings that may be brought by the city therein or in which the city may be interested. 
(b)	The city attorney shall, if directed so to do by an order of record of the city council, attend to and prosecute on behalf of the city all suits instituted for the collection of delinquent and back taxes and all suits or proceedings brought to enforce payment of any other tax, license or revenue whatsoever, due the city. 
(Code 1967, § 21-74)
Sec. 2-119. - Opinions to be given. 
    The city attorney shall, without fee, give his opinion to any officer of the city respecting his duties, or respecting questions of law in which the city is interested, and such opinions shall be in writing when so demanded by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 21-75)
Sec. 2-120. - Prosecution of appeals, writs of error in municipal court cases; reports. 
    The city attorney shall prosecute all appeals or writs of error in causes originating in the municipal court, and shall make all necessary affidavits therefor. He shall report to the city council, in writing, the condition of all suits pending in any court, which originated in municipal court, at the next meeting of the city council succeeding the adjournment of the court in which the same is pending. 
(Code 1967, § 21-76)
Sec. 2-121. - Effect of inability of city attorney to act. 
    In case of sickness, absence from the city, interest of the city attorney in the proceedings adverse to the interests of the city, or other temporary inability of the city attorney to discharge the duties of his office, he may, with the approval of the mayor and at his own expense, appoint some competent attorney to act in his stead during such temporary inability, in any proceedings pending before the municipal judge. If such appointment is not made as aforesaid, then it shall be the duty of the municipal judge to appoint some competent attorney to represent the city in all cases before his court, pending such temporary inability of the city attorney to perform the same, and the person so appointed shall possess the same powers and receive the same fees as the city attorney would receive if he were present and acting in the regular discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1967, § 21-77)
Sec. 2-122. - Effect of interest of city attorney in proceedings. 
    If the city attorney shall be interested in, or a party to any action brought by the city for the violation of any of its ordinances, or shall have been employed as counsel in any such case, previous to his election as city attorney, he shall inform the mayor and city council thereof, if the case be one which has been appealed or by other means removed from the municipal court; and the mayor and city council shall appoint some competent attorney at the expense of the city attorney to represent the city in such proceedings. 
(Code 1967, § 21-78)
Secs. 2-123-2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CITY COUNSELOR 

Sec. 2-131. - Office created. 
    The office of city counselor for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 1967, § 21-90)
Sec. 2-132. - Appointment, term. 
    The mayor, with the consent and approval of a majority of the city council, is hereby authorized to appoint a city counselor who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. 
(Code 1967, § 21-91)
Sec. 2-133. - Compensation. 
    The compensation to be paid the city counselor shall be fixed by ordinance or resolution of the city council, and shall be payable monthly. 
(Code 1967, § 21-92)
Sec. 2-134. - Duties. 
    The city counselor shall represent the city in all cases in all courts of record in this state; shall draft all ordinances and contracts and all legal forms of every kind; shall give legal advice to the council and other officers of the city; and shall perform such other duties as shall be prescribed by ordinance or shall be ordered by the council or the mayor. 
(Code 1967, § 21-93)
Secs. 2-135-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note-Section 11, Ord. No. 6107, adopted Aug. 19, 1985, repealed in its entirety Ord. No. 5971, adopted Apr. 17, 1984, section 1 of which pertained to the administrative assistant and was codified as Div. 8, §§ 2-141-2-149. Sections 1-10 of Ord. No. 6107, relative to the city administrator, have been added as Div. 8, §§ 2-141-2-150 at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance being not specifically amendatory of the Code.

Sec. 2-141. - Office created. 
    The position of city administrator for the City of Marshall, Missouri, is hereby created and the provisions of sections 2-142 through 2-150 shall apply at all times to said position. 
(Ord. No. 6107, § 1, 8-19-85)
Sec. 2-142. - Appointment and tenure. 
(a)	The city administrator shall be employed by a majority of the members elected to the city council, with the approval of the mayor. 
(b)	The city administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. The appointing authority may enter into a contract of employment with the city administrator for a term not to exceed two (2) years. Said contract shall provide that the city administrator may be removed at any time with or without cause, provided that, when removed without cause, said city administrator shall be paid the full amount remaining under the contract. For the purposes of this division, "removal with cause" shall mean: 
(1)	Obtaining materials on fraudulent orders, dishonesty, stealing and other criminal acts; 
(2)	Malicious destruction of city property;
(3)	Violation of any city ordinance or state statute relating to conflicts of interest;
(4)	Falsifying records, including payroll records;
(5)	Being under the influence of or use of intoxicating liquor, narcotics or other drugs while on the job; 
(6)	Failure to follow written policies and directives adopted by the mayor and the city council. 
(Ord. No. 6107, § 2, 8-19-85)
Sec. 2-143. - Qualifications. 
    The city administrator shall be at least twenty-five (25) years of age and a resident of Marshall during his tenure. In addition, the city administrator shall be a graduate of an accredited university or college with a major in public or municipal administration or shall have equivalent qualifications and experience in financial, administrative and/or public relations fields. 
(Ord. No. 6107, § 3, 8-19-85)
Sec. 2-144. - Bond. 
    The city administrator shall post a bond in the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The premium for the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 6107, § 4, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 6676, § 12, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-145. - Compensation. 
    The compensation to be paid to the city administrator shall be fixed by ordinances passed by the city council, and shall be paid bi-weekly. 
(Ord. No. 6107, § 5, 8-19-85)
Sec. 2-146. - Duties. 
    The city administrator shall have general superintending control of the administration and management of the government business, officers and employees of the city, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor. The city administrator's duties shall include, but not be limited, to the following: 
(a)	Administrative: Chief administrator assistant to the mayor, as such the administrative officer of the city's government who is directly responsible to the mayor and city council; 
(b)	Purchasing officer: Responsible for ensuring that all purchases are made in accordance with purchasing rules and procedures approved by the city council; 
(c)	Budget officer: Responsible for assembling estimates of financial needs and resources for each year, for approving all salary increases, expense accounts and travel requests, and for setting a program of activities within the financial capabilities of the city; 
(d)	Annual report: Shall present to the mayor and council an annual report for the fiscal year including summary reports of the activities of the various departments, etc. by January 1 of each year, and such other reports on the activities of the city as may be required by the mayor and council; 
(e)	Personnel officer: Responsible for ensuring that the personnel rules and regulations are followed by all departments, shall supervise and discipline all department heads and shall supervise, hire, fire and discipline all other city employees, all to the extent permitted by law; 
(f)	Policy formulation: Shall recommend to the city council adoption of measures which are deemed necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Marshall, and shall recommend and institute administrative improvements and services; 
(g)	Council agenda and notice of meetings: Shall submit a proposed agenda before each regular council meeting and shall give notice of regular and special meetings; 
(h)	Boards and committees: Shall work with all city boards; attend meetings of the board of public works and city park board and coordinate the work of each board with all city departments; 
(i)	Council meetings: Shall attend all meetings of the city council, and shall review all contracts, leases, grants and other matters to be considered by the council; 
(j)	Bids: Shall supervise the preparation of all bid specifications for services and equipment; shall receive and open all bids in compliance with the city bid ordinance and submit a recapitulation and recommendation for acceptance to the appropriate authority; 
(k)	State and federal aid programs: Shall coordinate and apply for grants which may have application in the city. The community development program will remain under the direction of the Marshall Housing Authority; 
(l)	Conference attendance: Shall attend state and regional conferences and programs applicable to the administration or business of the city; 
(m)	Press releases: Shall be the official responsible for keeping the public informed of the business of the city and shall make releases available to local media as necessary. Department heads will be responsible for their respective departments as far as news releases are concerned, but all releases relating to statements of city policy shall be reviewed by the administrator before release; 
(n)	Record keeping: Shall keep full and accurate records of all actions in the course of his duties; 
(o)	Miscellaneous: Shall perform all other duties as assigned or prescribed by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 6107, § 6, 8-19-85)
Sec. 2-147. - Powers. 
    The powers of the city administrator shall be as follows: 
(a)	City property: Shall be responsible for all property of the city; shall keep inventories; may sell property with approval of the council (real property may be sold only by ordinance authorization); 
(b)	Coordinate departments: Shall (1) coordinate the departments of the city, (2) have authority to assign employees of the city to any department where they can be used most effectively, and (3) coordinate the work priorities for the best overall services to the citizens; 
(c)	Investigations and reports: Shall have the power to investigate and examine or inquire into the affairs or operation of any department; shall have authority to review and revise all personnel actions, and to mediate and resolve all personnel disputes between employees and department heads. 
(Ord. No. 6107, § 7, 8-19-85)
Sec. 2-148. - Removal of city administrator. 
(a)	The city administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council, and may be removed prior to the expiration of the appointed term with or without cause by: 
(1)	The mayor with a majority of the members elected to the city council; or
(2)	By two-thirds (2/3) of the members elected to the council independent of the mayor's opposition;
(3)	By a vote of the people to change the form of city government.
(b)	Upon removal under subsections (a)(1) or (2) hereof, the city administrator may request a public hearing before the mayor and city council in writing. Said hearing shall be held within a reasonable time after notice of removal from office. The grievance procedures set forth in the city personnel policies shall not apply to the city administrator. 
(c)	The mayor may suspend the city administrator from duty without pay for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, with approval of a majority of the members elected to the council. 
(d)	If removed from office by the mayor and/or the members of the city council without cause, the city administrator shall receive severance pay equal to the balance of the salary due under the contract referred to in section 2-142(b) hereof. 
(e)	If removed for cause, the city administrator's salary shall be immediately discontinued.
(Ord. No. 6107, § 8, 8-19-85)
Sec. 2-149. - Other duties, powers, responsibilities. 
    The city administrator shall assume any other duties, powers and responsibilities assigned by the mayor and members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 6107, § 9, 8-19-85)
Sec. 2-150. - City administrator to perform former duties of administrative assistant, mayor. 
    All acts which fall under the authority granted to the city administrator, but which were previously required by city ordinances to be performed by the mayor or administrative assistant, shall to the extent permitted by state statutes be performed by the city administrator. All ordinances requiring the mayor or administrative assistant to perform said acts or which are in conflict with this division are hereby amended to require said acts and duties to be performed by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 6107, § 10, 8-19-85)
DIVISION 9. - CITY ENGINEER[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Appointment of officers, RSMo 77.330.

Sec. 2-151. - Appointment. 
    The mayor, with the consent and approval of a majority of the members elected to the city council, shall have the power to appoint a part-time city engineer for a term of one (1) year at the first regular meeting of the council in which the newly elected members shall sit after the annual city election in April; provided that should such appointment not be made at such meeting, it may be made at any subsequent meeting of the council, for a term to terminate not later than the first regular meeting after the next annual city elections in which the newly elected members of the council shall participate. 
(Code 1967, § 21-122)
Sec. 2-152. - Qualifications. 
    The engineer appointed as provided in this division shall be registered by the state board of registration. 
(Code 1967, § 21-121)
Sec. 2-153. - Oath of office. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city engineer shall take upon himself and subscribe to an oath or affirmation before some court of record of the county, or the clerk of the city or the municipal judge of the same, that he possesses all of the qualifications prescribed by law for his office; that he will support the Constitution of the United States and of the state, the provisions of all the laws of this state affecting cities of the third class and the ordinances of the city, and faithfully demean himself in office, which official oath or affirmation shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 21-123)
State Law reference- Oath of city officer, RSMo 77.390. 
Sec. 2-154. - Compensation. 
    The compensation to be paid to the part-time city engineer shall be fixed by ordinance or resolution of the city council, but he shall not be employed more than fifteen (15) days per month. 
(Code 1967, § 21-124)
Sec. 2-155. - Duties enumerated. 
    The city engineer shall: 
(1)	Make and file with the city clerk all plans, specifications and estimates that may be necessary for the letting of contracts for construction of city projects or that may be necessary for the doing of work when it is not by contract; 
(2)	When so ordered by the mayor or council, prepare such plans, specifications, estimates and profiles, make such surveys, compile such data and submit such reports to the mayor or city council concerning projects or improvements which may be under consideration as the mayor or council may order; 
(3)	Make tests of materials used in the construction or reconstruction of streets, the building of sidewalks and curbing, the oiling of streets and such other city work as may be necessary; 
(4)	Recommend the grade, quality and kind of materials used in the doing of work for the city including road oils, asphalt, concrete, cement, sand and rock; 
(5)	Supervise and inspect all construction work of the city, without assuming control over or direction of any person who may be employed by a contractor in the doing of work for the city; 
(6)	Make such street, sidewalk, sewer, curb and drainage surveys, as the mayor or council may order, and report the proper grade to be established; 
(7)	Upon the completion of any work, the acceptance of which shall require the approval of the city engineer, the engineer, if he shall approve the same, shall submit such approval in writing to the council; 
(8)	Upon application, give the grade for sidewalks to be constructed with the city, and upon completion of any sidewalk if he shall find the same to have been built on grade, he shall file with the city clerk and furnish the owner his approval thereof in writing; 
(9)	Prescribe rules and regulations for the tapping of any public or district sewer by private parties, shall supervise and inspect any connections which may be made and shall approve the same in writing if he shall find them to have been properly made; 
(10)	Perform such duties as are required by the laws of the state, of a city engineer of a city of the third class, and as required by the ordinance of the city, and such other duties in addition to those set out, as he may, by the city council or director of municipal services be ordered to perform. 
(Code 1967, § 21-125; Ord. No. 6675, § 13, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-156. - Instruments, equipment, books, data, etc.; custody, ownership. 
    The city shall furnish such instruments, equipment, field note books, drawing paper and other materials as shall by the council be deemed necessary, but all plats, profiles, maps, surveys, estimates, specifications, field notes, books and note books of data as may be made, compiled or begun by said engineer on city work, shall be the property of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 21-126)
Secs. 2-157-2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - DIRECTOR OF MUNICIPAL SERVICES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note-Section 9 of Ord. No. 5947, adopted Feb. 21, 1984, changed the title of Div. 10 from "Street Commissioner" to "Director of Municipal Services." See also § 2-161(c) with regard to this change in terminology.
State Law reference- Bond of city officer, RSMo 77.390.

Sec. 2-161. - Appointment, oath; removal; assistant director. 
(a)	At the first meeting of the newly elected council after the annual city election, or as soon thereafter as practicable, it shall be the duty of the mayor, with the consent and approval of a majority of the members elected to the city council, to appoint some suitable and competent person to the office of director of municipal services, who shall be a resident of the city and who shall hold his office for a term of one year and until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(b)	Before entering upon the duties of his office, the director shall take and subscribe an oath that he possesses all the qualifications prescribed by law for his office, that he will support the constitutions of the United States and of the state, all laws of the state, affecting cities of the third class and the ordinances of the city, that he will faithfully demean himself in office, and that he is not and will not during his term of office be either directly or indirectly interested in any contract with the city for any public work or material furnished, which official oath shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(c)	The director of municipal services shall serve as the street commissioner and the city traffic engineer. All references in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Marshall, Missouri to the "street commissioner" or city traffic engineer shall mean the "director of municipal services." 
(d)	The mayor shall, from time to time, with the consent and approval of a majority of the members elected to the city council, appoint some suitable and competent person to serve as the assistant director of the department of municipal services. It shall be the duty of the assistant director of the department of municipal services to perform the duties delegated to him by the director, and any acts required in the Code of Ordinances to be performed by the director may be delegated by him to the assistant director. 
(e)	In addition to the various duties set forth in the Code of Ordinances, the director of municipal services shall be responsible for all recordkeeping, coordination and administration of street maintenance, street construction, street sweeping and sign construction, equipment maintenance, administration of the city vehicle fuel system, residential and commercial refuse collection, operation of the city landfill, grant applications and administration on projects relating to the functions of the department and engineering-related duties. 
(f)	The director of municipal services may be removed from office in the manner prescribed for the removal of appointive officers of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 21-137; Ord. No. 59477, § 10, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 6676, § 14, 2-1-93)
State Law reference- Removal of city officer, RSMo 77.340; oath of city officer, RSMo 77.390. 
Sec. 2-162. - Duties enumerated. 
    The street commissioner shall: 
(1)	Give his personal attention to and direct the labor employed in the construction of any building, bridge, culvert, drain or sewer or in the improvement of any public park or other public place, where such work is done by the city and not under contract whenever so required by ordinance or resolution of the city council; 
(2)	Make such repairs on the streets and alleys of the city as may be immediately necessary for public safety and convenience, and is authorized and directed to make same without first obtaining an order therefor from the city council; 
(3)	See that all streets, alleys, sidewalks, gutters, drains and sewers are kept free from obstructions and in clean condition; 
(4)	Cause to be removed from all sidewalks and crossings any accumulation of snow, ice, mud, filth or other offensive matter, or anything calculated to impede the free and unobstructed passage of pedestrians; 
(5)	Keep a general supervision over the streets, alleys and public places of the city and recommend to the council from time to time any necessary improvements therein, and shall designate to the chief of police work for prisoners that may be required to labor on public work on streets; 
(6)	See that all sidewalks are kept in good condition and repair, and shall at any time report to the committee on streets, alleys, sidewalks and sewers for their information and action what new sidewalks, in his judgment, should be constructed; 
(7)	Cause to be removed any dead animals or fowl or other nuisance he may find in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or thoroughfare or other public place within the city; 
(8)	Where excavations are made in public places under contract with or permit from the city, see that the work of refilling the same and of restoring the pavement, sidewalk or other surface is done in a proper manner and without injury to the city or any citizen thereof, and shall report to the chief of police the violation of any ordinance or the terms of their permit, committed by any contractor or permittee with the city, making such excavations; 
(9)	At the first regular meeting of the council in each month, submit in writing an itemized and detailed report of the work done by him during the preceding month, specifying the character of the work, when performed, the number of men employed, days of service by each, prices paid per day, materials and tools purchased and the cost thereof, and the total expenditures or obligations for payment for which the city is responsible. 
(Code 1967, § 21-138)
Sec. 2-163. - Use of personnel, equipment; purchases. 
    The street commissioner, by and with the advice and consent of the council, is hereby authorized and empowered to use such laborers, mechanics, vehicles, carts and teams, and to purchase such materials and tools as from time to time may be necessary in the proper discharge of his duties; provided, that the wages of laborers and mechanics and the compensation allowed for vehicles, carts or teams so used shall in no event, exceed the rate of compensation usually paid in the city for similar services at the time of such use. 
(Code 1967, § 21-139)
Sec. 2-164. - Custody of equipment. 
    The street commissioner shall have the care and custody of all tools, machinery, implements and other property of the city under his control in the performance of his duties, and shall be held responsible for their loss or abuse and upon vacating his office he shall cause the same to be turned over to his successor in office, or to the committee on streets, alleys, sidewalks and sewers if his successor shall not have been appointed and qualified and he shall take duplicate receipts for all property so transferred; one copy of which he shall file with the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 21-140)
Sec. 2-165. - Accounts to be kept. 
    The street commissioner shall keep an accurate, itemized account of all purchases made by him and of all services rendered by those in his employ or under his control, and shall certify to the correctness of all accounts for purchases made by him, and for services rendered by the persons, vehicles, carts and teams under his control. 
(Code 1967, § 21-141)
Sec. 2-166. - Prosecution of violators. 
    The street commissioner shall cause to be prosecuted every person he may find violating any ordinance of the city relating to streets, alleys, sidewalks, sewers or other public property of the city and shall make arrests of all persons violating such ordinances and bringing them before the municipal judge. 
(Code 1967, § 21-142)
Sec. 2-167. - Additional duties. 
    The street commissioner shall perform such other duties as may hereafter be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the council. 
(Code 1967, § 21-143)
Secs. 2-168-2-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - PERSONNEL POLICIES 

Sec. 2-176. - Personnel policies. 
    The personnel policies of the city shall be those presently established or as hereafter adopted by the city council and kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
Secs. 2-177-2-277. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - BENEFITS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 2-278-2-285. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Old Age and Survivor's Insurance[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Agreement of political subdivision with state, respecting Old Age and Survivors Insurance, RSMo 105.350; contributions by political subdivisions, employees, RSMo 105.370; rules and regulations, RSMo 105.430.

Sec. 2-286. - Extension to eligible employees. 
    It shall be the policy and purpose of the city to extend to all eligible employees and officials of the city who are not excluded by law or by this subdivision, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function of said city, the benefits of the system of federal old-age and survivors insurance as authorized by the Social Security Act amendments and by the general assembly of the state, as the same may be now and hereafter in effect. 
(Code 1967, § 21-199)
Sec. 2-287. - Submission to state of plan and agreement, amendments thereto. 
    The mayor and city clerk shall, on behalf of this city, prepare, execute and submit to the division of budget and comptroller of the state, as state agency of the state, a plan and agreement for extending benefits hereunder to the eligible employees and officials of the city, in the form prepared by the state agency and hereby approved and adopted by the city council, which plan and agreement shall become effective upon approval thereof by the state agency; and shall execute agreements and modifications and amendments thereof with the state agency, providing for the extension of such benefits to the employees and officials as set forth in the plan and agreement, as provided for in section 2-286. 
(Code 1967, § 21-200)
Sec. 2-288. - Contributions to fund by employees. 
    There shall be deducted from the wages of all employees and officials of the city to whom the benefits of the system of federal old age and survivor's insurance are extended, by virtue of the plan and agreement hereinbefore provided for, the amount of each of the employees' and officials' contributions, as determined by applicable state and federal laws and by the plan and agreement, the aggregate amount of said deductions to be paid into the contributions fund created by the general assembly of the state. 
(Code 1967, § 21-201)
Sec. 2-289. - Contributions to fund by city. 
    There shall be appropriated from the various funds of the city the sum or sums of money necessary to pay the contributions of the city which shall be due and payable by virtue of the extension of the benefits of the federal old age and survivor's insurance system to the eligible employees and officials of the city, said sum or sums of money to be paid into the contributions fund created by the general assembly of the state. The fund from which the appropriation is made shall at all times, be sufficient to pay the contributions of the city by this section directed to be paid to the contributions fund. 
(Code 1967, § 21-202)
Sec. 2-290. - Records, reports, administration of plan and agreement. 
    The city shall fully comply with, and shall keep such records, make such reports and provide such methods of administration of the plan and agreement provided for in this subdivision as may be required by all applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations, now and hereafter in effect with respect to the extension of the benefits of the federal old age and survivor's insurance system to the employees and officials of this city. For the purpose of administering the plan and agreement the city clerk shall be the official who shall make all required reports, keep all records, and be responsible for the administration of the plan and agreement on behalf of the city, and any and all notices and communications from the state agency to the city with respect to the plan and agreement shall be addressed to "City Clerk, Marshall, Missouri." 
(Code 1967, § 21-203)
Secs. 2-291-2-295. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Local Government Employees Retirement System[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Retirement or pensioning of officers and employees of political subdivisions, RSMo 70.600 et seq.

Sec. 2-296. - City's participation in system; employee coverage; benefit program. 
(a)	The city hereby elects to have covered by the Missouri Local Government Employees Retirement System all its eligible employees in the following classes: 
(1)	Present and future firemen;
(2)	Present and future general employees;
(3)	Present and future policemen.
(b)	The city hereby elects that one hundred (100) percent of prior employment be considered for prior service credit in computing benefits and contributions to the system. 
(c)	The city hereby elects to to adopt a change in the benefit program of member employees, changing to Benefit Program L-12 (1.75;%) 
(Code 1967, § 21-206; Ord. No. 7386, § 1, 3-25-02; Ord. No. 7660, § 1, 11-21-05)
Sec. 2-297. - Employee and employer contributions. 
    The finance director is hereby authorized and directed to deduct from the wages and salaries of each employee member the member contributions required by RSMo 70.705, and to promptly remit the deductions to the retirement system, together with the employer contributions required by RSMo 70.730. Employee and employer contributions are to be effective April 1, 1971. 
(Code 1967, § 21-207; Ord. No. 6676, § 15, 2-1-93)
Subdivision IV. - Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 

Sec. 2-298. - Administration of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993. 
    All request for use of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (the "Act") by employees shall be made to the City Administrator of the City of Marshall. All requests for family and medical leave shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Act. Eligible employees shall be entitled to family leave in accordance with the Act and this ordinance [subdivision]. The City Administrator of the City is authorized to take whatever steps deemed necessary to administer the Act. 
(Ord. No. 7182, § 1, 5-3-99)
Sec. 2-299. - Determination of twelve-month period. 
    It is hereby determined that for purposes of computing the twelve-month period in which the twelve weeks of leave entitlement occurs, the City shall use the twelve-month period measured forward from the date any employee's first such leave begins. 
(Ord. No. 7182, § 1, 5-3-99)
Sec. 2-300. - Substitution of paid leave. 
    The City Administrator may require an eligible employee to substitute any of the accrued paid vacation leave, personal leave, family leave, holiday leave or sick leave that the employee is otherwise entitled to for leave provided under subparagraph (A), (B) or (C) or subsection (a)(1) of 29 USC 2612. 
    The City Administrator may require an eligible employee to substitute any of the accrued paid vacation leave, personal leave, holiday, or medical or sick leave for leave that the employee is otherwise entitled to for leave provided under subparagraph (C) or (D) of subsection (a)(1) of 29 USC 2612. 
    Nothing contained herein shall be construed to require the City of Marshall pay benefits in any such situation in which the City would not normally provide paid leave. 
(Ord. No. 7182, § 1, 5-3-99)
Sec. 2-301. - Leave taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule. 
    If an eligible employee requests intermittent leave or leave on a reduced leave scheduled under subparagraph (C) or (D) of subsection (a)(1) of 29 USC 2612 that is foreseeable based on planned medical treatment, the City Administrator may require such employee to transfer temporarily to an available alternate position offered by the City for which the employee is qualified provided there is equivalent pay and benefits and the position better accommodates the recurring periods of leave than the regular employment position of the employee. 
(Ord. No. 7182, § 1, 5-3-99)
Sec. 2-302. - Accrual of benefits. 
    Any eligible employee who takes family leave in accordance with the provisions of the Act without pay shall not be entitled to the accrual of any seniority or employment benefits during any period of leave or any right, benefit or position of employment other than any right, benefit, or position to which the employee would have been entitled if the employee had not taken leave. 
(Ord. No. 7182, § 1, 5-3-99)
Sec. 2-303. - Recoupment of medical insurance costs. 
    If an employee does not return to work after the employee has taken family leave without pay under provisions of the Act, the City shall be authorized to take whatever legal action necessary to recoup health insurance costs incurred by the City during the time that the employee took the family leave. 
(Ord. No. 7182, § 1, 5-3-99)
Sec. 2-304. - Spouses employed by the city. 
    In any case in which a husband and wife entitled to leave under subsection (a) of 29 USC 2612 are employed by the City, the aggregate number of workweeks of leave to which both may be entitled shall be limited to 12 workweeks during any 12-month period, if such leave is taken under subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (a)(1) of 29 USC 2612; or to care for a sick parent under subparagraph (C) of subsection (a)(1) of 29 USC 2612. 
(Ord. No. 7182, § 1, 5-3-99)
Sec. 2-305. - [Authorization of special leave.] 
    Nothing contained in Subdivision IV pertaining to the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 shall limit the city from authorizing special leave in addition to the family and medical leave otherwise provide herein. 
(Ord. No. 7182, § 1, 5-3-99)
DIVISION 13. - CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 

Sec. 2-306. - Declaration of policy. 
    The proper operation of government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a procedure for disclosure by certain officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the City. 
(Ord. No. 7267, § 1, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 7336, § 1, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 7403, § 1, 7-15-02; Ord. No. 7473, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 7550, § 1, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 7629, § 1, 7-18-05; Ord. No. 7694, § 1, 7-17-06; Ord. No. 7761, § 1, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 7825, § 1, 7-21-08; Ord. No. 7889, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 7951, § 1, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 8005, § 1, 7-18-11; Ord. 8057, § 1, 7-16-12; Ord. No. 8122, § 1, 8-5-13; Ord. No. 8167, § 1, 7-7-14; Ord. No. 8222, § 1, 7-6-15) 
Sec. 2-307. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)	All elected and appointed officials, as well as employees of the City serving in an executive or administrative capacity, must comply with Section 105.454 of the Missouri Revised Statutes related to conflicts of interest as well as any other state law governing official conduct. 
(b)	Any member of the Council of the City who has a "substantial personal or private interest" in any measure, bill, order or ordinance proposed or pending before such governing body must disclose that interest to the Clerk of such body and such disclosure shall be recorded in the ethics disclosure journal of the City as established by the Clerk. Substantial personal or private interest is defined as ownership by the individual, the individual's spouse, or the individual's dependent children, whether singularly or collectively, directly or indirectly, of: 
(1)	Ten percent (10%), or more, of any business entity; or
(2)	An interest having a value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more; or
(3)	The receipt by the individual, the individual's spouse, or the individual's dependent children, whether singularly or collectively, of a salary, gratuity, or other compensation or remuneration of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, per year, from any individual, partnership, organization, or association within any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 7267, § 2, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 7336, § 2, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 7403, § 2, 7-15-02; Ord. No. 7473, § 2, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 7550, § 2, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 7629, § 2, 7-18-05; Ord. No. 7694, § 2, 7-17-06; Ord. No. 7761, § 2, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 7825, § 2, 7-21-08; Ord. No. 7889, § 2, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 7951, § 2, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 8005, § 2, 7-18-11; Ord. No. 8057, § 2, 7-16-12; Ord. No. 8122, § 2, 8-5-13; Ord. No. 8167, § 2, 7-7-14; Ord. No. 8222, § 2, 7-6-15) 
Sec. 2-308. - Disclosure reports. 
    Each elected official, candidate for elective office, the chief administrative officer, the chief purchasing officer, and the full-time general counsel, if any, shall disclose the following information by May 1, or by the appropriate deadline as referenced in Section 105.487, RSMo., if any such transactions occurred during the previous calendar year: 
(1)	For such person, and all persons within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity of such person, the date and the identities of the parties to each transaction with a total value in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), if any, that such person had with the City, other than compensation received as an employee or payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the City, and other than transfers for no consideration to the City. 
(2)	The date and the identities of the parties to each transaction known to the person with a total value in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), if any, that any business entity in which such person had a substantial interest, had with the City, other than payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the City or transactions involving payment for providing utility service to the City, and other than transfers for no consideration to the City. 
(3)	The chief administrative officer and the chief purchasing officer for the City, and candidates or applicants for those offices, also shall disclose in writing, by May 1, or by the appropriate deadline as referenced in Section 105.487, RSMo., the following information for the previous calendar year: 
a.	The name and address of each of the employers of such person from whom income of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or more, was received during the year covered by the statement; 
b.	The name and address of each sole proprietorship that he owned; the name, address and the general nature of the business conducted of each general partnership and joint venture in which he was a partner or participant; the name and address of each partner or co-participant for each partnership or joint venture unless such names and addresses are filed by the partnership or joint venture with the Secretary of State; the name, address and general nature of the business conducted of any closely-held corporation or limited partnership in which the person owned ten percent (10%), or more, of any class of the outstanding stock or limited partnership units; and the name of any publicly traded corporation or limited partnership that is listed on a regulated stock exchange or automated quotation system in which the person owned two percent (2%), or more, of any class of outstanding sock, limited partnership units or other equity interests; and 
c.	The name and address of each corporation for which such person served in the capacity of a director, officer or receiver. 
(Ord. No. 7267, § 3, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 7336, § 3, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 7403, § 3, 7-15-02; Ord. No. 7473, § 3, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 7550, § 3, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 7629, § 3, 7-18-05; Ord. No. 7694, § 3, 7-17-06; Ord. No. 7761, § 3, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 7825, § 3, 7-21-08; Ord. No. 7889, § 3, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 7951, § 3, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 8005, § 3, 7-18-11; Ord. No. 8057, § 3, 7-16-12; Ord. No. 8122, § 3, 8-5-13; Ord. No. 8167, § 3, 7-7-14; Ord. No. 8222, § 3, 7-6-15) 
Sec. 2-309. - Filing of reports. 
(a)	The financial interest statements shall be filed at the following times, but no person is required to file more than one (1) financial interest statement in any calendar year: 
(1)	Every person required to file a financial interest statement shall file the statement annually, not later than May 1, and the statement shall cover the calendar year ending the immediately preceding December 31; provided that any member of the City Council may supplement the financial interest statement to report additional interests acquired after December 31 of the covered year until the date of filing of the financial interest statement; 
(2)	Each person appointed to office shall file the statement within thirty (30) days of such appointment or employment covering the calendar year ending the previous December 31; and 
(3)	Every candidate required to file a personal financial disclosure statement shall file no later than fourteen (14) days after the close of filing at which the candidate seeks nomination or election or nomination by caucus. The time period of this statement shall cover the twelve (12) months prior to the closing date of filing for candidacy. 
(b)	Financial disclosure reports giving the financial information required in Section 2-308 shall be filed with the City and the Missouri Ethics Commission. The reports shall be available for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 7267, § 4, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 7336, § 4, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 7403, § 4, 7-15-02; Ord. No. 7473, § 4, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 7550, § 4, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 7629, § 4, 7-18-05; Ord. No. 7694, § 4, 7-17-06; Ord. No. 7761, § 4, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 7825, § 4, 7-21-08; Ord. No. 7889, § 4, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 7951, § 4, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 8005, § 4, 7-18-11; Ord. No. 8057, § 4, 7-16-12; Ord. No. 8122, § 4, 8-5-13; 8222, § 4, 7-6-15) 
Sec. 2-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES, ETC.[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference- Contractors board § 7-18 et seq.; board of examiners of electricians, § 7-56 et seq.; board of plumbing examiners, § 7-116 et seq.; housing board of adjustments and appeals, § 7-128; commission on human relations, § 9-18; grievance committee for fire department, § 12-28; park board, § 19-21 et seq.; park board advisory council, § 19-311 et seq.; personnel board for police department, § 22-46 et seq.; policemen's advisory committee, § 22-66 et seq.; subdivision and development board, § 27-3; traffic commission, § 29-29; board of public works, § 30-21 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-311-2-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BAND COMMISSION[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Tax for band fund authorized, RSMo 71.640 et seq.

Sec. 2-316. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established within the city a commission, to be known as the band commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-10)
Sec. 2-317. - Composition. 
    The band commission shall consist of three (3) members who shall be residents of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-10)
Sec. 2-318. - Appointment. 
    The members of the band commission shall be appointed by the mayor annually for a term commencing from the first regular meeting of the city council in each year, following the city election in April. 
(Code 1967, § 2.10)
Sec. 2-319. - Compensation. 
    The members of the band commission shall receive no compensation for their services, nor shall the city be liable in any way for any services performed by the commission or the members thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 2-11)
Sec. 2-320. - Vacancies. 
    In case of a vacancy on the band commission, such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term of appointment by the mayor. 
(Code 1967, § 2-10)
Sec. 2-321. - Authority. 
    The band commission shall have a supervising control over all matters connected with the municipal band. The commission, subject to the approval of the city council, shall contract with the authorized officials of a band or other municipal civic musical organizations for its employment in the giving of free band concerts, or equivalent musical services by the band or other municipal civic musical organizations under the jurisdiction of the band commission upon such occasions of public importance as may be agreed upon and stipulated in such contract, and shall advise with the council upon all matters pertaining thereto; provided, that no contract or agreement made by the commission shall be binding upon the city until the same shall have been approved by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2.12)
DIVISION 3. - ENHANCED ENTERPRISE ZONE BOARD 

Sec. 3-322. - Administration of board. 
    The enhanced enterprise zone board, established pursuant to the Resolution adopted on May 16, 2005, shall be governed by the following provisions: 
(1)	There shall be seven (7) members on the enhanced enterprise zone board. One (1) member of the board shall be appointed by the school district or districts located within the area proposed for designation as an enhanced enterprise zone. One (1) member of the board shall be appointed by other affected taxing districts. The remaining five (5) members shall be chosen by the mayor, with the approval of the city council. 
(2)	The school district member and the affected taxing district member shall each have initial terms of five (5) years. Of the five (5) members appointed by the mayor, two (2) shall have initial terms of four (4) years, two (2) shall have initial terms of three (3) years, and one (1) shall have an initial term of two (2) years. Thereafter, members shall serve terms of five years. Each commissioner shall hold office until a successor has been appointed. All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment. For inefficiency or neglect of duty or misconduct in office, a member of the board may be removed by the applicable appointing authority. 
(3)	A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum of such board for the purpose of conducting business and exercising the powers of the board and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the board upon a vote of a majority of the members present. 
(4)	The members of the board annually shall elect a chair from among the members.
(5)	The role of the Board shall be to conduct the activities necessary to advise the mayor and the council of the city on the designation of an enhanced enterprise zone and any other advisory duties as may hereafter be determined by the mayor and the council of the city. The role of the board after the designation of an enhanced enterprise zone shall be review and assessment of zone activities as it relates to the annual reports as set forth in and required by RSMo. §135.960. 
(Ord. No. 7633, § 1, 7-18-05)
Secs. 2-322.1-2-322.7. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 6676, § 17, adopted Feb. 1, 1993 amended this Code by repealing Division 4, substantive sections being §§ 2-323-2-330, pertaining to the planning commission advisory council, as derived from Ord. No. 5709, adopted July 1, 1983.

Secs. 2-323-2-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE AND PURCHASING[17] 
Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference- Any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-5(4); taxation generally, Ch. 28.
State Law reference- Financial administration and indebtedness, RSMo Ch. 95.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-331. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin upon the first day of October each year, and shall end on the thirtieth day of September thereafter, and the books, accounts, records, and reports of all city officers and departments shall conform thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 13-1)
Sec. 2-332. - Records of city finances to be kept. 
    In order that the state of the city's funds can be ascertained at any time, the finance director shall and is hereby directed to prepare, keep and maintain adequate records of the city's finances, the same to be kept according to standard accounting procedures and practices. 
(Code 1967, § 13-2; Ord. No. 6676, § 18, 2-1 -93)
Sec. 2-333. - Access of treasurer, city clerk to books, accounts and papers. 
    The treasurer, finance director and city clerk shall have free access to each others offices for the inspection of all books, accounts and papers which they respectively contain, and full access to all other offices of the city for the inspection of such books, accounts and papers as concerning any of their duties. 
(Code 1967, § 13-3; Ord. No. 6676, § 19, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-334. - Audit of books covering city finances, required. 
    Annually during the month of October the books of the city covering its finances shall be audited for the year ending on the thirtieth day of September preceding, such audit to be made by such competent accountant as the city may employ for that pui-pose. 
(Code 1967, § 13-4)
Sec. 2-335. - Sale of unclaimed personal property; disposition of proceeds. 
(a)	The chief of police shall be authorized to sell all unclaimed personal property recovered by the police department. Items shall be retained by the police department for at least sixty (60) days from the date of possession. If the property is not claimed by its owner within sixty (60) days, the chief of police may sell the property. 
(b)	All sales of personal property, except firearms, shall be at public auction. The city clerk shall cause notice of the sale to be published in a local newspaper at least seven (7) days prior to the sale. 
(c)	Firearms shall be offered for sale by sealed bid to dealers licensed by the U. S. Department of Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. The highest and best bid shall be accepted. The chief of police shall have the discretion to destroy any firearm he deems inappropriate for sale. 
(d)	The proceeds of the sale, after deducting the expenses of sale, shall be deposited in the general revenue fund of the city and shall be accompanied by an itemized list of the expenses of sale, and a verified list identifying the article sold, the sale price, and the name of the purchaser. 
(Code 1967, § 13-15; Ord. No. 6852, § 1, 3-6-95)
Secs. 2-336-2-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FUNDS[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Cross reference- Sewer revenue fund, § 30-84 et seq.

Sec. 2-341. - Designated. 
    For the proper conduct of the fiscal affairs of the city, there shall be established such funds as deemed necessary, a list of which shall be on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1967, § 13-5)
Sec. 2-342. - Sources of revenue, receipts. 
    The sources of revenue and receipts for each of the funds described in section 2-341 shall be as provided for in the annual budget adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 13-6)
Sec. 2-343. - Disbursements, expenditures. 
    Disbursements and expenditures from each of the funds described in section 2-341 shall be as provided for in the annual budget adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 13-7)
Sec. 2-344. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6676, § 20, adopted Feb. 1, 1993, amended this Code by repealing § 2-344, pertaining to the equipment replacement reserve fund, as derived from § 13-8 of the 1967 Code. 
Sec. 2-345. - Sanitation fund. 
(a)	Source. All moneys received by the city for services provided by the city in the collection of ashes, trash and garbage shall be deposited in the sanitation fund herein created and established. 
(b)	Use. All moneys deposited in the sanitation fund shall be used for the necessary current expenses of the ash, trash and garbage department and for the purchase of necessary equipment therefor. 
(Code 1967, § 13-9)
Sec. 2-346. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6365, § 3, adopted Nov. 7, 1988, repealed § 2-346, which pertained to the parking lot fund and derived from § 13-10 of the city's 1967 Code. 
Sec. 2-347. - Tax surplus fund. 
(a)	Created. There is hereby created and established a special fund to be known as the "tax surplus fund." 
(b)	Source. Whenever real estate shall be sold by the city collector for the payment of real estate taxes assessed against any tract, parcel or lot of land within the corporate limits of the city, for the purpose of collecting the real estate taxes assessed thereon and the collector shall receive from the sale an amount of money in excess of the amount of taxes due thereon and the costs of the sale, and the owner or agent cannot be found, the city collector shall pay over such amount in excess of taxes and costs to the finance director and shall receive from said finance director his receipt for the same, upon receipt of which the city collector shall take credit for the amount so paid over to the finance director. 
(c)	Custody. The finance director shall deposit the amount so received from the city collector in the "tax surplus fund" where such moneys shall be kept until the city council shall order the disposition thereof. 
(d)	Trust established. The moneys placed in the "tax surplus fund" shall be held in trust by the finance director for the term of twenty (20) years for the owner or his legal representatives, and if at the end of twenty (20) years, such moneys shall not be called for then the city council may direct the transfer of such moneys to any fund which it may desire. 
(e)	Claim by owner. At any time within twenty (20) years after the payment into said "tax surplus fund" of any moneys as aforesaid the owner of the land so sold or his legal representatives may appear before the city council making claim for such moneys, and upon the making of proof satisfactory to the city council, the city council shall order the finance director to pay said moneys to the person claiming it; provided however, that no interest shall be paid. 
(Code 1967, § 13-11; Ord. No. 6676, § 11, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-348. - Consolidation of surplus monies for individual accounting funds for investment purposes. 
    All monies for each accounting fund of the city shall be accounted for separately after which they may be consolidated for investment purposes; all interest becoming due to each accounting fund from such investments shall be paid to the respective accounting fund and credited thereto upon receipt by the consolidated investment fund. From the time of transfer the consolidated surplus funds shall be invested within three (3) working days; if no investment is made thereof within this period, the surplus monies shall be returned to the appropriate fund. The authority to initiate the transfer of surplus monies and to commit such investments shall rest in the city council pursuant to considerations including but not limited to: Timing, need, limitations and consideration of various financial institutions. 
(Code 1967, § 13-13)
Sec. 2-349. - Officers authorized to deposit and withdraw funds belonging to investment fund account. 
    A combination of any two (2) signatures of the following designated officers of the city shall be required for the deposit or withdrawal of any funds belonging to the designated "investment fund account" for consolidated city fund investment pursuant to section 2-348 with any banking, loan or financial institution in which the city has established such a fund; the officers are: 
(1)	City clerk;
(2)	Mayor; and
(3)	Finance director.
(Code 1967, § 13-14; Ord. No. 6057, § 15, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 6676, § 11, 2-1-93)
Secs. 2-350-2-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PAYMENT OF CLAIMS[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
State Law reference- Presentation and allowance of claims, RSMo 95.315; penalty for corrupt allowance of claims, RSMo 77.460.

Sec. 2-356. - Preparation, presentation of warrant; sufficiency of funds. 
    Whenever the city shall become liable to any person in any amount and the claim has been properly audited by the city council and allowed as provided by ordinance, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to make out a warrant for the same, which he shall attest and present to the mayor for his signature, provided that there be sufficient money in the treasury to the credit of the fund to which said claim properly belongs, out of which it shall be paid, as provided by ordinance to pay the said warrants on demand; should there not be money in the treasury out of which to pay warrants drawn, the mayor and clerk shall not be allowed to draw any warrant on the fund. 
(Code 1967, § 13-23)
Sec. 2-357. - Warrant not to be drawn until allowed by council. 
    No warrant shall be drawn on the treasury for any sum for any purpose, unless the claim for the payment of which it is issued shall be first allowed by the city council. This shall apply to salaries of the city officers as well as all other claims against the city. 
(Code 1967, § 13-24)
Sec. 2-358. - Restrictions upon appropriations, warrants. 
    No appropriation of money shall be made by the mayor and council, and no warrant shall be drawn by the city clerk or paid by the finance director unless the amount of money remaining in the treasury to the credit of the fund upon which the warrant is drawn shall be sufficient to pay the same. It shall be unlawful for any councilman to vote to appropriate any sum out of the treasury, or order a warrant therefor, without the endorsement of the treasurer that there is a sufficient sum in the fund for the payment of the warrant, or appropriation. 
(Code 1967, § 13-25; Ord. No. 6676, § 11, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-359. - Appropriations, contracting indebtedness in excess of income of general fund. 
    It shall be unlawful for the city council to make appropriation or contract any indebtedness whatsoever, for any purpose, out of the general fund, exceeding the income of the fund, excluding commissions to officers, abatements of licenses and taxes and delinquent taxes for any fiscal year, or allow any claim unless there is money in the treasury to pay the same. 
(Code 1967, § 13-26)
Sec. 2-360. - City to defend and make payment of certain claims against city officers, employees, boards and commissions. 
(a)	The city council may authorize the proper officers to pay compensatory damage claims arising out of a civil or criminal action or threat of civil or criminal action, or settlements, judgments, expenses and costs, and awards of attorneys' fees arising therefrom against any present, future or former city employee, officer, agent, member of any city board or commission, or member of the city council when the city council determines that such claims resulted from activities which are done: 
(1)	In good faith; and
(2)	In the reasonable belief that such activities were in the best interest of the city and in the furtherance of the official practices and policies of the city; 
(3)	Within the scope of authority of the person so acting;
(4)	Within the course of employment of the person so acting;
(5)	Not willful, malicious or wanton.
(b)	Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving the city's defense of governmental function or governmental immunity in any action brought against the city or its employees, officers, agents, members of any city board or commission, or members of the city council for damages. 
(c)	The city council is hereby authorized to engage, retain and compensate special counsel for the defense of all such actions described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 2-16)
Secs. 2-361-2-365. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PURCHASING SYSTEM 

Sec. 2-366. - Authority of city clerk to prescribe and maintain forms and procedures. 
    The city clerk may prescribe and maintain such forms and procedures as necessary to expedite purchasing by the city. 
(Ord. No. 5670, § 1(13-132), 2-17-81)
Sec. 2-367. - General purchasing procedure. 
    The quantitative criteria for determining the degree of formality to be observed for each particular purchase by the city shall be as follows: 
(1)	Purchases under one thousand dollars. Budgeted purchases under one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be made directly by the department heads without formality. 
(2)	Purchases from one thousand dollars to two thousand five hundred dollars. For budgeted purchases from one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), the city administrator or department heads, without council approval, shall solicit at least three (3) bids, either in writing, by telephone, or both. The execution of the bid requirement should be documented on a prescribed form, which form shall include a statement from the finance director that the budgeted funds are available for immediate disbursement. The bids shall be submitted to the city council for subsequent award of the contract of services to the lowest responsible bidder who submits a responsive bid which is most advantageous to the city (hereafter referred to as the "lowest responsible bidder"). 
(3)	Purchases over two thousand five hundred dollars. Whenever any contemplated purchase or contract for services is for more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), the city council, by motion, or the city administrator shall direct the city clerk to solicit at least three (3) written sealed bids for the items or services. The city council shall award the purchase or contract of services to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(4)	Solicitation of bids. Whenever any contemplated purchase or contract for services requires solicitation for bids, the city clerk, upon request of the city administrator, a department head or by order of the city council, shall cause to be published in no less than one (1) issue of a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice inviting bids. The first such notice shall be published at least seven (7) days prior to the date set for the receipt of the bids. Such notice shall include a general description of the repairs or improvements and the time and place for opening bids. In addition, the city clerk shall post a notice inviting bids in the city administrator offices and may mail to all responsible prospective contractors for services performed a copy of the notice inserted in the newspaper as required in this subsection. This provision shall not apply to those cases in which bids are solicited by telephone as set forth in subsection (2) hereof. 
(5)	Notwithstanding any provision of this Article V, bids may be opened and reviewed in public by a council committee, or by the city administrator, city clerk, and department head meeting together, and subsequently reported to the council for its consideration and award. 
(6)	Notwithstanding any provision of this article, the city administrator may, with council approval, extend any contract for purchases or services awarded hereunder for the same or similar purchases or services by no more than fifty (50) percent of the original contract amount. 
(Ord. No. 5670, § 1(13-133), 2-17-81; Ord. No. 6012, § 1, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 6181, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 6676, § 11, 2-1-93) 
Sec. 2-368. - Authority to apply more formal procedures; criteria for selection of lowest responsible bidder. 
(a)	A department head or the city council shall not be precluded from applying more formal procedures in a particular situation than those called for under the prescribed requirements. 
(b)	The following criteria for selection of the lowest responsible bidder shall be considered:
(1)	Responsibility of bidder:
a.	The financial stability of the bidder;
b.	The production capability of the bidder;
c.	The ability of the bidder to deliver or perform on a timely basis;
d.	The quality of past performance on contracts or services;
e.	The principal place of business of the bidder.
(2)	Responsiveness of bidder:
a.	The conformity of specifications, terms and conditions to those in the invitation of bids; 
b.	The absence of unilateral mistakes or obvious errors made in calculating or presenting figures; 
c.	The reasonableness of price.
(Ord. No. 5670, § 1(13-134), 2-17-81)
Sec. 2-369. - Exceptions to general procedure. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2-467, purchases of items or services pursuant to this division may be made which are not in conformity with section 2-367 under the following circumstances: 
(1)	Single source purchases. If there is only one acceptable vendor capable of furnishing a particular service or commodity, the city council or department head may procure such service or commodity without bidding. The purchaser shall document the particular facts which make the item a single source purchase. 
(2)	Emergency purchases. Where an emergency situation requires immediate purchase of supplies or services and time is of the essence, the mayor shall authorize the procurement of the supplies or services needed without bidding. The purchaser shall maintain a written record of the circumstances surrounding emergency purchases. All emergency purchases shall be documented and presented at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. 
(3)	Situations calling for competitive negotiations. Where it can be demonstrated that the city receives the best value on a purchase through informal discussion and bargaining rather than through the conventional bidding process, the purchaser shall not be required to follow the conventional bidding process exclusively. Such purchases should be documented by the purchaser. Examples would include, but not be limited to, circumstances when time is a crucial factor, when the procurement involves high technology items or when there is obvious inherent economy in purchasing from a particular vendor. 
(4)	Cooperative purchasing. Established purchasing procedures should not apply to purchases made by, through or with the division of procurement of the state or any other governmental agency or unit with which the city is permitted to engage in cooperative purchasing. 
(5)	Confidential expenditures. Confidential expenditures, such as payments to informants, purchase of materials as evidence (such as narcotics) or other uses as may be required by law enforcement personnel working in an undercover capacity, cannot be subject to normal purchasing procedures. At such time as the circumstances require such expenditures to be made by the city, an imprest cash fund controlled by a bonded officer of the city should be established. All disbursements made from such fund should be approved by the chief of police and should be documented by written vouchers showing date, amount, nature of expenditure, signature of requesting officer or agent and approval of the chief of police. 
(6)	Professional services. Except by order of the city council, this division shall not apply to the acquisition of services of auditors, accountants, surveyors, registered professional engineers, land planners, consultants to the mayor and city council and attorneys-at-law providing legal services to the city and city employees and officers, both temporary and permanent. 
(Ord. No. 5670, § 1(13-135), 2-17-81)
Sec. 2-370. - Blanket purchase orders; purchase orders for recurring operating items or supplies. 
    Blanket authority not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be authorized by the mayor to facilitate purchasing items on credit from local business. 
(Ord. No. 5670, § 1(13-136), 2-17-81; Ord. No. 6676, § 21, 2-1-93)
Sec. 2-371. - Rules and regulations. 
    The mayor and a majority of the city councilmen are hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(Ord. No. 5670, § 1(13-137), 2-17-81)
Sec. 2-372. - Division inapplicable to purchases of real estate, easements, etc. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to govern the purchase or acquisition of real estate, rights-of-way, easements, licenses or any other interest of land or negotiated tap-on agreements. 
(Ord. No. 5670, § 1(13-138), 2-17-81)
Sec. 2-373. - Authority to reject bids. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of Division 4, the city may, without cause, reject any or all bids. 
(Ord. No. 6678, § 4, 2-16-93)
Chapter 3 - AIRPORT AND AIRCRAFT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note-Section 1 of Ord. No. 5988, adopted May 21, 1984, repealed §§ 3-1-3-5 of the 1967 Code as amended by Ord. No. 5772, § 1, adopted Feb. 1, 1982, from which §§ 3-11-3-15, the substantive provisions of Ch. 3, were derived. Said chapter formerly contained provisions relative to the municipal airport. Section 2 of Ord. No. 5988 enacted a new Ch. 3 to read as herein set forth.
State Law reference- Aircraft and airports, RSMo Ch. 305; authority of city to operate, maintain, regulate airports, RSMo 305.170.

Sec. 3-1. - Control of municipal airport. 
    The general control of the city airport shall be under the supervision of the director of the department of municipal services. 
(Ord. No. 5988, § 2, 5-21-84)
Sec. 3-2. - Insurance required for commercial operators. 
    All commercial operators of aircraft at the municipal airport shall carry bodily injury liability insurance and property damage insurance with a minimum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 5988, § 2, 5-21-84)
Sec. 3-3. - Location of hangar space. 
    The general control of all locations of hangar space shall be under the control of the director of the department of municipal services. 
(Ord. No. 5988, § 2, 5-21-84)
Sec. 3-4. - Unlawful to enter upon runways, enclosures; exceptions. 
(a)	No person shall enter onto any of the runways of the municipal airport of the city, nor into the enclosure surrounding the runways, other than personnel of and passengers in aircraft landing at or which are parked at the airport, and persons authorized by the mayor or a councilman of the city. 
(b)	Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the entrance onto the premises by:
(1)	Any duly authorized representative of the federal aviation administration.
(2)	The chief of police or the fire chief or any member of the police department or fire department of the city while in the discharge of their duties. 
(3)	Any lessee of any property which is a part of the property described in this section.
(4)	Any person meeting other persons landing at the airport or accompanying persons who are departing therefrom. 
(5)	Personnel present and necessary for maintenance of aircraft.
(Ord. No. 5988, § 2, 5-21-84)
Sec. 3-5. - Vehicles prohibited from landing area; exception. 
    All land motor vehicles shall be prohibited from the landing area of the municipal memorial airport except those vehicles marked with red flags. 
(Ord. No. 5988, § 2, 5-21-84)
Sec. 3-6. - Duties of director regarding airport. 
    The director of the department of municipal services, acting pursuant to the guidance and under the control of the council municipal services committee shall have the following duties: 
(a)	To develop and recommend rules and regulations applicable to airport activity within the confines of existing federal, state, county and city laws or ordinances, and recommend additional laws or ordinances or revisions thereto. 
(b)	To represent the city in all matters dealing with air traffic and commerce.
(c)	To receive and screen all applications for catering services, fuel, oil, transportation, fixed-based operations, flight instructions, manufacturing or such other activities involving the municipal airport and make recommendations to the mayor or city council as applicable. 
(d)	To investigate the need for and recommend action necessary for maintenance of the municipal airport so long as such airport requires city labor, equipment and materials or the contribution of labor, equipment and materials by others. 
(e)	To develop and update through the assistance of suitable technical consultants a master airport or improvement program, including but not restricted to, runways, lighting, taxiways, parking area, hangars, restaurants, lodging, communications, servicing, navigations, and flight aides. 
(f)	To develop and recommend ways and means for the accomplishment to an approved master airport plan. 
(Ord. No. 5988, § 2, 5-21-84)
Sec. 3-7. - Airport representative. 
    At the first regular meeting of the city council in May of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the mayor shall appoint one member of the municipal services committee as the airport representative. 
(Ord. No. 5988, § 2, 5-21-84)
Sec. 3-8. - Airport tenants' representative. 
    The airport tenants, as of April 1 of each year, shall select a person to represent their interests on airport matters before the municipal services committee. 
(Ord. No. 5988, § 2, 5-21-84)
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages prohibited in massage establishments, § 15-12; alcoholic beverages in city park, § 19-5; license taxes for alcoholic beverages, § 28-24(2); driving while under the influence of intoxicants, § 29-73; prima facie driving while intoxicated, § 29-74.
State Law reference- Liquor control law, RSMo Ch. 311; nonintoxicating beer, RSMo Ch. 312.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Intoxicating liquor shall mean and include alcohol for beverage purposes, alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt or other liquors, or combination of liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous or fermented, and all preparations or mixtures for beverage purposes, containing in excess of three and two-tenths (3.2) percent of alcohol by weight. 
    Nonintoxicating beer shall mean any beer manufactured from pure hops, and pure barley malt or other wholesome grains or cereals, and wholesome yeast, and pure water, and free from all harmful substances, preservatives and adulterants, and having an alcoholic content of more than one-half of one percent by volume and not exceeding three and two-tenths (3.2) percent by weight. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.020, 312.010. 
Sec. 4-2. - Drinking in public prohibited. 
    No person shall consume or drink any nonintoxicating beer or any intoxicating liquor of any kind in or upon any public street, sidewalk or other public place, except as provided in section 19-5 relating to picnic areas of public parks. 
(Code 1967, § 20-7.2)
Sec. 4-3. - Sale or handling by minors. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, no person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall sell or assist in the sale or dispensing of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer. 
(b)	In any place of business licensed in accordance with this chapter, where at least fifty (50) percent of the gross sales made consists of goods, merchandise or commodities other than intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer in the original package, persons at least eighteen (18) years of age may stock, arrange displays, accept payment for and sack for carryout intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer. Delivery of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer away from the licensed business premises cannot be performed by anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(c)	In any distillery, warehouse, wholesale distributorship or similar place of business which stores or distributes intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer but which does not sell intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer at retail, persons at least eighteen (18) years of age may be employed and their duties may include the handling of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer for all purposes except consumption, sale at retail, or dispensing for consumption or sale at retail. 
(d)	Persons eighteen (18) years of age or older may, when acting in the capacity as a waiter or waitress, accept payment for or serve intoxicating liquor in places of business which sell food for consumption on the premises if at least fifty (50) percent of all sales in those places consists of food; provided that nothing in this section shall authorize persons under twenty-one (21) years of age to mix or serve across the bar intoxicating beverages. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.300. 
Sec. 4-4. - Dancing restricted on licensed premises. 
    Any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter who employs an entertainer or performer, or permits any entertainer, performer or patron to perform a dance of any kind whatever upon the bar or any other place used for serving food or beverages, or in any place within the premises open to view from the sidewalk or street, or allows such dance to be performed other than on a raised dias or platform or some designated area adequately set aside from the immediate vicinity where patrons may be seated or standing shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 4-31)
Cross reference- Amusements generally, Ch. 5. 
Secs. 4-5-4-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NONINTOXICATING BEER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of nonintoxicating beer, RSMo Ch. 312.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-16. - Breaking of original package. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person holding a permit authorizing the sale of nonintoxicating beer in the original package to allow such original package to be broken, or to allow any of such nonintoxicating beer to be consumed, in or upon the premises described in such permit. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 312.390. 
Sec. 4-17. - Misrepresentation of age. 
(a)	Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and under the age of twenty-one (21) years who represents that he has attained the age of twenty-one (21) for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any way receiving nonintoxicating beer, shall, upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)	Any person under the age of seventeen (17) years who represents that he has attained the age of twenty-one (21) years for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any way receiving nonintoxicating beer, shall be dealt with in accordance with RSMo Ch. 211. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 312.405. 
Sec. 4-18. - Purchase or possession by minor. 
    Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, who purchases or attempts to purchase, or has in his possession, any nonintoxicating beer is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 4-5)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 312.407. 
Sec. 4-19. - Supplying to certain persons prohibited. 
    No person or his employee shall sell or supply nonintoxicating beer or permit the same to be sold or supplied to any person who is under or apparently under the influence of alcoholic beverages. Nonintoxicating beer shall not be given, sold or otherwise supplied to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, but this shall not apply to the supplying of nonintoxicating beer to a person under such age for medicinal purposes only, or by the parent or guardian of such person or to the administering of such nonintoxicating beer to such person by a physician. 
(Code 1967, § 4-3)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 312.400. 
Sec. 4-20. - Sales prohibited between certain hours. 
    No person having a license under the provisions of this article shall sell, give away or otherwise dispose of, or suffer the same to be done, upon or about his premises any nonintoxicating beer in any quantity between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. and any person violating any provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than one year, or by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than four hundred dollars ($400.00) or by both such fine and jail sentence. 
(Code 1967, § 4-2)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 312.410. 
Secs. 4-21-4-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational license taxes generally, § 28-11 et seq.
State Law reference- Licensing authority for nonintoxicating beer, RSMo 312.140.

Sec. 4-26. - Required; separate license for consumption on premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or expose for sale in this city nonintoxicating beer in any quantity without taking out a license from the city. A separate license shall be taken out for the sale of nonintoxicating beer for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(Code 1967, § 4-19)
State Law reference- Permit necessary, RSMo 312.030. 
Sec. 4-27. - Application. 
    An application for a license to sell nonintoxicating beer under the provisions of this division shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be on forms to be furnished by the clerk and signed and sworn to by the applicant. 
(Code 1967, § 4-20)
State Law reference- Application for state license, RSMo 312.080. 
Sec. 4-28. - Qualifications of licensee. 
    No person shall be granted a license under this division unless such person is of good moral character and a qualified legal voter and taxpaying citizen of the state; and no person shall be granted a license or permit hereunder whose license as such dealer has been revoked, or who has been convicted since the ratification of the twenty-first amendment to the Constitution of the United States, of the violations of the provisions of any law applicable to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, or who employs or has employed in his business, as such dealer, any person whose license has been revoked or who has been convicted of violating the provisions of any such law since the date aforesaid. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions for state license, RSMo 312.040. 
Sec. 4-29. - Separate license for each place of business; contents. 
    A separate license shall be required under this division for each place of business. Every license issued under the provisions of this division shall particularly describe the premises at which nonintoxicating beer may be sold thereunder, and such license shall not be deemed to authorize or permit the sale of nonintoxicating beer at any place other than that described therein. 
(Code 1967, § 4-21)
State Law reference- Similar provisions for state license, RSMo 312.110. 
Sec. 4-30. - Approval; issuance to owner, proprietor or keeper only. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a license under this division, such application shall be presented to the city council at its next regular or special meeting, and, upon approval of such application by a majority of the city council, and upon payment of the license tax provided for in section 4-31, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant to conduct business in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 4-21)
Sec. 4-31. - Fees. 
    Before any license shall be issued for the manufacture or sale of nonintoxicating beer in the city, the applicant therefor shall pay to the city a fee as follows: 
(1)	For the manufacture, and the sale by the manufacturer, of nonintoxicating beer brewed or manufactured in this state .....$375.00 
(2)	For the sale by any distributor or wholesaler, other than the manufacturer or brewer thereof .....50.00 
(3)	For the sale for consumption on the premises where sold .....35.00 
(4)	For the sale by grocers and other merchants and dealers in the original package direct to consumers, but not for resale .....22.50 
(5)	For sale to duly licensed wholesalers and soliciting orders for the sale .....75.00 
(Code 1967, § 4-22)
State Law reference- Amount of state fees, RSMo 312.100; amount charged by city regulated, RSMo 312.140. 
Sec. 4-32. - Term; proration of fees. 
    The annual licenses issued under this division shall be dated July first, and shall expire June thirtieth of the following year, and the fees for such licenses shall be paid annually in advance. Licenses may be issued for part of a year for businesses commenced after July first, and proportionate fees charged based on the months or fraction of a month such licenses are to run to the next June thirtieth following. 
(Code 1967, § 4-23)
State Law reference- Similar provisions for state licenses, RSMo 312.110. 
Sec. 4-33. - Posting on premises required. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be kept conspicuously posted in the place for which such licenses were issued. 
Sec. 4-34. - Licensee not to sell intoxicating liquor. 
    No person having a license under the provisions of this division to sell nonintoxicating beer at retail shall be granted or permitted to hold a license to sell malt liquor containing alcohol in excess of three and two-tenths (3.2) percent by weight or any other kind of intoxicating liquor; nor shall any person be granted or permitted to hold a license to sell nonintoxicating beer in, upon or about the premises of any person who is the holder of a license to sell intoxicating liquor. 
(Code 1967, § 4-6)
State Law reference- Similar provisions for state licenses, RSMo 312.050. 
Sec. 4-35. - Transferability. 
    No license issued under this division shall be transferable or assignable. 
(Code 1967, § 4-24)
State Law reference- Similar provisions for state licenses, RSMo 312.130. 
Sec. 4-36. - Revocation; notice and hearing. 
    Whenever it is shown to the city council that a dealer licensed under this division has not at all times kept an orderly place or house, or has violated any of the provisions of this division or of RSMo Ch. 312, or has no license from the state supervisor of liquor control, or has made a false affidavit in his application for a license, the city council, after a hearing thereon, shall revoke the license of such dealer, giving ten (10) days' notice, in writing, thereof prior to the hearing thereon to the dealer, or any person in charge of or employed in the place licensed stating the time, place, purpose and grounds therefor, at which hearing the dealer may have counsel and produce witnesses in his behalf. 
(Code 1967, § 4-25)
State Law reference- License revocation, RSMo 312.237. 
Secs. 4-37-4-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INTOXICATING LIQUOR[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Liquor control law, RSMo Ch. 311.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-46. - Exemptions from article provisions. 
    This article shall not apply to the possession by a druggist of intoxicating liquor purchased by him from a licensed vendor under the Liquor Control Act of the state, or intoxicating liquor lawfully acquired and transported into the state by him pursuant to such act, such liquor to be used in connection with the business of a druggist in compounding medicines or as a solvent or preservative, nor shall this article apply to the sale of intoxicating liquors by druggists on prescription from a regularly licensed physician. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.470. 
Sec. 4-47. - Misrepresentation of age by minor. 
    Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and under the age of twenty-one (21) years who shall represent that he or she has attained the age of twenty-one (21) years for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in anyway receiving any intoxicating liquor, except in cases authorized by law, shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person under the age of seventeen (17) years who shall represent that he or she has attained the age of twenty-one (21) years for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in anyway receiving any intoxicating liquor, except in cases authorized by law, may be considered a delinquent child and may be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of RSMo Ch. 211. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions. RSMo 311.320. 
Sec. 4-48. - Purchase or possession by minor. 
    Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, who purchases or attempts to purchase, or has in his possession, any intoxicating liquor is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 4-5)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.325. 
Sec. 4-49. - Sale prohibited during certain hours. 
(a)	No person having a license under this article nor any employee of such person shall sell, give away or otherwise dispose or suffer the same to be done upon or about his premises, any intoxicating liquor in any quantity between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 1:30 a.m. Sunday and 9:00 a.m. Where such licenses authorizing the sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink are held by clubs or hotels this section shall apply only to the room or rooms in which intoxicating liquor is dispensed; and where such licenses are held by restaurants whose business is conducted in one room only and substantial quantities of food and merchandise, other than intoxicating liquors are dispensed, then the licensee shall keep securely locked during the hours and on the days herein specified all refrigerators, cabinets, cases, boxes and taps from which intoxicating liquor is dispensed. A "closed place" is defined to mean a place where all doors are locked and where no patrons are in the place or about the premises. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)	When December thirty-first falls on Sunday, any person having a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink may be open for business and sell intoxicating liquor by the drink under the provisions of his license on that day after 1:00 p.m. and until the time which would be lawful on another day of the week. 
(Code 1067, §§ 4-2, 4-4; Ord. No. 6471, § 1,5-21-90; Ord. No. 6676, § 22, 2-1-93; Ord. No. 6703, § 1, 6-21-93; Ord. No. 7484, § 1, 9-2-03) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.290, 311.298. 
Sec. 4-50. - Supplying to certain persons prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or his employee to sell or supply intoxicating liquor or permit same to be sold or supplied to a habitual drunkard or to any person who is under or apparently under the influence of intoxicating liquor. Intoxicating liquor shall not be given, sold or otherwise supplied to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(Code 1967, § 4-3)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.310. 
Sec. 4-51. - Window displays prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to display in any street window or show window any intoxicating liquor, or any package, bottle or container bearing the label or brand of any intoxicating liquor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.350. 
Sec. 4-52. - Possession of intoxicating liquor restricted. 
    No person shall possess intoxicating liquor within the city unless the same has been acquired from some person holding a duly authorized license to sell the same under this chapter, or unless the intoxicating liquor is had or kept with the written or printed permission of the state supervisor of liquor control, and the package in which intoxicating liquor is contained and from which it is taken for consumption has, while containing intoxicating liquor, been labeled and sealed with the official seal prescribed under state law and the regulations made thereunder. 
(Code 1967, § 4-7)
State Law reference- Possession of intoxicating liquor, RSMo 311.580(2). 
Secs. 4-53-4-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational license tax generally, § 28-11 et seq.
State Law reference- State license required, RSMo 311.050; licensing authority of the city, RSMo 311.220.

Sec. 4-61. - Required; classes. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distill, brew, sell or expose for sale in this city, intoxicating liquor in any quantity, without taking out a license from the city. A separate license shall be taken out for each of the following classes of sales of intoxicating liquors in which the licensee desires to engage: 
(1)	Sales of all kinds of intoxicating liquors in the original package not to be consumed on the premises where sold; 
(2)	Sales of malt liquor containing alcohol in excess of three and two-tenths (3.2) percent by weight and not in excess of five (5) percent by weight by grocers and other merchants and dealers for sale in the original package direct to consumers but not for resale and not for consumption on the premises where sold; 
(3)	Sales of malt liquor containing alcohol not in excess of five (5) percent by weight and more than three and two-tenths (3.2) percent by weight and light wines containing alcohol not in excess of fourteen (14) percent by weight made exclusively from grapes, berries and other fruits and vegetables, at retail by the drink, for consumption on the premises where sold, which license shall also permit the holder to sell non-intoxicating beer. 
(4)	Sale of intoxicating liquor of all kinds at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold, including the sale of intoxicating liquors in the original package. 
(5)	Sunday restaurant-Bar by the drink. For the retail sale of intoxicating liquor in excess of five percent (5%) of alcohol by weight between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and midnight on Sunday at retail for consumption on the premises where sold, and the premises is a restaurant bar as defined in RSMo 311.097, as amended. 
(6)	Picnic retail liquor by the drink. For issuance of a temporary license to certain not-for-profit organizations, as authorized in Section 311.482 RSMo, as amended, for the retail sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink for consumption on premises where sold at picnics and similar gatherings for a period not to exceed seven days in any fiscal period. If the event will be held on a Sunday, the permit shall authorize the sale of intoxicating liquor on that day beginning at 11:00 a.m. 
(7)	Caterers' retail liquor by the drink. For issuance of a license to caterers and other persons who provide provisions and services at a particular function, occasion or event at a particular location for a period not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) consecutive hours, allowing the temporary sale of retail liquor by the drink, all as authorized in Section 311.200 RSMo, as amended. 
(8)	Caterers' retail five (5) percent beer-wine by the drink. For issuance of a license to caterers and other persons who provide provisions and services at a particular function, occasion or event at a particular location for a period not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) consecutive hours, allowing the temporary sale of retail five (5) percent beer-wine by the drink, all as authorized in Chapter 311, RSMo., as amended. 
(9)	Picnic retail five (5) percent beer-wine by the drink. For issuance of a temporary license to certain not-for-profit organizations for the retail sale of five (5) percent beer by the drink at picnics and similar gatherings for a period not to exceed seven (7) days in any fiscal period, all as authorized in Chapter 311, RSMo., as amended. 
(b)	Each license shall apply to the class for which issued, and it shall be unlawful to sell or expose for sale any intoxicating liquor except in the manner authorized in the license held by the licensee as issued under this division. 
(Code 1967, § 4.19; Ord. No. 7536, § 1, 4-19-04; Ord. No. 7906, § 1, 10-5-09; Ord. No. 8110, § 1, 4-15-2013) 
Sec. 4-62. - Application. 
    Application for a license to sell intoxicating liquors under the provisions of this division shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be on forms to be furnished by the clerk and signed and sworn to by the applicant. 
(Code 1967, § 4-20)
Sec. 4-63. - Qualifications of licensee. 
    No person shall be issued a license under this division unless such person is of good moral character and a qualified legal voter and taxpaying citizen of the state; and no person shall be issued a license or permit hereunder whose license as such dealer has been revoked, or who has been convicted, since the ratification of the twenty-first amendment to the Constitution of the United States, of the violations of the provisions of any law applicable to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor, or who employs or has employed in his business, as such dealer, any person whose license has been revoked or who has been convicted of violating the provisions of any such law since the date aforesaid. 
(Code 1967, § 4.27)
State Law reference- Similar provisions for state licenses, RSMo 311.060. 
Sec. 4-64. - Distance restrictions from churches, schools. 
    No license shall be issued for the sale of intoxicating liquor within one hundred (100) feet of any school, church or other building regularly used as a place of religious worship, unless the applicant for the license shall first obtain the consent in writing of the board of directors of the school, or the consent in writing of the majority of the managing board of the church or place of worship; except that when a school, church or place of worship shall hereafter be established within one hundred (100) feet of any place of business licensed to sell intoxicating liquor, the license shall not be denied for lack of consent in writing as herein provided. The distance shall be measured by direct measurement in a horizontal plane on a straight line by means of a steel tape of standard length; and the distance shall be measured between and defined as the distance between the most adjacent point on the property lines of any church or school of learning and the most adjacent point on the frontal line or street line property line of the building in question. 
(Code 1967, § 4-28; Ord. No. 5763, § 1, 6-15-81)
State Law reference- Sale prohibited near schools, churches, RSMo 311.080. 
Sec. 4-65. - Separate license required for each place of business; contents. 
    A separate license shall be required under this division for each place of business. Every license issued under the provisions of this division shall particularly describe the premises at which intoxicating liquor may be sold thereunder, and such license shall not be deemed to authorize or permit the sale of intoxicating liquor at any place other than that described therein. 
(Code 1967, § 4-21)
Sec. 4-66. - Fees. 
    Before any license shall be issued for the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors in the city, the applicant therefor shall pay to the city a fee as follows: 
(1)	For the manufacturing, brewing, distilling or blending of intoxicating liquors:
a.	Containing not more than five (5) percent of alcohol by weight .....$300.00 
b.	Containing not more than twenty-two (22) percent of alcohol by weight .....150.00 
c.	Of all kinds .....300.00 
(2)	For selling to duly licensed wholesalers and soliciting orders for the sale by or through a duly licensed wholesaler of intoxicating liquors: 
a.	Containing not more than five (5) percent of alcohol by weight .....75.00 
b.	Containing not more than twenty-two (22) percent of alcohol by weight .....150.00 
c.	Of all kinds .....375.00 
(3)	For the sale by a wholesaler to a person duly licensed to sell, at retail, intoxicating liquor: 
a.	Containing not more than five (5) percent of alcohol by weight .....75.00 
b.	Containing not more than twenty-two (22) percent of alcohol by weight .....150.00 
c.	Of all kinds .....375.00 
(4)	For the manufacture in quantities not exceeding seventy-five thousand (75,000) gallons of light wines containing not more than fourteen (14) percent of alcohol by weight exclusively from grapes, berries and other fruits and vegetables grown in the state, for each five hundred (500) gallons or fraction thereof .....7.50 
    A manufacturer hereunder may sell directly to the consumer at the winery in lots not exceeding five (5) gallons, and to duly licensed wholesalers and retailers in lots of five (5) gallons or more. 
(5)	For the sale at retail of intoxicating liquors in connection with a drugstore, a cigar and tobacco store, a general merchandise store, a confectionery or delicatessen, or a store having and keeping a stock of goods valuing at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), exclusive of fixtures and intoxicating liquors .....75.00 
(6)	For the sale of malt liquor by grocers and other merchants and dealers in the original package direct to consumers, but not for resale (includes Sunday sales) .....150.00 
    This license shall also permit the sale of non-intoxicating beer in the original package direct to consumers, but not for resale. 
(7)	For the sale of malt liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold (includes Sunday sales) .....75.00 
    This license shall also permit the sale of non-intoxicating beer by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(8)	For the sale of malt liquor and light wines by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold .....75.00 
    This license shall also permit the sale of non-intoxicating beer by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(9)	For the sale of intoxicating liquor, by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold .....450.00 
    This license shall also permit the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package. 
(10)	For a restaurant bar licensed under RSMo. §311.215 .....300.00 
(11)	For the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package on Sunday .....300.00 
(12)	For the sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink, on Sunday, for consumption on the premises where sold .....150.00 
(13)	For the retail sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink by certain not-for-profit organizations for consumption on premises where sold at picnics and similar gatherings .....37.50 
(14)	For temporary sale of retail liquor by the drink to caterers and other persons for an event at a particular location for a period not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) consecutive hours, for each 24-hour period, or part thereof .....15.00 
(15)	For temporary sale of retail beer-wine by the drink by caterers and other persons for an event at a particular location for a period not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) consecutive hours for each 24-hour period or part thereof .....15.00 
(16)	For picnic sale of retail beer-wine by the drink by certain not-for-profit organizations at picnics and similar gatherings for a period not to exceed seven (7) days in any fiscal period .....37.50 
(Code 1967, § 4-29; Ord. No. 6057, § 16, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 6703, § 2, 6-21-93; Ord. No. 7536, § 2, 4-19-04; Ord. No. 7624, § 1, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 7906, §§ 2.3, 10-5-09; Ord. No. 8110, § 2, 4-15-13) 
State Law reference- Amount of state fees, RSMo 311.180-311.200; amount charged by city regulated, RSMo 311,220. 
Sec. 4-67. - Term. 
    Each license issued under this division may be issued for a period of six (6) months or one (1) year, as applied for. 
(Code 1967, § 4-23)
State Law reference- Similar provisions for state licenses, RSMo 311.240. 
Sec. 4-68. - Display. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be kept conspicuously posted in the place for which such license was issued. 
Sec. 4-69. - Transferability. 
(a)	No license issued under this division shall be transferable or assignable except as provided in this section. 
(b)	In the event of the death of the licensee, the widow or widower or the next of kin of such deceased licensee, who shall meet the other requirements of this division may make application for a transfer of such license to permit the operation of the business of the deceased for the remainder of the period for which a license fee has been paid by the deceased. 
(c)	Whenever one or more members of a partnership withdraws from the partnership, the remaining partners may be permitted to continue to operate for the remainder of the period for which the license fee has been paid, without obtaining a new license. 
State Law reference- Licenses nontransferable; exceptions, RSMo 311.250. 
Sec. 4-70. - Revocation; notice and hearing. 
    Whenever it is shown to the city council that a dealer licensed under this division has not at all times kept an orderly place or house, or has violated any of the provisions of this division or of the Liquor Control Act of the state, or has no license from the state supervisor of liquor control, or has made a false affidavit in his application for a license, the city council, after a hearing thereon, shall revoke the license of such dealer, giving ten (10) days' notice, in writing, thereof prior to the hearing thereon to the dealer, or any person in charge of or employed in the place licensed stating the time, place, purpose and grounds therefor, at which hearing the dealer may have counsel and produce witness in his behalf. 
(Code 1967, § 4-25)
Chapter 5 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Dancing restricted on licensed alcoholic beverage premises, § 4-4; license tax for billiard hall, § 28-24(13); license tax for bowling alleys, § 28-24(15); license tax for carnivals, § 28-24(19); license tax for circuses, § 28-24(20); license tax for dance halls, § 28-24(23); license tax for equestrian performances, § 28-24(26); license tax for menageries, § 28-24(51); license taxes for opera houses, § 28-24(52); license tax for moving pictures, § 28-24(57); license tax for music boxes, § 28-24(58); license tax for pinball machines, § 28-24(65); license tax for pistol gallery, § 28-24(66); license tax for pool halls, § 28-24(67); license tax for shooting gallery, § 28-24(74); license tax for shows, exhibitions, performances and displays, § 28-24(75); license tax for sideshows, § 28-24(76); license tax for skating rink, § 28-24(77); license tax for ten pin alleys, § 28-24(82); license tax for tent shows and stock companies, § 28-24(83); license tax for theatrical performances, § 28-24(84).
State Law reference- Authority to control amusements, RSMo 77.520; authority to license, regulate, restrain, prohibit and suppress various amusements, RSMo 94.110.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Licenses to be displayed on pinball machines and music boxes. 
    The owners or operators of pinball machines and music boxes shall display the licenses for each machine in a place in the place of business where the public may inspect same. There shall be licenses displayed for each such machine in the place of business. It shall be permissible for the owners or operators to change machines but they shall not at any time have more machines than they have licenses on display. 
(Code 1967, § 18-31)
Secs. 5-2-5-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BILLIARDS, POOL AND BOWLING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- License tax for billiard halls, § 28-24(13); license tax for bowling alleys, § 28-24(15).
State Law reference- Pool tables, RSMo Ch. 318.

Sec. 5-16. - Prerequisites to operation. 
    Any person who desires to operate and keep for hire and profit, billiard tables, pool tables or similar tables, or bowling alley or box ball alleys, shall make application in person to the city council and shall appear before the city council while the same is in session and show to the satisfaction of the city council that he is a person who will operate and keep his place of business in an orderly manner, and he shall then and there furnish to the city council the names of all persons who are to be engaged in the conduct of the business of operating or keeping for hire or profit, such billiard, pool or other tables, or bowling or box ball alleys, and shall also furnish to the city council a description of the exact location where the business is to be conducted. It shall be unlawful for each applicant thereafter, during the term of his license, to employ for hire or otherwise any person to assist in any way in the conduct of his business who is not so named at the time of making such application, or to engage in or operate the business at any place other than that described at the time of making such application to the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 18-32)
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 7040, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 5, 1997, repealed former Ch. 6, Arts. I-III, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1967 and the following: Ord. No. 5947, § 5, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 6028, § 1, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 6047, §§ 4, 5, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 6676, § 23, 2-1-93.
The editor has amended the section numbering set out in Ord. No. 7040 to reflect the numbering system of this Code of Ordinances. For example, "Section 5." as set out in section 2 of said ordinance has been included as "Sec. 6-5." Language in brackets [] has been added by the editor solely for purposes of clarification and such language does not derive from Ord. No. 7040.
Cross reference- License tax for stockyards, § 28-24(79); applicability of traffic regulations to persons riding animals, § 29-3; regulation of horse drawn vehicles, § 29-396.
State Law reference- Authority of City concerning animals and fowl, RSMo 77.510.

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote harmonious relationships in the interaction between man and animal by: 
(a)	protecting animals from improper use, abuse, neglect, exploitation, inhumane treatment and health hazards; 
(b)	delineating the animal owner's or harborer's responsibility for the acts and behavior of his animal at all times; 
(c)	providing security to residents from annoyance, intimidation, injury and health hazards by animals; 
(d)	encouraging responsible pet ownership; and
(e)	providing standards for any and all persons and agencies, public or private, engaged in confinement, buying, selling, harboring or dealing in animals in any manner whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(1), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
(a)	"Animal" is any mammal domestic or wild, other than man, which may be affected by rabies. 
(b)	"Animal Control Officer" is that person educated in the care, seizure, custody and confinement of animals or his agent as appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council and supervised by the Chief of Police. 
(c)	"Animal nuisance" is created when an animal:
(1)	runs uncontrolled (except cats);
(2)	molests or disturbs persons or vehicles by chasing, barking or biting;
(3)	attacks other animals;
(4)	damages property other than that of the owner or harborer;
(5)	barks, whines, howls, honks, brays, cries or makes other noises excessively;
(6)	creates noxious or offensive odors;
(7)	defecates upon any public place or upon premises not owned or controlled by the owner or harborer unless promptly removed by the animal owner or harborer; or 
(8)	creates an insect breeding and/or attraction site due to an accumulation of excreta.
(d)	"Animal shelter" is a licensed facility, public or private, used to impound, confine and house animals seized, lost, abandoned or given over by owners. 
(d.5)	"Appropriate shelter" is a cover or protection from the elements containing adequate bedding such as straw, hay, or wood shavings, which cover or protections is small enough to allow the dog or cat to retain its body heat but is large enough to allow protection from the sun and allow the animal to stand, turnaround and lie down. 
(e)	"Bite" means to be seized with the teeth or jaws so that a person or animal has been nipped, gripped, wounded, pierced or scratched by the biting animal. 
(f)	"Boarding kennel" is a licensed facility other than an animal hospital, the City pound or an animal shelter where animals, normally dogs and cats, not owned by the proprietor, are temporarily sheltered, fed, watered, and exercised in return for a fee. 
(g)	"Breeder" is any person who harbors four or more animals, or who breeds animals for profit or who produces more than one litter of animals, normally dogs or cats, in any one calendar year. 
(h)	"Cat" is any member of the animal species Felis Catis.
(i)	"City" is the City of Marshall, Missouri, a municipal corporation of the third class.
(j)	"Control" of an animal means that same is on a leash not more than eight feet in length; is restrained on or within a vehicle being driven or parked; or is within the property limits of its owner or harborer or upon the premises of another person with the consent of that person. 
(k)	"Dog" is any member of the animal species Canis Familiaris.
(l)	"Domestic animal" includes dogs, cats, domesticated sheep, horses, cattle, goats, swine, fowl, ducks, geese, turkeys, confined domestic hares and rabbits, pheasants and other birds and animals raised and/or maintained in confinement. 
(m)	"Euthanasia" is the act of inducing a humane death by a technique which produces rapid loss of consciousness, followed by cardiac arrest and ultimate loss of brain function. 
(n)	"Exhibitor" is a person who exhibits animals, for compensation or improvement of the breed. 
(o)	"Groomer" is a person who performs the service of trimming, bathing or pedicure of animals, normally dogs and cats. 
(p)	"Harborer" is any person who provides food and shelter to any domesticated animal on other than a periodic or temporary basis. 
(q)	"Non-Domestic Animal"- All felines (other than the domestic house cat), nonhuman primates, bears, wolves, coyotes, foxes and venomous reptiles, any animal having a poisonous bite, constrictor reptiles, and any crossbreed of such animals which have similar characteristics of the animals specified herein. In order to properly administer the provisions of this section, the Animal Control Commission may add to or remove from the classification of non-domestic animals any bird, mammal, reptile, aquatic and amphibious forms, or other members of the animal kingdom. Additions to the list may be made only if the Animal Control Commission determines, after public hearing, that such species because of habit, mode of life or natural instinct is incapable of being domesticated, requires the exercise of art, force, or skill to keep them safely in subjection, and would create a reasonable likelihood of hazard to the public. Each determination by the Animal Control Commission as to additions or deletion shall become effective when filed with the City Clerk. 
(r)	"Owner" is any person having the right of property in any animal; who keeps an animal; who has an animal in his care or custody; or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. 
(s)	"Person" is any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust, estate or other legal entity. 
(t)	"Pet Shop" is an establishment operated by a person which acquires animals, birds, reptiles and fish bred by others whether an owner or agent or on consignment and sells, offers to sell, exchanges or offers for adoption with or without charge such animals, birds, reptiles and fish as domestic pets to the general public at wholesale or retail. 
(u)	"Pound" is that facility as designated by the City used to temporarily shelter, confine and house animals that have been seized. 
(u.5)	"Tether/Tethering" means to attach an animal to a stationary object or pulley run by means of a chain, rope, tether, cable or similar restraint, but does not include the use of a leash to walk a dog. 
(v)	"Trainer" is a person qualified by training and experience in training animals for work, hunting, pleasure, obedience or exhibition. 
(w)	"Vaccination" is the administration of vaccine by a licensed veterinarian at such intervals as required by state statutes and the State Department of Agriculture. 
(x)	"Vicious (dangerous) dog" is any dog over 25 pounds in weight that attacks a person where the person may lawfully be at any time without other provocation; or any dog whose attack or bite breaks a bone, requires sutures or causes other serious injury; or any dog declared to be vicious by the Animal Control Commission or its authorized representative. 
Exceptions: 
a)	Dogs owned by governmental or law enforcement agencies when being used in the service of those agencies; 
b)	Work dogs, to include service dogs trained to assist the handicapped.
No dog may be declared vicious if the Animal Control Commission determines that 
a)	the attack was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal, or has, in the past, been observed or is reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime; and 
b)	the actions of the injured person caused the attack.
(y)	"Work dog" is any member of the animal species Canis Familiaris trained for and actively engaged in rescue, law enforcement or war work, or as a guide of the blind or deaf. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(2), 5-5-97; Ord. No. 7142, § 1, 10-5-98; Ord. No. 7884, § 1, 6-15-09)
Sec. 6-3. - Animal control officer. 
    There is hereby created the position of Animal Control Officer within the organization of the Police Department. The Animal Control Officer or his agent, or any officer of the law: 
(a)	may enter upon private premises to apprehend a stray, a vicious animal, a wild creature, a non-domestic animal, or an animal suspected of being infected with rabies; 
(b)	may enter upon private premises to investigate complaints of irresponsibility or inhumane animal care; and 
(c)	may seize, impound and dispose of any vicious animal of any kind when necessary for the protection of any person or animal. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(3), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-4. - City animal shelter. 
    A facility for proper impoundment of animals on a temporary basis shall be provided by the City. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(4), 5-5-95)
Sec. 6-4.1. - Animal shelter registry. 
    The Animal Control Officer shall maintain a registry of all animals served by the shelter, including date of receipt and discharge, reason for use, description of the animal, itemization of impoundment expenses incurred and disposition. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(4.1), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-5. - Ownership. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 17 to own or harbor a domestic animal. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(5), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-5.1. - Responsible animal care. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, keeper or other person controlling, possessing or responsible for any animal to: 
(a)	Not provide sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and water for the animal;
(b)	Not provide appropriate shelter from the weather for the animal;
(c)	Not provide veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering by the animal.
(d)	Treat or care for an animal in an inhumane manner;
(e)	Tether an animal outdoors in unsafe or unsanitary conditions;
(f)	Leave an animal tethered outdoors for more than eight continuous hours or for a total in excess of twelve (12) hours in a twenty-four hour period; 
(g)	Tether an animal to inanimate objects such as, but not limited to, trees, posts, stakes and buildings except by means of a properly fitting harness or collar of nylon or leather construction, a tether no less than fifteen (15) feet in length, a tether in proportion to the size of the animal and with a swivel at both ends; 
(h)	Tether an animal outdoors under conditions where the animal or tether can become entangled on the tether, another animal, or some other object or where the tether can restrict the animal's access to suitable, edible, and sufficient food, clean water and appropriate shelter. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(5.1), 5-5-97; Ord. No. 7884, § 2, 6-15-09)
Sec. 6-5.1[2]. - Butchering domestic animals in residential areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to butcher or kill for the purpose of butchering outside and within 100 feet of a residence any domestic animal except confined domestic hares and rabbits, fowl, ducks, geese, turkeys, pheasants and other birds. 
(Ord. No. 7142, § 2, 10-5-98)
Sec. 6-6. - Animal control commission. 
    There is hereby established a Commission to be known as the Animal Control Commission. The Commission shall be concerned with application of this ordinance to satisfy the goals set forth in Section 6-1, may make recommendations on enforcement or amendments of regulations, and may hear and make determinations on nuisance complaints as hereinafter set forth. It shall be the Commission's function and duty to: 
(a)	study the problems of human and animal interactions and possible solutions;
(b)	keep the Council advised of study results and offer recommendation for the improvement of human and animal relationships and amendments to this chapter; 
(c)	revoke any permit issued to a breeder; and
(d)	hear, consider and make determinations on nuisance and vicious animal charges brought pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(6), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-6.1. - Membership. 
    The commission shall be comprised of one licensed veterinarian and two (2) members of the City Council. The Council members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the Council. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(6.1), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-6.2. - Veterinarian member. 
    The veterinarian member shall be selected from the licensed veterinarians who are residents of or practicing within the City and who volunteer to serve on the Commission. Veterinarians volunteering for service on the Commission shall be placed on a list in alphabetical order, and shall serve on a rotating basis such that the first name so listed serves for a period of twelve months, or three contested hearings, whichever first occurs. Said member shall then be replaced by the next in order, who shall serve for a similar term. In the event of a conflict of interest, the next veterinarian on the list shall serve in the conflicted case. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(6.2), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-7. - Rabies control. 
    All cases of rabies occurring within the City shall be reported to the Police Department. If in the opinion of the Health Officer, danger of rabies epidemic exists, legal notice shall be used to inform all owners and harborers of animals to confine or securely muzzle their animals for such period of time as shall be designated in the published notice. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(7), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-8. - Rabies procedure. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any animal to refuse or fail to promptly surrender any animal suspected of being affected by rabies. Any animal suspected of being affected by rabies shall be seized by the animal control officer and handled according to the most recently published compendium on rabies. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(8), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-9. - Diseased animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domestic animal to knowingly cause or allow the same to run at large or be exposed in any public place anywhere in the City, or to ship or remove such animal from the owner's premises when same is afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease except under the supervision of the Animal Control Officer. This provision shall not prevent taking a diseased animal to a licensed veterinarian. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to order the disposition of such diseased animals and treatment of the affected premises to prevent the communication and spread of contagion or infection except in cases where the state veterinarian is empowered to act and does act. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(9), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-10. - Cruelty to animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(a)	beat, underfeed, overload, overwork, torment, abandon or otherwise inhumanely treat any domestic animal anywhere in the City; 
(b)	sell, offer for sale, barter or give away as a pet or novelty any rabbit, hare, baby chick, duckling or other fowl which has been dyed, colored or otherwise treated to impart an artificial color thereto; 
(c)	kill or wound, or attempt to kill or wound, or take the eggs or young of any game or song bird; 
(d)	knowingly poison or cause to be poisoned any domestic animal except that common rat poison mixed only with vegetable or grain substances may be exposed for the protection of property; or 
(e)	give away any domestic animal as a prize or as an inducement to enter any contests, games or other competition; or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement when the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(10), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-11. - Nuisance prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any dog, cat or other domestic animal to cause or permit such animal to perform, create or engage in any nuisance as defined by section 6-2. Any animal found acting in any manner forbidden by this chapter, in the determination of the Animal Control Officer, shall hereby be declared a nuisance and its owner or harborer shall be subject to citation. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(11), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-12. - Removal of excrement. 
    No person shall appear with an animal upon the public ways, within public places or upon the property of another, absent that person's consent, without some means for the removal of excrement; nor shall any person fail to remove any excrement deposited by such animal. This section shall not apply to a blind person while walking his or her guide dog. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(12), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-13. - Wild creatures. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, permit or have custody of any of the following anywhere in the City: 
(a)	any wild creature contrary to federal, state or local laws or regulations; or
(b)	any imported creature as is subject to special permit and licensing by the State Department of Agriculture; or 
(c)	any non-domestic animal.
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(13), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-14. - Animal exhibitions. 
    Exhibitions or parades involving animals may be conducted only upon the issuance of a permit therefor by the Chief of Police. Performing exhibits, circuses and parades must be investigated in advance as to purpose, intent, animal care procedures and assurances for human health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(14), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-15. - Female animals in heat. 
    All female animals in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure or upon leash in such manner that the animal cannot come into contact with a male animal except for planned breeding. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(15), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-16. - Biting animal. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of an animal involved in a biting incident to euthanize, sell, give away or otherwise dispose of such animal until a full release on the incident has been issued by the Animal Control Officer. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(16), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-17. - Bite procedures. 
(a)	Impoundment. Regardless of animal age or license status, the owner or harborer of an animal inflicting a bite shall immediately impound the animal with a licensed veterinarian or with the City pound for a period of ten days. The expense thereof, including expenses for medical care, shall be paid by the owner or harborer of the animal. 
(b)	Impoundment exception. When the bitten person is a member of the same household as the owner or harborer of the animal inflicting the bite, or when, in the judgment of the Chief of Police, special circumstances exist which makes impoundment impractical, such impoundment may be upon the premises. Impoundment shall mean within a structure or secure enclosure or upon leash only upon the premises of the owner or harborer. The animal inflicting the bite shall be examined by a veterinarian on the first and tenth day of such confinement. 
(c)	Reporting. All incidents of bite shall be reported immediately to the Animal Control Officer or his agent. 
(d)	Disposition of animal. It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of an animal which has inflicted a bite to dispose of such animal by sale, exchange, barter or give away without full disclosure of the animal's history. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(17), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-18. - Stray animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domestic animal, except cats, to cause or allow the same to run at large in the City or be picketed or tied in any public place for the purpose of grazing or feeding. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer or his agent to apprehend and impound any such animal not under control. In the event any animal cannot be safely captured and is deemed to be a threat to any person or property, the Animal Control Officer is hereby empowered to destroy the animal. Depending upon circumstances, impounding shall be in the City pound as follows: 
(a)	Known ownership.
(1)	When the owner or harborer of a stray animal is known through licensing, collar identification or other immediate means, the Animal Control Officer shall notify such person of the impounding within 5 business days of the impoundment by phone or by mail. 
(2)	The release of an impounded animal shall not be made by the Animal Control Officer until all expenses of apprehension, notification and impounding have been paid by the owner or harborer. 
(3)	If the impounded animal is one requiring a license and/or rabies vaccination, the owner or harborer shall have 5 days in which to present proof of licensing and/or rabies vaccination to the Animal Control Officer. 
(4)	The known owner or harborer of the stray animal shall have five business days from the time of notification in which to claim the animal. Failure by the known owner or harborer to obtain release of the impounded animal within this time period shall be deemed an act of disclaiming and the Animal Control Officer shall offer the animal for adoption or humanely destroy the animal. 
(b)	Unknown ownership.
(1)	When the owner or harborer of a stray animal cannot be ascertained, the animal shall be locally impounded for at least 1 full Saturday and not less than 5 business days. 
(2)	If unclaimed beyond this time period, the Animal Control Officer shall offer the animal for adoption or euthanize the animal. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(18), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-19. - Disclaimed animals. 
    If, for any reason, the owner or harborer of an animal chooses to disclaim ownership of same or voluntarily delivers the animal to be disclaimed to the Animal Control Officer; executes formal acknowledgment of such an act; and pays the consignment fee involved, the Animal Control Officer shall offer the animal for adoption or euthanize the animal, without regard to the time period cited above. 
(a)	There shall be no adoption fee for animals taken up and impounded.
(b)	Animals picked up for any violation shall be considered City property until such time as they are claimed by their rightful owners. Any unauthorized removal of animals from the animal shelter shall be considered a violation of this Code. 
(c)	No animal shall be impounded and retained at the shelter without sufficient heat during cold weather. Animals that are sick, injured or otherwise not suited for placement in a new home shall be disposed of by euthanasia with the least possible delay. All other animals shall be disposed of as soon as possible by either returning to owners, placed in a home or euthanized. 
(d)	The recipient of any dog from the City pound shall immediately have the dog licensed and vaccinated. 
(e)	Subject to the further provisions of this chapter, the Animal Control Officer may authorize the euthanization of any animal kept in excess of the time periods set forth herein. 
(f)	At any time prior to disposal, sale or destruction of any impounded dog, the owner thereof, upon satisfactory proof of ownership, may redeem the dog, upon paying the boarding fee established by the City Council and by paying a fine of five dollars ($5.00). If such dog has not been vaccinated for rabies, the owner in addition to paying the boarding fee and fine and before being entitled to have said dog, must have the dog vaccinated as provided for in this chapter. If the dog shall be picked up and impounded a second time, the owner shall be required to pay, in addition to the boarding fee, a fine of ten dollars ($10.00); if the dog shall be picked up a third time, the owner shall be required to pay the boarding fee, and in addition, a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(g)	The Animal Control Officer shall also be empowered to sell an unclaimed animal within the purview of this article to that person making the best offer for same and who, in the judgment of the Animal Control Officer will best and humanely care for said animal, but shall not sell or release it for experimental use. 
(h)	It shall be the duty of the Police Department to verify and receipt for the payment of the inoculation fees and the following fees where applicable: 
(1)	Impounding fee (picking up dogs and other animals):
a.	First time .....$ 5.00 
b.	Second time .....10.00 
c.	Third time .....25.00 
(2)	Boarding fee per day (or fraction) .....5.00 
(i)	On or before the tenth day of each calendar month, the Police Department shall deposit and account to the office of the City accountant for all moneys collected under and by virtue of this article. 
(j)	It shall be unlawful for any person to take up any dog registered and collared as required herein, and to remove or cause to be removed the collar from the neck of any such dog, or to entice any such dog into any enclosure for the purpose of taking it up, or for such purpose to decoy or entice any such dog out of the enclosure or house of its owner or possessor, or to seize or molest any dog while held or led by any person, or to bring any dog into the City for the purpose of taking up or impounding the same. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(19), 5-5-97)
[Sec. 6-20. - Reserved.] 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 6-21. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own or harbor any dog or cat, over 6 months old, in the City without having first obtained and affixed to the animal a license or appropriate permit therefor by application to the Chief of Police or his designated agent. Only persons who comply with the provision of this article shall be entitled to receive and retain such license. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(21), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-22. - Application. 
    Written application for a license shall be made by the owner on a form provided by the City. The owner shall be identified by name, address and telephone number and the animal identified by sex, age, breed, color and call name and the rabies inoculation certificate number, date and administering veterinarian given. It will be the responsibility of the owner to notify the City of a change of address. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(22), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-23. - Rabies inoculation required. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner of a dog or cat harbored in the City to have such dog or cat inoculated against rabies. The owner or harborer of such dog or cat shall at all times keep attached to the animal a current rabies tag as evidence of a current rabies inoculation consisting of a certificate signed by the licensed veterinarian administering the vaccine. A copy of the certificate of rabies inoculation shall be presented with the application for license as required by section 6-22. No license shall be issued unless such certificate bears a date within one year prior to the date of license application. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(23), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-24. - Tags. 
    The person to whom the license is issued shall receive from the Chief of Police a metal tag containing such lettering or numbering thereon as may be directed by the Chief. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody of any dog or cat to cause or allow the same to be in any public place anywhere in the City unless such dog or cat shall be wearing a collar to which a current tag is securely fastened. Any dog or cat found in a public place not wearing a collar and tag shall be deemed a stray animal and shall be seized. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(24), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-25. - Limitation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, care for, have custody of or knowingly permit at any time more than three dogs, excluding work dogs, and three cats, over 6 months old, to be upon any property in the City, excluding properly licensed animal shelters; animal hospitals and clinics; grooming parlors; animal training schools and boarding kennels; the City pound; and the premises of breeders granted a permit in accordance with section 6-26. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(25), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-26. - Breeder permit. 
(a)	Application. Any person desirous of obtaining a breeder permit shall make application on forms provided by the City. No breeder permit shall be issued to any multiple-family residential premises and only one permit shall be issued to any one household. Upon verification of the information provided; receipt of required certifications; satisfactory inspection of related premises and facilities by the City Health Officer; compliance with zoning and other regulations; and payment of the fee involved, a breeder permit shall be issued. 
(b)	Fee. A breeder permit shall be $55 minimum per calendar year plus $10 per adult animal, or $5 per sexually altered adult animal, in excess of six. 
(c)	Revocation. Falsification of original application data or failure by the breeder to properly amend original application data as required during the licensing year shall be cause for revocation of the permit. Further, a nuisance judgment against the holder of the breeder permit may serve as a reason for permit revocation. Three nuisance judgments against the holder of a breeder permit within a 12-month period shall result in automatic revocation of the permit. Any breeder permit once revoked shall not again be issued in subsequent licensing years. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(26), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-27. - Expense liability. 
    The owner or harborer of any dog or cat requiring veterinarian, impounding, licensing, destruction or disposition services as a result of any violations of this ordinances shall be responsible for all such expenses. Failure to assume such expenses shall be deemed an act of disclaiming and the dog or cat involved shall be considered a disclaimed animal. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(27), 5-5-97)
ARTICLE III. - OTHER ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-28. - Area requirements. 
    A minimum of 25,000 square feet of open space per animal shall be required to keep, maintain, tether, confine or house sheep, horses, cattle, goats, swine or similar domestic animals anywhere in the City. It shall be unlawful for more than two such animals, in any combination, to be upon such premises. The shelter for sheep, horses, cattle, goats, swine, rabbits, mules, or poultry in any structure, whether temporary or permanent, must be 150 feet distant from any public property, church or any building used for a residence by other than the owner of such animals. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a duly licensed public stable. 
(a)	Driving animals on sidewalks. It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to lead, ride or drive any horse, pony or other beast of burden on any sidewalk or footway in the City, otherwise than by going into or out of any premises owned or occupied by him or his employer. 
(b)	Designated animals, fowl prohibited at large. No owner or keeper of any cattle, hogs, horses, mules, sheep, goats, geese, ducks, chickens and turkeys, or any of them, in the City, shall permit the same to run at large in the City. 
(c)	Burial of dead animals; removal of same.
(1)	Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to bury any dead animal within the corporate limits of the City. 
(2)	Duty of Street Commissioner. In any such case described in subsection (1), if the person offending shall not remove the nuisance it shall be the duty of the Street Commissioner to remove the same and the costs of doing so shall be taxed as costs in the case in addition to the fine imposed. 
(3)	City to bear cost if unknown offender. If the person so offending shall not be known, the City shall pay the actual amount expended in removing such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(28), 5-5-97)
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDING KENNELS AND PET SHOPS 

Sec. 6-29. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a boarding kennel or pet shop without having first obtained a license therefor. Application for such license shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this code relating to license application as set forth in Chapter 28. Such application shall specify existing district zoning of the premises and the precise location upon the premises of the kennels or pens in which the animals are to be kept. No such kennels or pens shall be located less than ten feet from the nearest public place or lot line bounding the premises. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(29), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-30. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of such application, the Chief of Police shall cause such investigation to be made as in his judgment is necessary and may, in his discretion, recommend to the City Clerk that a license be issued to the applicant upon the payment of the license fee. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(30), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-31. - License fees. 
    The license for any boarding kennel or pet shop shall expire on the 31st day of May following its issuance. The annual fees for such licenses shall be as follows: 
(a)	Pet shop .....$ 25.00 
(b)	Kennel with a capacity of 10 animals or less .....$ 25.00 
(c)	Kennel with a capacity of 25 animals or less .....$ 50.00 
(d)	Kennel with a capacity of over 25 animals .....$100.00 
    Should the business of buying, selling or dealing in birds, dogs or other small animals as household pets or for domestic purposes be conducted, operated, managed or carried on in connection with a boarding kennel on the same premises by the same person, then only one license need be obtained. The amount of such license shall be the highest license fee applicable to a kennel. The licensee of any kennel or pet shop shall be held responsible for the proper licensing of each dog and cat which may be owned, kept or harbored at such kennel or pet shop in the City. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(31), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-32. - Sanitation requirements. 
    Every kennel and pet shop shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be free and clear from decaying food and filth of any kind. All kennels, barns and pens shall be cleaned and disinfected on a regular schedule, and shall be kept in a sanitary condition satisfactory to the Health Officer who shall have the right to cause an inspection of said premises to be made from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(32), 5-5-97)
Sec. 6-33. - Revocation of license. 
    If the report of the Health Officer consistently indicates that the person conducting such kennel or pet shop has not complied with the provisions of RSMo. § 273.325, et seq., this code and with the City ordinances regulating health, safety and sanitation, the City Administrator may revoke any license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(33), 5-5-97)
ARTICLE V. - VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 6-34. - Vicious dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, own or in any way possess within the corporate limits of the City of Marshall, Missouri any vicious dog; provided, that vicious dogs may be kept within the City subject to the standards and requirements set forth in section 6-35 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(34), 2-21-95)
Sec. 6-35. - Keeping of vicious dogs. 
    Owners, keepers or harborers of vicious dogs shall be subject to the following standards. 
(a)	Leash and Muzzle. No person shall permit a vicious dog to go outside its kennel or pen unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer than four (4) feet in length. No person shall permit a vicious dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person is in physical control of the leash. Such dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. In addition, all vicious dogs on a leash outside the animal's kennel must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such dog from biting persons or other animals. 
(b)	Confinement. All vicious dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled as above provided. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures used to confine vicious dogs must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two (2) feet. All structures erected to house vicious dogs must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the City. All such structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(c)	Confinement Indoors. No vicious dogs may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
(d)	Signs. All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious dogs within the City shall display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable (from the nearest public property) using the words "Beware of Dog." In addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal. 
(e)	Insurance. All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious dogs must provide proof to the City Clerk of public liability insurance in a single incident amount of $300,000.00 for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property owned by any person or persons which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such animal. Such insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the policy will be made unless ten (10) days written notice is first given to the City Clerk. 
(f)	Identification Photographs. All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious dogs must provide to the Animal Control Officer two color photographs of the animal clearly showing the color and approximate size of the animal. 
(g)	Reporting Requirements. All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious dogs must, within ten (10) days of the incident, report the following information in writing to the Animal Control Officer: 
(1)	The removal from the City or death of a vicious dog;
(2)	The new address of a vicious dog owner should the owner move within the corporate City limits. 
(h)	Sale or Transfer of Ownership Prohibited. No person shall sell, barter or in any other way dispose of a vicious dog registered with the City to any person within the City unless the recipient person resides permanently in the same household and on the same premises as the owner of such dog; provided that the owner of a vicious dog may sell or otherwise dispose of such dog to persons who do not reside within the City. 
(i)	Failure to Comply. It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of a vicious dog to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this ordinance. Any dog found to be in violation of this ordinance shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. In addition, failure to comply will result in the revocation of the license of such animal, and such animal shall then be a disclaimed dog. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(35), 5-5-97)
ARTICLE VI. - [PENALTIES] 

Sec. 6-36. - Nuisance violation. 
    Any person found guilty of violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1-10. No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to limit the jurisdiction of the Circuit Court of Saline County, Missouri, Marshall Municipal Division to hear and determine criminal violations of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7040, § 2(36), 5-5-97)
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; lighting requirements in eating and drinking establishments § 13-36; garbage, trash and other solid waste, Ch. 14; signs, Ch. 25; electrical signs, § 25-11 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 26; subdivisions, Ch. 27; license tax for brick contractors, § 28-24(16); license tax for building contractors, § 28-24(17); license tax for glass installations contractors, § 28-24(33); license tax for painting contractors, § 28-24(63); utilities, Ch. 30; zoning, Ch. 32.
State Law reference- Authority to regulate and control construction of building, RSMo 77.500.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 7-1-7-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-11. - Adoption of building code. 
    A certain document, one (1) digital copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2015 edition, including Appendix Chapters C, F, G, and I (see International Building Code Section 102.2.1, 2015 edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Marshall, Missouri, regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, building, and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, Missouri are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribe in section 7-12. 
(Ord. No. 6384, § 1, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 6586, § 1, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 6824, § 1, 11-7-94; Ord. No. 7022, §§ 1, 2, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 7321, § 1, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 7598, § 1, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7747, § 1, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7932, § 1, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 8233, § 1, 8-3-15) 
Sec. 7-12. - Additions, insertions and changes to building code. 
    The following additions, insertions and changes are made to the building code adopted in section 7-11. 
(a)	Section 101.1. Insert: The City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(b)	Section 113.1. Revised to read: 
113.1 General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code shall be heard by the City of Marshall Board of Appeals, as established, adopted and amended from time to time by the City of Marshall, Missouri. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(c)	Section 113.3. Revised to read: 
113.3 Qualifications. The Board of Appeals shall consist of not less than four members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, fire protection or other areas of construction, property maintenance or building trades. Officers and/or employees of the City of Marshall, Missouri, may serve as members of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(d)	Section 1612.3. Insert: The City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(e)	Section 1612.3. Insert: January 16, 2013. 
f.	Section G102.2. Insert: November 4, 1988. 
g.	Section 109.2. Insert: The building permit fees established by this section shall be as follows based on Table (1) square foot construction costs: 
Table 1. Square Foot Construction Costsa,b,c,d,e 
Group (2012 International Building Code)IAIBIIAIIBIIIAIIIBIVVAVBA-1Assembly, theaters, with stage224.49217.12211.82202.96190.83185.33196.14174.43167.83A-1Assembly, theaters, without stage205.71198.34193.04184.18172.15166.65177.36155.75149.15A-2Assembly, nightclubs177.15172.12167.31160.58150.83146.74154.65136.68132.81A-2Assembly, restaurants, bars, banquet halls176.15171.12165.31159.58148.83145.74153.65134.68131.81A-3Assembly, churches207.73200.38195.06186.20174.41168.91179.38158.02151.41A-3Assembly, general, community halls, libraries, museums173.36165.99159.69151.83138.90134.40145.01122.50116.89A-4Assembly, arenas204.71197.34191.04183.18170.15165.65176.36153.75148.15BBusiness179.29172.71166.96158.70144.63139.20152.43126.93121.32EEducational192.11185.49180.05171.90160.09151.82165.97139.90135.35F-1Factory and Industrial, moderate hazard108.42103.3297.1893.3883.2479.8289.2268.8964.39F-2Factory and Industrial, low hazard107.42102.3297.1892.3883.2478.6288.2268.8963.39H-1High Hazard, oxptosives101.5396.4491.2986.4977.5772.9582.3463.02N.P.H234High Hazard101.5396.4491.2986.4977.5772.9582.3463.0257.71H-5HPM179.29172.71186.96158.70144.63139.20162.43126.93121.32I-1Institutional, supervised environment177.76171.50166.52159.45146.31142.45159.13131.29126.72I-2Institutional, hospitals302.44295.85290.11281.84266.80N.P.275.58249.09N.P.I-2Institutional, nursing homes209.38202.79197.05188.78175.72N.P.182.52158.01N.P.I-3Institutional, restrained204.27197.68191.94183.67171.10164.68177.41153.40145.80I-4Institutional, day care facilities177.76171.50186.52159.45146.31142.45159.13131.20126.72MMercantite132.04127.01121.20115.47105.47102.39109.5491.3388.45R-1Residential, hotels179.14172.89167.90160.83147.95144.10160.52132.93128.36R-2Residential, multiple family150.25143.99139.01131.94119.77115.91131.62104.74100.18R-3Residential, one- and two-family141.80137.90134.46131.00125.88122.71128.29117.71110.29R-4Residential, care/assisted living facilities177.78171.50166.52159.45146.31142.45159.13131.29126.72S-1Storage, moderate hazard100.5395.4489.2985.4975.5771.9581.3461.0256.71S-2Storage, low hazard99.5394.4489.2984.4975.5770.9580.3461.0255.71UUtility, miscellaneous75.5871.2266.7863.3756.9953.2260.4144.6042.48 
  
a.Private Garages use Utility, miscellaneousb.Unfinished basements (all use group) = $15.00 per sq. ft.c.N.P. = not permittedd.Regional Cost Modifier-Missouri = 0.31e.Permit Fee Multiplier = .0031 
(Ord. No. 6384, § 3, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 6586, § 3, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 6824, §§ 3, 5, 11-7-94; Ord. No. 7022, §§ 3, 5, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 7321, §§ 3, 5, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 7532, § 1, 4-19-04; Ord. No. 7598, § 2, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7747, § 2, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7932, § 2, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 8233, § 1, 8-3-15) 
Secs. 7-13-7-17. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED 
      
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6676, § 25, adopted Feb. 1, 1993, amended this Code by repealing Division 2, substantive sections being, §§ 7-18-7-21, pertaining to the contractors board, as derived from Ord. No. 5723, adopted Aug. 3, 1981. 

Secs. 7-18-7-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-26. - Adoption of National Electrical Code; amendments; appeals. 
(a)	Adoption of electrical code. A certain document, one (1) digital copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, being marked and designated as the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, as published by the National Electrical Code Committee, be and is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the City of Marshall, Missouri, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use, testing or maintenance of electrical systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Electrical Code on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, Missouri are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribe in this section. 
(b)	Additions, insertions and changes. That the sections of the Electrical Code are hereby revised: that all references in said Code to the "authority having jurisdiction" shall mean the City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(c)	Appeal from Decision of Building Official.All appeals from the decisions of the Building Official concerning the application, interpretation or implementation of the National Electric Code, 2014 edition, shall be taken to the City of Marshall Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall consist of not less than four members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, fire protection or other areas of construction, property maintenance or building trades. Officers and/or employees of the City of Marshall, Missouri, may serve as members of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(Code 1967, § 12-01; Ord. No. 6027, §§ 1, 2, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 6582, § 1, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 6820, §§ 1, 2, 11-7-94; Ord. No. 7175, §§ 1-4, 5-3-99; Ord. No. 7498, §§ 1-5, 11-3-03; Ord. No. 7748, § 1, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7937, §§ 1, 2, 4, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 8243, §§ 1, 2, 4, 8-3-15) 
Sec. 7-27. - Adoption of Marshall Municipal Utilities Procedure Manual. 
    The Marshall Municipal Utilities Procedure Manual, (the "manual"), which manual is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth, is hereby adopted by the city as a supplement to the 1984 National Electrical Code. If any provisions of the manual are inconsistent with the provisions of the National Electrical Code, the provisions of the manual shall control. 
(Ord. No. 5786, § 1, 4-5-82; Ord. No. 6034, § 1, 10-15-84)
Secs. 7-28-7-30. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-31. - Office created. 
    The office of electrical inspector of the city shall be and the same is hereby created. 
(Code 1967, § 12-1)
Sec. 7-32. - Designation. 
    The building official shall also be the electrical inspector and charged with the administrative authority to insure compliance with the electrical code. 
(Code 1967, § 12-2)
Sec. 7-33. - Duties enumerated. 
    The electrical inspector is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to regulate the placing of electric light and power wires in and on buildings in the city so as to prevent fires, accidents or injuries, and to cause all electrical equipment to be so placed, constructed and guarded as not to cause fires or accidents or endanger life or property. Whenever in the judgment of the electrical inspector any electric wires or equipment shall be defective or dangerous, he shall forthwith notify the owner of the premises or his agent of such defective or dangerous condition and the owner or his agent shall proceed to remedy the same within forty-eight (48) hours, or if the danger be imminent, then the inspector may cause the current to be cut off and withheld until such defect or danger shall have been remedied. 
(Code 1967, § 12-3)
Sec. 7-34. - Authority to cause removal of wires, equipment, to discontinue current. 
    The electrical inspector shall have the power to cause the removal of wires and equipment and to cause the current to be turned off on any circuit during emergencies for such time as he may deem fit. 
(Code 1967, § 12-4)
Sec. 7-35. - Right of entry. 
    The electrical inspector shall have the right and authority at any time to enter any building, manhole or part or parts of any premises in the discharge of his official duties or for the purpose of making any tests of the electrical equipment therein contained, and for that purpose he shall be given prompt access to all buildings and premises, public and private, upon written notification served either in person by the electrical inspector or by certified mail, to the party owning or in charge of the premises. 
(Code 1967, § 12-5)
Secs. 7-36-7-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 7-41. - Permit for electrical work. 
    Before any building or premises shall be wired or equipped for the installation of lighting, heating or power apparatus and before any alteration, extensions or change shall be made in the wiring of any premises, a permit therefor may be required by the city council by the party who makes such installation or alteration from the electrical inspector 
(Code 1967, § 12-6)
Sec. 7-42. - Fees for permits. 
(a)	The electrical permit fees established by this section shall be as follows:
Residence service and entrance .....$5.00 
Commercial service and entrance .....10.00 
Temporary service .....2.00 
First 5 circuits .....5.00 
Over 5 circuits, each .....0.50 
Pumps, fans, etc., each .....0.50 
Electrical signs, each .....2.00 
Air Conditioner .....1.00 
Furnace .....1.00 
Switches, receptacles, each .....0.25 
Motors 1 HP and over, each .....1.00 
Minimum Fee .....10.00 
Maximum Fee .....200.00 
(b)	All such fees set out above as can be predetermined shall be paid at time of issuance of permit. Other fees which cannot be predetermined shall be due and payable prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1967, § 12.6.1; Ord. No. 7533, § 1, 4-19-04)
Sec. 7-43. - Certificate of approval of electrical work. 
(a)	Issuance.When the construction and installation of electrical equipment and apparatus or the alteration or change of the wiring of any building or premises shall have been completed, it shall be the duty of the party who shall have completed the work to return his permit to the electrical inspector, who shall forthwith inspect the work, and if the same shall be found by him to have been done in compliance with the regulations herein, then he may issue to the owner of the building or premises a certificate of approval of the work. 
(b)	Contents. The certificate of approval shall bear the date of its issuance, set out the name of the owner and the location of the building and premises and recite such other data as may be required by the inspector. 
(c)	Withholding prior to compliance. If the inspector shall find that the work has not been completed in conformity with the regulations herein established then he shall cause the current to be withheld until compliance therewith has been made. 
(Code 1967, § 12-8)
Sec. 7-44. - Written notice of violation provided. 
(a)	When, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, there is an apparent violation of the electrical code, and where, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, the violation is not such as to cause an immediate danger of fire or other hazard, then the electrical inspector shall notify the owner and tenants of said premises in writing to remedy the violation within a period of fifteen (15) days; and in the event of noncompliance the electrical inspector shall cause the current to be cut off and withheld until such defect shall have been remedied. 
(b)	If there is an immediate danger or hazard created by the defect, then the electrical inspector shall cause the current to be cut off and withheld in accordance with section 7-33 after written notice and noncompliance within forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Code 1967, § 12-9)
Sec. 7-45. - Appeals procedure. 
    The owner or tenants of the premises having been notified of a violation may appeal the decision to the electrical board, and the decision of the electrical board shall become final. Continuing violation after appeal shall be prosecuted in the municipal court. 
(Code 1967, § 12-10)
Sec. 7-46. - Application of provisions to qualified homeowner. 
    Nothing in this article shall deny a qualified homeowner the right to perform electrical work within his own property boundaries, providing such electrical work is done by himself and is used exclusively by him or his family. Such privilege does not convey the right to violate any of the provisions of this electrical code, nor is it to be construed as exempting any such property owner from obtaining a permit and paying the required fees therefor. 
(Code 1967, § 12-11)
Secs. 7-47-7-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational license taxes generally, § 28-11 et seq.

Sec. 7-56. - License required for persons, organizations engaging in electrical work. 
    Any person or organization who engages in the business of contracting for installation, alteration, repairs, assembly, maintenance or service of equipment regulated by this Code, shall be licensed in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1967, § 12-12)
Sec. 7-57. - Licensed contractors subletting work. 
    Licensed contractors shall not enter into an agreement with, or sublet any work to a person not licensed for such work under the provisions of this division. No deviation from the work as described in the permit shall be made without permission of the building official, and any work in addition to work authorized by the permit shall require a supplementary permit. 
(Code 1967, § 12-13)
Sec. 7-58. - Electrician Class I; Electrician Class II licenses. 
(a)	Electrician Class I License. An Electrician Class I license is required for those who install, alter, repair or remove any electrical equipment regulated by this article. The license fee for Electrician Class I shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year, with all licenses to be due and payable in accordance with section 28-17. 
(b)	Electrician Class II License. An Electrician Class II license is required for those who: 
(1)	Maintain or repair existing facilities on property owned by the licensee or his employer;
(2)	Assemble or install electric lighting fixtures and wiring in connection therewith;
(3)	Connect new or replacement gas-fired heating equipment to existing electrical circuits, extend existing circuits not more than ten (10) feet, and install control circuits; 
(4)	Install or connect electric signs which shall be limited to extension of new or existing circuits (provided by an Electrician Class I licensee) in close proximity to a sign, such connections not to exceed ten (10) feet. 
(c)	The license fee for Electrician Class II shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year, with all licenses to be due and payable in accordance with section 28-17. 
(Code 1967, § 12-14; Ord. No. 7940, § 1, 4-5-10)
Sec. 7-59. - Qualifications of applicant for class I electrician's license. 
    An applicant for a class I electrician's license shall have at least five (5) years experience as a journeyman electrician class II and show competency in the form of a satisfactory score on a written examination and an interview with the electrical board. 
(Code 1967, § 12-15; Ord. No. 5993, § 1, 6-4-84)
Sec. 7-60. - Procedure for obtaining license. 
(a)	In the city electrical installations can be legally made only by licensed electricians or by men that are supervised by a licensed electrician. 
(b)	To obtain an electrician's license, a person must apply to the electrical inspector and present proof of trade competency to be presented to the electrical board for evaluation and approval. 
(c)	Upon application for a license to do electrical work in the city, a temporary thirty (30) day license will be issued without initial charge (all permits and permit fees will be required during this thirty (30) day period). During the thirty (30) day period, qualification for a permanent license will be investigated including prior licensing, testing, visual inspection of work being performed and any other method deemed necessary by the city's licensing authority. 
(Code 1967, § 12-16)
Sec. 7-61. - Temporary license. 
    The board of examiners of electricians may issue a temporary license pending examination, provided the applicant holds a similar license from an equivalent board. Such permit shall not be valid for more than sixty (60) days. If the board finds through its investigation that the applicant has been properly licensed by a city of the state and in acquiring same, has passed an examination equivalent to the examination given by this city in issuing a similar license, the board may issue a regular certificate of competence without further examination. The fee for a temporary license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 6528, § 1, 4-1-91)
Secs. 7-62-7-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BOARD OF EXAMINERS OF ELECTRICIANS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-311 et seq.

Sec. 7-66. - Created; composition. 
    There is hereby created a board of examiners of electricians for the city, consisting of four (4) members, one of which shall be the electrical inspector. A second member shall be the superintendent of the municipal electrical department. who shall be ex officio chairman of the board. The third and fourth members shall be class I electricians licensed by the city. The third and fourth members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council and when so appointed shall serve until the first regular meeting of the council after the general city election in April. Appointments shall be for a term of two (2) years; the third and fourth members of the board shall have at least six (6) years' practical experience as electricians and shall be actually engaged in or working at, the electrical business at the time of such appointment. 
(Ord. No. 5652, § 1, 12-15-80)
Sec. 7-67. - Duties and powers. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the board of examiners, as created by section 7-66, to examine all applicants for certificate of competency in the grade or grades, specified in the application, as to their knowledge of, and ability to perform the duties and services of the grade for which the application is made. The results of such examinations will be certified to the building official, or his duly authorized representative, where the certified results will become a permanent record. When as a result of aforesaid examinations, the board of examiners is satisfied as to the competence and ability of the applicant, it shall authorize the building official, or his duly authorized representative to issue a certificate of competency to the applicant. 
(b)	The board of examiners shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this division. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board may determine. Such chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of this board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each matter presented or if absent or failing to vote, indicate such, and shall keep records of its examinations and all other official actions, all of which shall be properly filed in the office of the board, and become a public record. All testimony, objections thereto and rulings thereon shall be taken down by a qualified person employed by the board for such purpose. 
(c)	The board of examiners shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged injustice, or an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination was made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this division. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same in a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(d)	The board of examiners shall also have power to hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this division, where there are practical exceptions or where there are apparent undue difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of a certain requirement of this division; to vary or modify, if reasonable and practical, the application of any of the regulations or provisions relating to the use and installation of electrical work so that the spirit and essence of this division shall be observed and public safety, health and welfare secured and substantial justice done. 
(Ord. No. 5652, § 2, 12-15-80)
Sec. 7-68. - Removal of members. 
    The third and fourth members of the board of examiners, being the class I electricians, respectively appointed as members of the board, may be removed by a majority vote of the mayor and council for good cause. 
(Ord. No. 5652, § 3, 12-15-80)
Sec. 7-69. - Meetings. 
    The board of examiners shall meet on call of the chairman or a majority of the membership thereof, and the call shall include the time, place and purpose of such meetings. Applicants scheduled for examination at such meetings shall be notified at least three (3) days prior to the date of the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 5652, § 4, 12-15-80)
Secs. 7-70-7-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Plumbing facilities for eating and drinking establishments, § 13-30; utilities, Ch. 30.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-76. - Adoption of plumbing code. 
    A certain document, one (1) digital copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, being marked and designated as the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, including Appendix Chapters B, D, E, and F, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City of Marshall, Missouri, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, Missouri are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribe in this section. 
(Ord. No. 6382, § 1, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 6584, § 1, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 6822, § 1, 11-7-94; Ord. No. 7021, §§ 1, 2, 7-18-97; Ord. No. 7326, § 1, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 7594, § 1, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7743, § 1, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7928, § 1, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 8239, § 1, 8-3-15) 
Sec. 7-77. - Additions, insertions and changes to plumbing code. 
    The following sections are hereby revised as follows: 
(a)	Section 101.1: Insert: The City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(b)	Section 106.6.2: Insert: The plumbing permit fees established by this section shall be as follows: 
New Sewer .....$5.00 
Sewer Repair, Replace .....5.00 
Septic Tank .....10.00 
Water Service .....5.00 
Gas Distribution .....5.00 
Heating or cooling ventilating system, each .....5.00 
Stool, each .....2.00 
* Each additional fixture .....2.00 
** Reinspection .....5.00 
Minimum Fee .....10.00 
Maximum Fee .....200.00 
* Additional fixtures include, but are not limited to, bath tubs, lavatory, shower stall, sinks, disposals floor drain, laundry machine, water fountain, urinal-men, urinal-women, water heater, gas fixtures, etc. 
**Reinspection is meant to be: Inspector has to reinspect plumbing because of change needed to meet code requirements. 
(c)	Section 106.6.3. Insert: Twenty-five Percent (25%), Twenty-five Percent (25%). 
(d)	Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $500.00, 90 days. 
(e)	Section 108.5. Insert: $1.00-$500.00. 
(f)	Section 109.1: Revised to read: 
109.1 General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code shall be heard by the City of Marshall Board of Appeals, as established, adopted and amended from time to time by the City of Marshall, Missouri. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(g)	Section 109.2 to 109.7: Revised to read: 
109.2 Membership, Qualifications and Procedures. The Board of Appeals shall consist of not less than four members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, fire protection or other areas of construction, property maintenance or building trades. Officers and/or employees of the City of Marshall, Missouri may serve as members of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(h)	Section 305.4.1. Insert: Eighteen Inches (18") - Eighteen Inches (18"). 
(i)	Section 903.1. Insert: Twelve Inches (12"). 
(Ord. No. 6382, § 3, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 6584, § 3, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 6822, § 3, 11-7-94; Ord. No. 7021, §§ 3, 5, 7-18-97; Ord. No. 7326, §§ 3, 5, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 7743, § 2, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7928, § 2, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 8239, § 2, 8-3-15) 
Sec. 7-78. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6528, § 1, adopted April 11, 1991, repealed former section 7-78 in its entirety which pertained to the requirement for plumbers to have a merchant's license for the sale of plumbing supplies and derived from the Code of 1967. 
Sec. 7-79. - Protection of water supply system. 
    The city council shall make such rules and regulations in furtherance of the purposes of this article for the installation, repair, or alteration of air-conditioning systems, water-treatment equipment and water-operated devices as may be deemed necessary to properly protect the water supply system. 
Secs. 7-80-7-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 7-86. - Permits. 
(a)	No permit to install plumbing fixtures shall be issued to other than regularly certificated and bonded plumbing contractors, and master plumbers. Each permit must have such a request. Blanket request will not be received. Permits must be on the ground at all times while the work is in progress, and be shown to any police officer or other properly authorized representative of the department of engineering. 
(b)	Plans and specification for plumbing work to be done in one- and two-family dwellings, small one story business buildings, etc., will not be required. However, for large buildings such as apartments, two (2) story business buildings, public buildings, churches, schools, hotels, hospitals, institutions, etc., complete plans and specifications showing proposed work in detail, shall be submitted to the city engineer, or his duly authorized representative, and the engineer, or his duly authorized representative, will determine from examination of such plans and specifications that they give assurance that the work will conform to the provisions of this article. If a permit is denied, the applicant may submit revised plans and specifications without payment of additional fee. If in the course of the work, it is found necessary to make any change from the plans and specifications on which a permit has been issued, amended plans and specifications shall be submitted and a supplementary permit, subject to the same conditions applicable to original application for permit, shall be issued to cover the change. 
(c)	Any permit required by this article may be issued to any person to do any work regulated by this article in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such building; provided, the person is the bona fide owner of such dwelling and that the same will be occupied by the owner and that the owner shall personally purchase all material and perform all labor in connection therewith, and that the applicant shall file an affidavit certifying that these conditions are correct before the issuance of the permit. Any work performed under a permit issued under this section shall be subject to all of the applicable regulatory provisions of this article in the same manner that they would apply if the permit was issued under subsection (a). 
(d)	Repairs involving only the working parts of a faucet or valve, the clearance of stoppages, repairing of leaks, or replacement of defective faucets or valves may be made without a permit provided no changes are made in the piping of the fixtures. 
Sec. 7-87. - Inspector to be notified. 
    It shall be the duty of any plumber, corporation or firm engaged in the business of plumbing and drain-laying to notify the inspector to inspect any plumbing that has been installed, when the job is roughed in and also within twenty-four (24) hours after same has been completed. Repeated violations of this section shall be deemed sufficient cause for the revocation of a license. 
Sec. 7-88. - Protests. 
(a)	If a protest against the ruling or decision of the inspector is to be made it shall be in writing to the board of examiners; the board shall then, as soon as possible, hold a hearing in relation thereto at which time the aggrieved person or parties in interest and the inspector shall have an opportunity to be heard. The board then shall, within a reasonable time, render a decision in the matter and the concurring vote of two (2) of its members shall be necessary to reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify any order, requirement or decision as previously made by the inspector. 
(b)	If still aggrieved by the board's decision, the person may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that the decision is illegal or not in line with code requirements and specify the grounds for such allegation. 
Secs. 7-89-7-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational license taxes generally, § 28-11 et seq.

Sec. 7-96. - Grades or classifications requiring examination. 
    Grades or classifications of operations, for which the board of examiners of plumbers shall hold examinations, are hereby authorized: 
(1)	Master plumbers;
(2)	Journeyman plumbers.
Sec. 7-97. - Qualification requirements. 
(a)	Applicants for a certificate as a master plumber shall have at least five (5) years of experience as a certified licensed journeyman plumber and attain a satisfactory score on a written examination. Licenses from other jurisdictions having equal or exceeding our requirements would qualify in lieu of the five (5) years locally. 
(b)	Applicants for a certified license as a journeyman plumber shall be working for, and under the supervision of, a licensed master plumber. 
Sec. 7-98. - Registration. 
    The following grades or classifications shall register with the plumbing board of examiners: 
(1)	Master plumbers;
(2)	Journeymen.
(Ord. No. 7940, § 2, 4-5-10)
Sec. 7-99. - license fees. 
    The annual fee for examination and/or license in the grades herein listed are: 
(1)	Master plumber .....$50.00 
(2)	Journeyman plumber .....10.00. 
(Ord. No. 6528, § 1, 4-1-91; Ord. No. 7940, § 2, 4-5-10)
Sec. 7-100. - Examination. 
    Examinations under this division to be given monthly on the first Wednesday of each month. Examinations will be written and oral; practical and sufficiently strict as to accurately establish the qualifications of each applicant. 
Sec. 7-101. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7521, § 1, adopted March 15, 2004, repealed former 7-101 in its entirety which pertained to temporary plumbing licenses and derived from this codification. 
Sec. 7-102. - Bonds. 
    Before the issuance of a certificate of competency to a master plumber, he shall file with the city clerk a surety bond for the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or as such as may be approved by the city counselor and city council, conditioned that he will indemnify and keep harmless the city from all liability, from any accidents and damages arising from negligence or unskillfulness, in doing or protecting his work or from any unfaithful or inadequate work done in pursuance of his license, and that he will also restore the street, sidewalk or pavement and fill all excavations in accordance with the requirements as set forth in Article VI of Chapter 26; and that he will indemnify and keep the city harmless from any damage suffered by his failure to do and keep and maintain them in good repair to the satisfaction of the city council for the period of ninety (90) days and that he will pay all fines imposed upon him for the violation of any rule or regulation adopted by the city and in force during the term of his license, and that he will pay all fees set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 7940, § 3, 4-5-10)
Sec. 7-103. - Expiration. 
    All licenses issued by the board of plumbing examiners shall expire on the 1st day of March following the date of issue. Said licenses may be renewed upon payment of the fees provided in section 7-99 on or before March 31st of each year. Expired licenses may be renewed upon payment of an additional fee of ten (10) percent per month for each month, or part of a month, following March 31st of the year of expiration. 
(Ord. No. 6528, § 1, 4-1-91; Ord. No. 7521, § 2, 3-15-04)
Sec. 7-104. - Revocation. 
    The board of plumbing examiners may revoke any license if obtained through nondisclosure, misstatement, or misrepresentation of a material fact, or if a penalty has been imposed upon the licensee under this article. Before a license may be revoked, the licensee shall have notice in writing, enumerating the charges against him, and be entitled to a hearing by the board not sooner than five (5) days from receipt of the notice. The licensee shall be given an opportunity to present testimony, oral or written, and shall have the right of cross-examination. All testimony shall be given under oath. The board shall have power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and compel the attendance of witnesses. The decision of the board shall be based upon the evidence produced at the hearing and made part of the record thereof. The city engineer, or his duly authorized representative, shall transmit a written report of the hearing to the mayor for transmittal to the city council. A person whose license has been revoked shall not be permitted to apply for renewal within one year from date of revocation. 
Sec. 7-105. - Licensee subletting or deviation from permit. 
    No licensee under this division shall enter into an agreement with, or sublet any work to a person not licensed for such work under the provisions of this division. No deviation from the work as described in the permit shall be made without the permission of the building official, and any work in addition to work authorized by the permit shall require a supplementary permit. 
(Ord. No. 7940, § 4, 4-5-10)
Sec. 7-106. - Supervision. 
    All installations of the plumbing in any building or structure in the city shall be under the general supervision of a master plumber and the direct charge of a journeyman plumber. Apprentice plumbers may be used on installations provided licensed journeyman plumbers are employed on such installations, full time, to assure proper and accurate work as prescribed by this article. 
Sec. 7-107. - Adoption of private sewage disposal code. 
    A certain document, one (1) digital copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, being marked and designated as the International Private Sewage Disposal Code, 2015 edition, including Appendix Chapters A and B, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Private Sewage Disposal Code of the City of Marshall, Missouri, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of individual sewage disposal systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Private Sewage Disposal Code on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, Missouri are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribe in this section. 
(Ord. No. 7324, § 1, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 7590, § 1, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7739, § 1, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7926, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 8240, § 1, 8-3-15) 
Sec. 7-108. - Additions, insertions and changes to private sewage disposal code. 
    The Private Sewage Disposal Code is amended and changed in the following respects: 
(a)	Section 101.1: Insert: The City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(b)	Section 106.4.2: Revised to read: 
The fees for work shall be as indicated in the Plumbing Code. 
(c)	Section 106.4.3. Insert: Twenty-five Percent (25%), Twenty-five Percent (25%). 
(d)	Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $500.00, 90 days. 
(e)	Section 108.5. Insert $1.00-$500.00. 
(f)	Section 109.1: Revised to read: 
109.1 General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code shall be heard by the City of Marshall Board of Appeals, as established, adopted and amended from time to time by the City of Marshal, Missouri. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(g)	Section 109.2 to 109.7: Revised to read: 
109.2 Membership, Qualifications and Procedures. The Board of Appeals shall consist of not less than four members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, fire protection or other areas of construction, property maintenance or building trades. Officers and/or employees of the City of Marshall, Missouri may serve as members of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(h)	Section 405.2.5. Insert: April 15, April 30, May 15. 
(i)	Section 405.2.6. Insert: April 15, April 15. 
(Ord. No. 7324, § 3, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 7590, § 2, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7739, § 2, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7926, § 2, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 8240, § 2, 8-3-15) 
Secs. 7-109-7-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BOARD OF PLUMBING EXAMINERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-31 et seq.

Sec. 7-116. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a board of plumbing examiners, consisting of four (4) members, one of which shall be the code official, who shall be ex officio chairman of the board, a second and third member, who shall be master plumbers, and a fourth member who shall be a representative of the municipal utilities. The second, third, fourth and fifth members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council and when so appointed shall serve until the first regular meeting of the council after the general city election in April of each odd-numbered year. Appointments shall be for a term of two (2) years. The second, and third members of the board shall have at least six (6) years practical experience as plumbers and shall be actually engaged in, or working at, the plumbing business at the time of such appointment. 
(Code 1967, § 23-4; Ord. No. 6769, § 1, 6-6-94; Ord. No. 6851, § 1, 3-6-95)
Sec. 7-117. - Removal of members. 
    The second and third members of the board of plumbing examiners, being the master plumbers appointed as members of the board, may be removed for good cause by the mayor and a majority vote of the council. 
(Ord. No. 6769, § 1, 6-6-94; Ord. No. 6851, § 1, 3-6-95)
Sec. 7-118. - Meetings. 
    The board of plumbing examiners shall meet on call of the chairman or a majority of the membership thereof, and the call shall include the time, place and purpose of such meetings. Applicants scheduled for examination at such meetings shall be notified at least three (3) days prior to the date of the meeting. 
Sec. 7-119. - Duties. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the board of plumbing examiners to examine all applicants for certificate of competency in the grade or grades, specified in the application, as to their knowledge of, and ability to, perform the duties and services of the grade for which the application is made. The results of such examinations will be certified to the code official, or his duly authorized representative, where such certified results will become a permanent record. When as a result of aforesaid examinations, the board is satisfied as to the competence and ability of the applicant, it shall authorize the code official, or his duly authorized representative to issue a certificate of competency to the applicant. 
(b)	The board of plumbing examiners shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this article. Meeting of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board may determine. Such chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of this board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each matter presented or if absent or failing to vote, indicate such, and shall keep records of its examinations and all other official actions, all of which shall be properly filed in the office of the board, and become a public record. All testimony, objections thereto and rulings thereon shall be taken down by a qualified person employed by the board for such purpose. 
(c)	The board of plumbing examiners shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged injustice, or an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination was made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this article. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same in a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(d)	The board of plumbing examiners shall also have the power to hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article, where there are practical exceptions or where there are apparent undue difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of a certain requirement of this article; to vary or modify, if reasonable and practical, the application of any of the regulations or provisions relating to the use and installation of plumbing work so that the spirit and essence of the article shall be observed and public safety, health and welfare secured and substantial justice done. 
(Ord. No. 6769, § 1, 6-6-94)
Secs. 7-120-7-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOUSING CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Fair housing practices, § 9-16 et seq.
State Law reference- Municipal housing, RSMo Ch. 99.

Sec. 7-126. - Adoption of Standard Housing Code. 
    A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the city clerk's office, being marked and designated as the Standard Housing Code, 1976 Edition, as published by the Southern Building Code Congress Board of Trustees, be and is hereby adopted as the housing code of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided and each and all of the regulations of the Standard Housing Code, 1976 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part thereof, as if fully set out in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-1)
Sec. 7-127. - Abatement of nuisances. 
(a)	The Standard Housing Code provides for service of adequate notice of the declaration of nuisances, which notice shall specify that the property be vacated, if such be the case, reconditioned or removed. The time period set forth by the code for commencement shall be as follows: Property owner shall have thirty (30) days from date of notice to reply advising the building official whether he will bring the building up to the specified standards or whether he will have the building removed from the lot. After the initial thirty (30) days as stated above have expired, property owners will have an additional thirty (30) days to comply with the provisions of the code either by bringing the structure up to standards or by removing it completely, whichever method the property owner advises the building official he will follow; said notice shall be served either by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, but if service cannot be had by either of these modes of services then service may be had by publication. The owner, occupant, lesser [lessor], mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building or structure as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county shall be made parties. 
(b)	Upon failure to commence work of reconditioning or demolition within the time specified or upon failure to proceed continuously with the work without unnecessary delay, the building official shall call and have a full and adequate hearing upon the matter, giving the affected parties twenty-one (21) days' written notice of the hearing. Any party may be represented by counsel, and all parties shall have an opportunity to be heard. After the hearings, if the evidence supports a finding that the building or structure is a nuisance or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city, the building official shall issue an order ordering the building or structure to be demolished and removed, or repaired. 
(c)	If the building official issues an order to demolish and remove a building or structure or to repair a building or structure based on the findings of the hearing, property owners will have a period of no more than ten (10) days to comply with this final order. If work is not commenced within this ten (10) day period the building official will authorize the removal or the repair of the building or structure and the city clerk will issue a special tax bill against the property. At the request of the taxpayer the tax bill may be paid in installments over a period of not more than ten (10) years. The tax bill from date of its issuance shall be a lien on the property until paid. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-1)
Cross reference- Nuisances generally, Ch. 17. 
Sec. 7-128. - Housing board of adjustments and appeals. 
(a)	There is hereby established by the city, a board called the housing board of adjustments and appeals which shall be composed of five (5) members. Such board insofar as practicable shall be composed of one realtor, one physician, one architect, engineer or general contractor, one building materials dealer, and one member at large who must be a homeowner in the city. The board shall be appointed by the mayor of the city with the approval of the city council. 
(b)	If it is not possible to fill the membership of the board in all categories listed above, the mayor may select the remaining membership, at his discretion and with the approval of the city council, from business and professional residence of the city. The authority, activities, terms of office, quorum, procedures and decisions of the board shall be as provided in the applicable provision of the Standard Housing Code adopted by the city in section 7-126. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-2)
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-311. 
Sec. 7-129. - Housing authority designated community development agency for city. 
(a)	The housing authority of the city is hereby designated as the community development agency for the city. 
(b)	The housing authority shall exercise on behalf of the city all the functions set forth in the various titles of Public Law 93-383. 
(c)	The specific titles of Public Law 93-383 as they may apply to the city and in which the housing authority as the community development agency shall function on behalf of the city are: 
Title I-Community Development. 
Title II-Assisted Housing. 
Title VIII-Miscellaneous. 
(d)	The housing authority is hereby authorized to revise, amend, delete or add to its functions as Public Law 93-383 may in the future be revised or the statutes of the state may be amended particularly with regard to enabling legislation in RSMo Ch. 99 or other laws that may be enacted by the state to implement Public Law 99-383. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-3)
Secs. 7-130-7-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXISTING BUILDING CODE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 8235, § 1, 2, adopted Aug. 3, 2015, has been treated by the editor as superseding former Art. VI, §§ 7-141, 7-142 in it entirety. Former Art. VI pertained to the existing structures code and derived from Ord. No. 6385, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 1989.

Sec. 7-141. - Adoption of existing building code. 
    A certain document, one (1) digital copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, being marked and designated as the International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, including Appendix Chapter B and Resource A (see International Existing Building Code Section 101.6, 2015 edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the City of Marshall, Missouri, for regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings, as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Existing Building Code on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, Missouri are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribe in section 7-142. 
(Ord. No. 8235, § 1, 8-3-15)
Sec. 7-142. - Additions, insertions and changes to existing building code. 
    The Existing Building Code is amended and changed in the following respects: 
(a)	Section 101.1: Insert: The City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(b)	Section 1401.2: Insert: January 1, 2000. 
(c)	Section 112.1. Insert: Revised to read: 
112.1 General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code shall be heard by the City of Marshall Board of Appeals, as established, adopted and amended from time to time by the City of Marshall, Missouri. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(d)	Section 112.3. Insert: Revised to read: 
112.3 Membership, Qualifications and Procedures. The Board of Appeals shall consist of not less than four members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, fire protection or other areas of construction, property maintenance or building trades. Officers and/or employees of the City of Marshall, Missouri, may serve as members of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 8235, § 1, 8-3-15)
Secs. 7-143-7-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 7-151. - Adoption of mechanical code. 
    A certain document, one (1) digital copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, including Appendix Chapter A, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City of Marshall, Missouri, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Mechanical Code on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, Missouri are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribe in section 7-152. 
(Ord. No. 6383, § 1, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 6587, § 1, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 6825, § 1, 11-7-94; Ord. No. 7020, §§ 1, 2, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 7323, § 1, 6-4-1; Ord. No. 7593, § 1, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7742, § 1, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7934, § 1, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 8238, § 1, 8-3-15) 
Sec. 7-152. - Additions, insertions and changes to mechanical code. 
    The following sections are hereby revised as follows: 
(a)	Section 101.1: Insert: The City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(b)	Section 106.5.2. Insert: The mechanical permit fees established by this section shall be as follows: 
Air Condition Units = 2 ton .....$10.00 
Air Condition Units > 2 ton .....15.00 
Boilers - H.P. ea .....20.00 
Furnaces/Ht. Pumps = 100M Btu .....10.00 
Furnaces/Ht. Pumps > 100M Btu .....15.00 
Floor Furnaces - B.T.U. .....10.00 
Unit Heaters - B.T.U. (M) .....10.00 
Range Hood .....5.00 
Fans .....2.50 
Gas Piping .....10.00 
Diffuser/Register .....1.00 
Minimum Fee .....10.00 
Maximum Fee .....200.00 
(c)	Section 106.5.3: Insert: Twenty-five per cent (25%)-Twenty-five per cent (25%). 
(d)	Section 108.4: Insert: Misdemeanor, $500.00, 90 days. 
(e)	Section 108.5: Insert: $1.00-$500.00. 
(f)	Section 109.1: Revised to read: 
109.2 General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code shall be heard by the City of Marshall Board of Appeals, as established, adopted and amended from time to time by the City of Marshall, Missouri. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(g)	Section 109.2-109.7, inclusive: Revised to read: 
109.2 Qualifications. The Board of Appeals shall consist of not less than four members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, fire protection or other areas of construction, property maintenance or building trades. Officers and/or employees of the City of Marshall, Missouri may serve as members of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 6383, § 3, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 6587, § 3, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 6825, §§ 3, 5, 11-7-94; Ord. No. 7020, §§ 3, 5, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 7323, §§ 3, 5, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 7593, § 2, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7742, § 2, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7934, § 2, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 8238, § 2, 8-3-15) 
Secs. 7-153-7-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESIDENTIAL CODE 

Sec. 7-160. - Adoption of residential code. 
    A certain document, one (1) digital copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, being marked and designated as the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, E, H, I, J, K, and N, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the City of Marshall, Missouri, regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal, and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential Code on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, Missouri are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribe in section 7-161. 
(Ord. No. 8058, § 1, 7-16-12; Ord. No. 8237, § 1, 8-3-15)
Editor's note- Ord. No. 8058, § 1, adopted July 16, 2012, amended § 7-160 in its entirety. Former § 7-160 pertained to adoption of residential code, and was derived from Ord. No. 6592, § 1, adopted Jan. 6, 1992; Ord. No. 6679, § 1, adopted Dec. 16, 1993; Ord. No. 6826, § 1, adopted Nov. 7, 1994; Ord. No. 7327, § 1, adopted May 4, 2001; Ord. No. 7592, § 1, adopted Jan. 18, 2005; Ord. No. 7741, § 1, adopted April 16, 2007; and Ord. No. 7936, § 1, April 5, 2010. 
Sec. 7-161. - Additions, insertions and changes to the residential code. 
    That the following sections are hereby revised as follows: 
(a)	Section R101.1: Insert: The City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(b)	Section R112.1: Revised to read: 
R112.1 General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code shall be heard by the City of Marshall Board of Appeals, as established, adopted and amended from time to time by the City of Marshall, Missouri. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(c)	Section R112.3: Revised to read: 
R112.3 Qualifications. The Board of Appeals shall consist of not less than four members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, residential protection or other areas of construction, property maintenance or building trades. Officers and/or employees of the City of Marshall, Missouri, may serve as members of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(d)	Insert: Table R301.2(1). 
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA 
GROUND SNOW LOADWIND DESIGNSEISMIC DESIGN
CATEGORYf SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROMWINTER DESIGN TEMPe >ICE BARRIER
UNDERLAYMENT
REQUIREDh >FLOOD HAZARDSg >AIR FREEZING INDEXi >MEAN ANNUAL TEMPj Speedd (mph) Topographic effectsk Special wind regionl Wind-borne debris zonem Weatheringa Frost line depthb Termitec 20 90NONONOASEV.30"Mod. Sev.5°FN/A1/16/13100055°F 
For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s. 
a.  Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index, "negligible," "moderate" or "severe" for concrete as determined from Figure R301.2(3). The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C 145, C 216 or C 652. 
b.  The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade. 
c.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage. 
d.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R301.2(4)A]. Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.14. 
e.  The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from the columns of 971/2-percent values for winter from Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. Deviations from the Appendix D temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the building official. 
f.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1. 
g.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with (a) the date of the jurisdiction's entry into the National Flood Insurance Program (date of adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard areas), (b) the date(s) of the Flood Insurance Study and (c) the panel numbers and dates of the currently effective FIRMs and FBFMs or other flood hazard map adopted by the authority having jurisdiction, as amended. 
h.  In accordance with Sections R905.1.2, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "NO." 
i.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from the 100-year (99 percent) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)." 
j.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)." 
k.  In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table. 
l.  In accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A, where there is local historical data documenting unusual wind conditions, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES" and identify any specific requirements. Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table. 
m.  In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2.1, the jurisdiction shall indicate the wind-borne debris wind zone(s). Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table. 
  
(e)	Section P2603.5.1: Insert: Eighteen inches (18?)/Eighteen inches (18?). 
(Ord. No. 7327, § 3, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 7592, § 2, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7741, § 2, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7936, § 2, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 8058, § 2, 7-16-12; Ord. No. 8242, § 2, 8-3-15) 
Secs. 7-162-7-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 7-166. - Adoption of property maintenance code. 
    A certain document, one (1) digital copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Marshall, Missouri, regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, Missouri are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 7-167. 
(Ord. No. 6585, § 1, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 6823, § 1, 11-7-94; Ord. No. 6060, §§ 1, 2, 6-3-96; Ord. No. 7325, § 1, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 7591, § 1, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7740, § 1, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7929, § 1, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 8241, § 1, 8-3-15) 
Sec. 7-167. - Additions, insertions and changes in property maintenance code. 
    The following sections are hereby revised as follows: 
(a)	Section 101.1: Insert: The City of Marshall, Missouri; 
(b)	Section 103.5 shall be deleted; 
(c)	Section 112.4: Insert: $1.00-$500.00. 
(d)	Section 302.4: Insert: Ten inches (10?). 
(e)	Section 304.14: Insert: April 1/December 1; 
(f)	Section 602.3: Insert: October 1/May 15; 
(g)	Section 602.4: Insert: October 1/May 15; 
(h)	Section 111.1. Insert: Revised to read: 
111.1 General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code shall be heard by the City of Marshall Board of Appeals, as established, adopted and amended from time to time by the City of Marshall, Missouri. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(i)	Section 111.2 to 111.3, inclusive. Insert: Revised to read: 
111.2 Membership, Qualifications and Procedures. The Board of Appeals shall consist of not less than four members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, fire protection or other areas of construction, property maintenance or building trades. Officers and/or employees of the City of Marshall, Missouri, may serve as members of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 6585, § 3, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 6823, §§ 3, 5, 11-7-94; Ord. No. 6960, §§ 1, 2, 6-3-96; Ord. No. 7325, §§ 3, 5, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 7591, § 2, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7740, § 2, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7929, § 2, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 8241, § 2, 8-3-15) 
Sec. 7-168. - Appeals. 
    Sections 111.2 to 111.7 of the International Property Maintenance Code, inclusive, shall not be enacted. All written applications for appeal from any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official pursuant to the provisions of the Property Maintenance Code shall be heard by the Board of Building Code Enforcement established pursuant to Section 7-175, et seq. of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 7929, § 6, 3-15-10)
Secs. 7-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 6957, § 1, adopted June 3, 1996, reenacted Art. X, §§ 7-170-7-182.

Sec. 7-170. - Nuisance defined. 
    The following conditions have been determined to be detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Marshall and therefore constitute a nuisance: 
(1)	Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity of any such wall or vertical structural members falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(2)	Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three (33) percent or more, of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or fifty (50) percent of damage or deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)	Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors, roofs, or other horizontal structural members, or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength or deflections to be reasonably safe for the purpose used or intended to be used. 
(4)	Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city. 
(5)	Those which are uninhabited and are open at door, window, wall or roof.
(6)	Those under construction upon which no substantial work shall have been performed for ninety (90) days immediately next to the time that a notice shall issue under section 7-173 for the completion or demolition thereof. 
(7)	Those in the process of demolition upon which no substantial work shall have been performed for a period of fourteen (14) days immediately following the time a notice shall issue to complete the demolition thereof under section 7-173. 
(8)	Those containing therein substantial accumulations of trash, garbage or other materials susceptible to fire, or constituting or proving a harboring place for vermin or other obnoxious animals or insects or in any way threatening the health of the occupants thereof or the health of persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(9)	Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic.
(10)	Those which have parts thereof which are so attached or deteriorated that they may fall upon public ways or upon the property of others or may injure members of the public or the occupants thereof. 
(11)	Those buildings built in violation of any safety provision of the building code, electrical code, plumbing code, mechanical code, minimum housing standards code, or the fire prevention code of the city, or used in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 6507, § 1, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 6957, § 1, 6-3-96)
Sec. 7-171. - Standards. 
    The following standards shall be followed [in] substance by the building inspector and the city administrator in ordering repair, vacation or demolition: 
(1)	If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired or maintained so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be ordered so repaired or maintained. 
(2)	If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated pending abatement of the nuisance. 
(3)	In any case where the dangerous building cannot be reasonably repaired or maintained so that the building or structure will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, the building or structure shall be ordered repaired or demolished. 
(4)	In any case where the conditions constituting the public nuisance are such that the costs to repair or maintain the building or structure so that it will no longer constitute a public nuisance equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the value of the building or structure, it shall be ordered repaired or demolished, and in the event it is not repaired or demolished by the owner, then the city shall abate the nuisance by demolition. 
(5)	Any building or structure constituting a public nuisance because of the conditions described in subsection (6) of section 7-170 of this article shall be ordered to be completed in accordance with lawful plans and specifications, and if it shall not be so completed or demolished by the owner, then the city shall abate the nuisance by demolition. 
(6)	Any building or structure found to be a public nuisance because of the conditions described in subsection (7) of section 1-170 of this article shall be ordered demolished. 
(Ord. No. 6507, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 6957, § 2, 6-3-96)
Sec. 7-172. - Building inspector; duties. 
    The building inspector shall: 
(1)	Inspect or cause to be inspected annually all public buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements, commercial, manufacturing, or loft buildings for the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist as set forth in section 7-170 of this article. 
(2)	Inspect any building or structure about which complaints are filed by any person alleging that the building or structure contains any of the conditions described in section 1-170 of this article. 
(3)	Inspect any building or structure reported by the fire or police departments of this city when that department has reason to believe that the building or structure has any of the conditions set forth in section 1-170 of this article. 
(4)	Inspect any building or structure of the city at any time whenever there is reason to believe that the building or structure has a condition described in section 7-170 of this article. 
(5)	Determine in any case where inspection shows that a building or structure has any of the conditions referred to in Section 1 of this ordinance, whether or not it reasonably appears there is immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of any person because of such condition, and if it does so reasonably appear, to immediately post upon the building or structure a notice reading as follows: 
"This building has been found to be a public nuisance by the Building Inspector of the City of Marshall. It also reasonably appears that this building or structure is an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of persons thereabout or therein. This notice is to remain on this building or structure until it is brought into compliance with the ordinances of the City of Marshall, Missouri. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such compliance has occurred." 
    Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to deprive any person entitled thereto by this article of the notice and hearings prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 6507, § 3, 12-2-90; Ord. No. 6957, § 1, 6-3-96)
Sec. 7-173. - Notice. 
    Whenever the building inspector has determined that any building or structure is a public nuisance under the provisions of this article, he shall, as soon as possible thereafter, notify the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building or structure as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds for the appropriate county that such building or structure has been found to be a public nuisance under the provisions of this article. The notice shall set forth a description of the conditions found in the building or structure so as to constitute the building or structure as a public nuisance under section 7-170. The notice shall also provide for abatement of the nuisance by ordering the building or structure to be vacated if such be the case, reconditioned, or removed, giving a reasonable time for commencement of the work, and requiring the work to proceed continuously without unnecessary delay. 
(Ord. No. 6507, § 4, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 6957, § 2, 6-3-96)
Sec. 7-174. - Publication of notice. 
    Whenever under this article a notice is required to be served upon the persons interested in any building or structure, the notice shall be served upon the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building or structure as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds for the appropriate county, and shall be signed by the person who has the responsibility to issue the notice. The notice shall be served, if the party or parties to be served reside in the city, by handing the notice to the person to be served by anyone competent to be a witness or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode of the one to be served with a member of the household over the age of fifteen (15) years. If the person to be served shall not reside in the city or shall have absented himself from the city or concealed himself so that personal service may not be made as herein provided for and if his address shall be known, then service shall be made by posting a copy of such notice in a conspicuous place on the building or structure to which it relates and by certified mail, return receipt requested; but if his address shall not be known, the service of notice shall be by posting and by publication. The publication shall contain the full text of the notice and shall be published at least once a week for three consecutive weeks on the same day of the week in some newspaper of general circulation published in the appropriate county, and shall contain the time specified in the notice for a hearing to be held, or for the commencement of work or for any other thing to be done which shall be at least thirty (30) days from the date of the first publication of notice. 
(Ord. No. 6507, § 5, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 6957, § 1, 6-3-96)
Sec. 7-175. - Board of building code enforcement; hearing. 
(a)	It shall be the responsibility of the city administrator to supervise and direct the building inspector in carrying out the provisions of this article. Whenever there shall be a failure to obey a notice to abate a public nuisance issued as provided in section 7-173 by not commencing work in the time specified in said notice, or there shall be a failure to proceed continuously with the work required therein without unnecessary delay, the city administrator shall call and have a full and adequate hearing upon the matter giving all affected parties at least twenty-one (21) days written notice of the hearing. The hearing shall be held by a board of three (3) persons, two (2) of which shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. The city administrator shall be the third member of the board and shall preside at the hearings held by the board. A fourth person shall be appointed in like manner to serve as an alternate for any member of the board unable to be present at a hearing. The board shall be known as the board of building code enforcement (hereinafter the "board"). No member shall participate in the final decision in any case unless the member has either attended each hearing held with respect to the subject property, or read the transcript of and examined physical evidence admitted in any session where the member was not present. Any party may be represented by counsel, and all parties shall have an opportunity to be heard and present such evidence as shall be relevant to a determination of: 
(1)	Whether or not the building or structure involved is a public nuisance under the terms of this article; 
(2)	Whether the procedure required by this article shall have been substantially followed; and 
(3)	Whether or not the abatement order of the building regulations supervisor was reasonable and within the standards of this article. 
(b)	All testimony shall be under oath, which may be administered by the city clerk, and a written record of the hearing shall be made, the cost of which shall be paid by the city should the proceeding be eventually held against the city and by the owner if it should not. In the latter case, the cost of such reporting shall be a lien upon the lot, tract, or parcel of land upon which the building or structure stands, and shall be added to the cost of performance for demolition or repair in the event the city shall be required to do so, and payable as provided for such costs. 
(Ord. No. 6507, § 6, 12-2-90; Ord. No. 6957, § 1, 6-3-96; Ord. No 8014, § 1, 9-19-11)
Sec. 7-176. - Dismissal. 
    Within thirty (30) days from the date of the hearing required by section 7-175, the board shall, upon the basis of competent and substantial evidence offered at the hearing, make a conclusion of law as to whether or not the building or structure in question is a public nuisance under the terms of this article and detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city; specifically finding as a matter of fact the condition or conditions of such building or structure which constitute the nuisance. If it is found that the building or structure is a public nuisance, further findings shall be made as to whether or not the procedures required by this article have been substantially met and complied with, and whether or not the abatement order of the building inspector to abate the nuisance was reasonable in its terms and conditions and within the standards of this article. In the event it is found that the abatement order was not reasonable or within the standards of this article, it shall be the duty of the board to make findings of fact as to what is reasonably required to abate the public nuisance within the standards of this article. If the board finds that a public nuisance does not exist or that the procedures of this article have not been substantially met and complied with, the proceedings against the building or structure shall be dismissed. 
(Ord. No. 6507, § 7, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 6957, § 1, 6-3-96)
Sec. 7-177. - Compliance with order to complete, repair or demolish building. 
    If a proceeding is not dismissed following the findings required by section 7-176, the board shall issue an order directing the building or structure to be completed, repaired, or demolished and vacated as the case may be, within the standards of this article. This order, together with the findings of fact and conclusions of law required by section 7-176, shall be in writing and shall be immediately delivered or mailed to each party to the hearing or to his attorney of record. In addition, copies of the order and findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the office of the city clerk for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of issuance thereof. The order shall state a reasonable time which shall not be less than thirty (30) days from the date of issuance within which to comply with the order, and shall further provide that if it is not complied with within such time, the city administrator shall cause the work to be done by the city and its own crews or by contractors employed by the city for that purpose. 
    If there shall be no contractor employed by the city for that purpose, the city administrator is hereby authorized to enter into contracts not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with persons engaged in the business of repairing or demolishing buildings for the purpose of enforcing the order provided for in this section if there are sufficient funds provided for that purpose in the budget or a supplemental appropriation. Additional contracts, or contracts for amounts in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), must be approved by council. The contracts can be signed only after compliance with the city's prescribed bidding procedures. 
(Ord. No. 6507, § 8, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 6957, § 1, 6-3-96)
Sec. 7-178. - Costs; special tax bill. 
    Whenever the city shall have caused the work to be done as provided by section 7-177, the building inspector shall certify the costs of the work to the city clerk who shall cause a special tax bill therefor, and for costs of certified mailings, service of process and publication incurred therefor, and for the cost of the reporter at the hearing which shall be likewise certified by the building inspector, to be issued against the lot, tract or parcel of land upon which the building or structure is located. The special tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be deemed a personal debt against the property owner, and in addition shall be a lien on the lot, tract or parcel of land until paid and shall be registered in the office of the city clerk in a book to be kept by him for such purposes. Said lien shall be superior to the interest, lien or claim of any person or entity served with notice pursuant to section 7-174 hereof. The tax bill shall be collected by the county collector or other official collecting taxes. 
    At the written request of the tax payer delivered to the city clerk of the city, a tax bill for repair or demolition of a building or structure may be paid in ten (10) equal annual installments, which installments with interest thereon to date on the unpaid balance shall be due annually on the anniversary of the date of issuance of the bill. Interest shall be paid at the maximum rate per annum allowable by law on the unpaid balance of the special assessment computed from the date of issuance. If any annual payment of principal or interest shall not be paid within thirty (30) days of its due date the entire remaining balance of the tax bill shall immediately become due and payable. 
    If a request for ten (10) annual payments is not made prior to the time the building inspector shall certify the cost of the work to the city clerk, the tax bill shall be payable in sixty (60) days from its date of issuance with interest thereon at the maximum rate per annum allowable by law. 
(Ord. No. 6507, § 9, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 6957, § 1, 6-3-96)
Sec. 7-179. - Collection of special tax bill. 
    Tax bills issued under section 7-178 shall be prima facie evidence of the validity of the bill, the doing of the work and the liability of the property for the damages stated in the bill and shall be collected if default should occur by suit brought in a court of competent jurisdiction by the city counselor on behalf of the city. Judgment in any such suit shall be special and against the property only and shall be satisfied by sale of the property or so much thereof as is necessary to satisfy the judgment and the costs of the sale. Nothing herein shall limit the authority of the city collector to collect the tax by sale or other means authorized by law. 
    If there are proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered claim payment made for damage or loss to a building or other structure caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion or other casualty loss, and if the covered claim payment is in excess of fifty (50) percent of the face value of the policy covering a building or other structure, then the following procedure shall apply: 
(1)	The insurer shall withhold from the covered claim payment ten (10) percent of the covered claim payment, and shall pay that amount to the city to deposit into an interest-bearing account. Any named mortgagee on the insurance policy shall maintain priority over any obligation under this section. If a special tax bill or assessment is issued by the city for the expenses of demolition of such building as a dangerous building, the moneys held by the city shall be applied toward payment of special tax bill or assessment. If there is any excess, it shall be paid by the city to the insured or as the terms of the policy, including any endorsements thereto, provide. 
(2)	The city shall release the proceeds and any interest which has accrued on such proceeds received under subsection (l) of this section to the insured or as the terms of the policy and endorsements thereto provide within thirty (30) days after receipt of such insurance moneys, unless, the city has instituted legal proceedings under the provisions of sections 7-177 and 7-178. If the city has proceeded under the provisions of sections 7-177 and 7-178, all moneys in excess of that necessary to comply with the provisions of sections 7-177 and 7-178 for the removal of the building or structure, less salvage value, shall be paid to the insured. 
(3)	The city may certify that, in lieu of payment of all or part of the covered claim payment under this section, it has obtained satisfactory proof that the insured has or will remove debris and repair, rebuild or otherwise make the premises safe and secure. In this event, the city shall issue a certificate within thirty (30) days after receipt of proof to permit covered claim payment to the insured without deduction. It shall be the obligation of the insured or other person making the claim to provide the insurance company with the written certificate provided for in this subsection. 
(4)	No provision of this section shall be construed to make the city a party to any insurance contract. 
(Ord. No. 6507, § 10, 12-13-90; Ord. No. 6957, § 1, 6-3-96)
Sec. 7-180. - Appeals. 
    Any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent or other person having an interest in the building or structure may appeal from the order and determination of the building inspector made under the provisions of section 7-177 of this article. The appeal shall be to the Circuit Court of Saline County as established in Article 536 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 6507, § 11, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 6957, § 1, 6-3-96)
Sec. 7-181. - Emergency measures. 
    In all cases where it reasonably appears that an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of any person exists, the building inspector may take emergency measures to vacate, repair or demolish a building or structure which is a public nuisance under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 6507, § 12, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 6957, § 1, 6-3-96)
Sec. 7-182. - Personal liability of officers, agents or employee of the city. 
    No officer, agent or employee of the City of Marshall shall be personally liable for any damage that may occur to any persons or property as a result of any act required of him or permitted to be taken by him under the terms of this article. Any suit brought against any such officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any such acts required or permitted shall be defended by the city until the final determination of the proceedings, and if judgment shall be obtained it shall be paid by the City of Marshall. It is hereby further declared that no officer, agent or employee of the city owes any duty under the provisions of this article to any citizen or other individual but that the duties prescribed herein and imposed upon officers, agents or employees of the city are duties to be performed for the government of said city. 
(Ord. No. 6507, § 13, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 6957, § 1, 6-3-96)
Secs. 7-183-7-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - FUEL GAS CODE 

Sec. 7-201. - Adoption of fuel gas code. 
    A certain document, one (1) digital copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, being marked and designated as the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, and D (see International Fuel Gas Code Section 101.3, 2015 edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Marshall, Missouri, regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, Missouri are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribe in section 7-202. 
(Ord. No. 7595, § 1, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7744, § 1, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7930, § 1, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 8237, § 1, 8-3-2015) 
Sec. 7-202. - Additions, insertions and changes. 
    The following sections are hereby revised as follows: 
(a)	Section 101.1: Insert: The City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(b)	Section 106.6.2: Revised to read: 
The fees for work shall be as indicated in the Mechanical Code. 
(c)	Section 106.6.3: Insert: Twenty-five Per Cent (25%), Twenty-five Per Cent (25%). 
(d)	Section 108.4: Insert: Misdemeanor, $500.00, 90 days. 
(e)	Section 108.5: Insert: $1.00-$500.00. 
(f)	Section 109.1: Revised to read: 
109.1 General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code shall be heard by the City of Marshall Board of Appeals, as established, adopted and amended from time to time by the City of Marshall, Missouri. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(g)	Section 109.2-109.7, inclusive: Revised to read: 
109.2 Membership, Qualifications and Procedures. The Board of Appeals shall consist of not less than four members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, fire protection or other areas of construction, property maintenance or building trades. Officers and/or employees of the City of Marshall, Missouri may serve as members of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 7595, § 2, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7744, § 2, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7930, § 2, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 8237, § 2, 8-3-15) 
Secs. 7-203-7-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 

Sec. 7-221. - Adoption of energy conservation code. 
    A certain document, one (1) digital copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, being marked and designated as the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Marshall, Missouri, regulating and governing energy-efficient building envelopes and installation of energy-efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Energy Conservation Code on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, Missouri are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 7-222. 
(Ord. No. 7597, § 1, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7746, § 1, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7931, § 1, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 8234, § 1, 8-3-15) 
Sec. 7-222. - Additions, insertions and changes. 
    The following sections are hereby revised as follows: 
(a)	Sections C101.1 and R101.1. Insert: The City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(b)	Sections C108.4. and R108.4. Insert: Revised to read: 
Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $1.00 and not more than $500.00. 
(c)	Sections C109.1 and R109.1. Revised to read: 
General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code shall be heard by the City of Marshall Board of Appeals, as established, adopted, and amended from time to time by the City of Marshall, Missouri. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(d)	Sections C109.3 and R109.3. Revised to read: 
Qualifications. The Board of Appeals shall consist of not less than four members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, fire protection or other areas of construction, property maintenance or building trades. Officers and/or employees of the City of Marshall, Missouri, may serve as members of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 7597, § 2, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7746, § 2, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7931, § 2, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 8234, § 2, 8-3-15) 
Secs. 7-223-7-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - COMPREHENSIVE FLOODPLAIN MANGEMENT PROGRAM[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note-Art. XIII contains the comprehensive floodplain management program regulations enacted by Ord. No. 8088, adopted Dec. 17, 2012, as amended. Organization and numbering of provisions has been provided by the editor in order to conform to the format used in the this Code. The legislative history notes in parentheses following the sections of this article provide the article and section numbers used in Ord. No. 8088 and subsequent ordinances.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-241. - Statutory authorization. 
    By adopting RSMo. § 77.260, the Legislature of the State of Missouri delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations designed to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the City of Marshall, Missouri finds and orders as follows: 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 1, § A, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-242. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	Flood losses resulting from periodic inundation. The special flood hazard areas of the City of Marshall, Missouri are subject to inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base; all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	General causes of the flood losses. These flood losses are caused by (1) the cumulative effect of development in any delineated floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities; and (2) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods, hazardous to others, inadequately elevated, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(c)	Methods used to analyze flood hazards. The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) that is the basis of this article uses a standard engineering method of analyzing flood hazards which consist of the following series of interrelated steps: 
(1)	Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this article is representative of large floods which are characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this article. It is in the general order of a flood which could be expected to have a one percent chance of occurrence in any one year as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administrator's FIS, and illustrative materials for the City of Marshall, Missouri dated January 16, 2013 as amended, and any future revisions thereto. 
(2)	Calculation of water surface profiles is based on a standard hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood. 
(3)	Computation of a floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than one (1) foot at any point. 
(4)	Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no development is permitted that would cause any increase in flood height. 
(5)	Delineation of flood fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the base flood. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 1, § B, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-243. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; to minimize those losses described in subsection 7-242(a); to establish or maintain the community's eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 59.22(a)(3); and to meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d) by applying the provisions of this article to: 
(1)	Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Require uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction; and 
(3)	Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the intended development purposes due to the flood hazard. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 1, § C, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-244. - Lands to which article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of City of Marshall, Missouri identified as numbered and unnumbered A zones and AE zones, on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) for the City of Marshall, Missouri on map panel numbers 29195C0240C, 29195C0245C, 29195C0360C, 29195C0376C, 29195C0377C, 29195C0379C, and 29195C0385C, dated January 16, 2013, as amended, and any future revisions thereto. In all areas covered by this ordinance, no development shall be permitted except through the issuance of a floodplain development permit, granted by the council or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the council or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community, and as specifically noted in Division 3 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 2, § A, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-245. - Floodplain administrator. 
    The building official is hereby designated as the floodplain administrator under this article. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 2, § B, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-246. - Compliance. 
    No development located within the special flood hazard areas of this community shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 2, § C, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-247. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 2, § D, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-248. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 2, § E, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-249. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This ordinance does not imply that areas outside the floodway and flood fringe or land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This article shall not create a liability on the part of the City of Marshall, Missouri, any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 2, § F, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-250. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 2, § G, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-251. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and in addition, shall pay all costs, attorney's fees and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Marshall, Missouri, or other appropriate authority, from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 6, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-252. - Amendments. 
    The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this article may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Marshall, Missouri. At least twenty (20) days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be provided to the Region VII office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The regulations of this ordinance are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 7, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-253. - Date of effect. 
    This article and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force and effect from and after the date of its final passage and adoption of the ordinance for which it derives. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 10, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-254. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    100-year flood. See "base flood." 
    Accessory structure means the same as "appurtenant structure." 
    Actuarial rates see "risk premium rates." 
    Administrator means the Federal Insurance Administrator. 
    Agency means the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
    Agricultural commodities means agricultural products and livestock. 
    Agricultural structure means any structure used exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities. 
    Appeal means a request for review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure that is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building see "structure." 
    Chief executive officer or chief elected official means the official of the community who is charged with the authority to implement and administer laws, ordinances, and regulations for that community. 
    Community means any state or area or political subdivision thereof, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, levees, levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Eligible community or Participating community means a community for which the administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Food or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of inland and/or (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means an official map of a community on which the administrator has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the designated regulatory floodway. 
    Flood elevation determination means a determination by the administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards. 
    Flood fringe means the area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the administrator, where the boundaries of the flood areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered or numbered) A zones. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see "flooding"). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof that provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
    Floodway encroachment lines means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This term includes only docking facilities and facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable floodproofing design requirements of this article. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Map means the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM), flood insurance rate map (FIRM), or the flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
    Market value or Fair market value means an estimate of what is fair, economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
    (NFIP) means the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Participating community also known as an eligible community, means a community in which the administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance. 
    Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including federal, state, and local governments and agencies. 
    Principally above ground means that at least fifty-one (51) percent of the actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis;
(2)	Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with federal, state, or local floodplain management regulations or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Risk premium rates means those rates established by the administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307 of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted actuarial principles. "Risk premium rates" include provisions for operating costs and allowances. 
    Special flood hazard area see "area of special flood hazard." 
    Special hazard area means an area having special flood hazards and shown on an FHBM, FIRM or FBFM as zones (unnumbered or numbered) A and AE. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvements were within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, the erection of temporary forms, nor installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    State coordinating agency means that agency of the state government, or other office designated by the governor of the state or by state statute at the request of the administrator to assist in the implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in that state. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure" for insurance purposes means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The term includes "repetitive loss" buildings (see definition). 
For the purposes of this definition, "repair" is considered to occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences. 
The term does not apply to: 
(1)	Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)	Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure"; or 
(3)	Any improvement to a building.
    Substantial improvement means any combination of reconstruction, alteration, or improvement to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative percentage of improvement equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the current market value of the building. For the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. This term includes structures which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work done. 
The term does not apply to: 
(1)	Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the building official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)	Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure;" or 
(3)	Any building that has been damaged from any source or is categorized as "repetitive loss." 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief by the community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the community. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 8, 12-17-12)
Secs. 7-255-7-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 7-261. - Floodplain development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required for all proposed construction or other development, including the placement of manufactured homes, in the areas described in section 7-244. No person, firm, corporation, or unit of government shall initiate any development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate floodplain development permit for each structure or other development. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 3, § A, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-262. - Designation of floodplain administrator. 
    The building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 3, § B, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-263. - Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator. 
    Duties of the building official shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	Review of all applications for floodplain development permits to assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the floodplain development permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
(2)	Review of all applications for floodplain development permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required by federal, state, or local law; 
(3)	Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(4)	Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications;
(5)	Notify adjacent communities and the Missouri State Emergency Management Agency (Mo SEMA) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(6)	Assure that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished and shall be maintained within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse; 
(7)	Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(8)	Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) that the new or substantially improved non-residential structures have been floodproofed; and 
(9)	When floodproofing techniques are utilized for a particular non-residential structure, the building official shall require certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 3, § C, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-264. - Application for floodplain development permit. 
    To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every floodplain development permit application shall: 
(1)	Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block and tract, house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed structure or work; 
(2)	Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain development permit;
(3)	Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended;
(4)	Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market value of the improvement;
(5)	Specify whether development is located in designated flood fringe or floodway;
(6)	Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed development;
(7)	Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the building official;
(8)	Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction; and
(9)	Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 3, § D, 12-17-12)
Secs. 7-265-7-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 7-271. - General standards. 
(a)	No permit for floodplain development shall be granted for new construction, substantial improvements, and other improvements, including the placement of manufactured homes, within any numbered or unnumbered A zones and AE zones, unless the conditions of this section are satisfied. 
(b)	All areas identified as unnumbered A zones on the FIRM are subject to inundation of the 100-year flood; however, the base flood elevation is not provided. Development within unnumbered A zones is subject to all provisions of this ordinance. If flood insurance study data is not available, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from federal, state, or other sources. 
(c)	Until a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within any numbered A zone or AE zone on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(d)	All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvements, prefabricated structures, placement of manufactured homes, and other developments shall require: 
(1)	Design or adequate anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)	Construction with materials resistant to flood damage;
(3)	Utilization of methods and practices that minimize flood damages;
(4)	All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment, and other service facilities be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)	New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination; and 
(6)	Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, located within special flood hazard areas are required to assure that: 
a.	All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
b.	All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; 
c.	Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and
d.	All proposals for development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data. 
(e)	Storage, material, and equipment. 
(1)	The storage or processing of materials within the special flood hazard area that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
(2)	Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning. 
(f)	Agricultural structures. Structures used solely for agricultural purposes in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising of livestock, may be constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed provided there is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; there is no permanent retail, wholesale, or manufacturing use included in the structure; a variance has been granted from the floodplain management requirements of this ordinance; and a floodplain development permit has been issued. 
(g)	Accessory structures. Structures used solely for parking and limited storage purposes, not attached to any other structure on the site, of limited investment value, and not larger than four hundred (400) square feet, may be constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed provided there is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; a variance has been granted from the standard floodplain management requirements of this ordinance; and a floodplain development permit has been issued. 
(h)	Critical facilities. 
(1)	All new or substantially improved critical nonresidential facilities including, but not limited to, governmental buildings, police stations, fire stations, hospitals, orphanages, penal institutions, communication centers, water and sewer pumping stations, water and sewer treatment facilities, transportation maintenance facilities, places of public assembly, emergency aviation facilities, and schools shall be elevated above the 500-year flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be flood proofed so that below the 500-year flood level the structure is water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations. 
(2)	All critical facilities shall have access routes that are above the elevation of the 500-year flood. 
(3)	No critical facilities shall be constructed in any designated floodway.
(i)	Hazardous materials. All hazardous material storage and handling sites shall be located out of the floodplain. 
(j)	Nonconforming use. A structure, or the use of a structure or premises, that was lawful before the passage or amendment of the ordinance from which this article derives, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	If such structure, use, or utility service is discontinued for twelve consecutive months, any future use of the building shall conform to this article. 
(2)	If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than fifty (50) percent of the pre-damaged market value of the structure. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, safety codes, regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the state inventory of historic places, or local inventory of historic places upon determination. 
(k)	Cumulative improvement. A structure may be improved (remodeled or enlarged) without conforming to current requirements for elevation so long as the cumulative value of all work done within the last five calendar years does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the structure's current market value. If the cumulative value of the improvement exceeds fifty (50) percent of the structure's current market value, the structure must be brought into compliance with subsection 2-272(a) which requires elevation of residential structures to or above the base flood elevation or the elevation/floodproofing of non-residential structures to or above the base flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 4, § A, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 8090, § 1, 1-7-13)
Sec. 7-272. - Specific standards. 
(a)	In all areas identified as numbered and unnumbered A zones and AE zones, where base flood elevation data has been provided, as set forth in subsection 2-271(b), the following provisions are required: 
(1)	Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one (1) foot above base flood elevation. 
(2)	Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood elevation the structure is water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in subsection 7-263(9). 
(3)	Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements that fully enclosed areas below lowest floor used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.	A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; and 
b.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 4, § B, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-273. - Manufactured homes. 
(a)	All manufactured homes to be placed within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones on the community's FIRM shall be required to be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
(b)	Require manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within unnumbered or numbered A zones and AE zones on the community's FIRM on sites: 
(1)	Outside of manufactured home park or subdivision;
(2)	In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(3)	In an expansion to and existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(4)	In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, 
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(c)	Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones on the community's FIRM, that are not subject to the provisions of subsection 7-273(b), be elevated so that either: 
(1)	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at one (1) foot above the base flood level; or 
(2)	The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 4, § C, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-274. - Floodway. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 7-244, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters that carry debris and potential projectiles, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point. 
(2)	The community shall prohibit any encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	If subsection 2-274(2), is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Division 3 of this article. 
(4)	In unnumbered A zones, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from federal, state, or other sources as set forth in subsection 2-271(b). 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 4, § D, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-275. - Recreational vehicles. 
    It is required that recreational vehicles placed on sites within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones on the community's FIRM either: 
(1)	Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;
(2)	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use*; or
(3)	Meet the permitting, elevation, and the anchoring requirements for manufactured homes of this article. 
*A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 4, § E, 12-17-12)
Secs. 2-276-2-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 7-281. - Establishment of appeal board. 
    The board of adjustment of the City of Marshall, Missouri shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the floodplain management requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 5, § A, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-282. - Responsibility of appeal board. 
    Where an application for a floodplain development permit or request for a variance from the floodplain management regulations is denied by the building official, the applicant may apply for such floodplain development permit or variance directly to the appeal board, as defined in section 7-281. 
    The board of adjustment of the City of Marshall, Missouri shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 5, § B, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-283. - Further appeals. 
    Any person or any taxpayer, aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment of the City of Marshall, Missouri, may appeal such decision to the Saline County Circuit Court as provided in RSMo. § 89.110. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 5, § C, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-284. - Floodplain management variance criteria. 
    In passing upon such applications for variances, the board of adjustment of the City of Marshall, Missouri shall consider all technical data and evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article, and the following criteria: 
(1)	The danger to life and property due to flood damage;
(2)	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(3)	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
(5)	The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(6)	The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flood damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(8)	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 5, § D, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-285. - Conditions for approving floodplain management variances. 
(a)	Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (b) through (f) below have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(b)	Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the state inventory of historic places, or local inventory of historic places upon determination provided the proposed activity will not preclude the structure's continued historic designation. 
(c)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(d)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(e)	Variances shall only be issued upon (a) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (b) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (c) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(f)	A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 5, § E, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-286. - Conditions for approving variances for agricultural structures. 
(a)	Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall be decided individually based on a case-by-case analysis of the building's unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in sections 7-284 and 7-285. 
(b)	In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance issued for agricultural structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed: 
(1)	All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the floodplain management regulations of this ordinance shall demonstrate that the varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other alternate location outside of the floodplain exists for the agricultural structure. Residential structures, such as farm houses, cannot be considered agricultural structures. 
(2)	Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural purposes in flood-prone areas only. 
(3)	For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below highest adjacent grade, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with subsection 7-271(d)(2). 
(4)	The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with subsection 7-271(d)(1). All of the building's structural components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces. 
(5)	Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above highest adjacent grade or floodproofed so that they are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with subsection 7-271(d)(4). 
(6)	The agricultural structures must meet all National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in accordance with the NFIP regulations. 
(7)	Major equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from any flood damage.
(8)	No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by any federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs of the agricultural structures. 
(9)	A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below highest adjacent grade will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below highest adjacent grade increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this ordinance. 
(10)	Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and approved by the community and a registered professional engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for construction. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 5, § F, 12-17-12)
Sec. 7-287. - Conditions for approving variances for accessory structures. 
(a)	Any variance granted for an accessory structure shall be decided individually based on a case-by-case analysis of the building's unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in sections 7-284 and 7-285. 
(b)	In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance issued for accessory structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed: 
(1)	Use of the accessory structures must be solely for parking and limited storage purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). 
(2)	For any new or substantially damaged accessory structures, the exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood elevation, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with subsection 7-271(d)(2). 
(3)	The accessory structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure in accordance with subsection 7-271(d)(1). All of the building's structural components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces. 
(4)	Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with subsection 7-271(d)(4). 
(5)	The accessory structures must meet all National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in accordance with subsection 7-272(a)(3). 
(6)	The accessory structures must comply with the floodplain management floodway encroachment provisions of subsection 7-274(2). No variances may be issued for accessory structures within any designated floodway, if any increase in flood levels would result during the 100-year flood. 
(7)	Equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from any flood damage.
(8)	No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by any federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs of the accessory structures. 
(9)	A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this ordinance. 
(10)	Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and approved by the community and by a registered professional engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for construction. 
(Ord. No. 8088, Art. 5, § G, 12-17-12)
Chapter 8 - CIVIL DISASTERS AND EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Police, Ch. 22.
State Law reference- Civil defense, RSMo Ch. 44.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL DISASTER PLANNING ORGANIZATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2.
State Law reference- Mandate to establish a local disaster planning organization, RSMo 44.080.

Sec. 8-11. - "Chief executive officer" defined. 
    Chief executive officer shall be defined for purposes of this article as the mayor or other official appointed by the city council or elected by the public to administer the city government and its operations. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-12. - Established. 
    A local disaster planning organization is hereby created for the preparation and the carrying out of all the emergency functions other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy attack in accordance with RSMo Ch. 44. 
(Code 1967, § 9-2)
Sec. 8-13. - Membership. 
    The local disaster planning organization shall consist of a director and other additional members to be selected by the director in order to conform to the state organization and procedures for the conduct of emergency operations as outlined in the state survival plan. 
(Code 1967, § 9-3)
Sec. 8-14. - Coordinator. 
(a)	A coordinator of the local disaster planning organization for the conduct of emergency operations may be appointed by the mayor and shall serve until removed by the same. 
(b)	The coordinator shall have such responsibilities for the organization, administration and operation of this organization as is delegated by the chief executive officer subject to the direction and control of the city council as provided by statute. 
(Code 1967, § 9-4)
Sec. 8-15. - Functions; appointment of personnel. 
    The local disaster planning organization shall perform such civil defense functions within the city as shall be prescribed in and by the state civil defense plan and program prepared by the governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by RSMo Ch. 44 or the state survival plan; and shall appoint, provide, without compensation, or remove any personnel needed by the organization for the proper performance of its duties. 
(Code 1967, § 9-5)
Sec. 8-16. - Oath of members required. 
    Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the local disaster planning organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the coordinator: 
    "I, __________, do solemnly swear that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the constitution of the State of Missouri, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservations or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been, a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United States or this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the local disaster planning organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of any Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence." 
(Code 1967, § 9-6)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 44.115. 
Sec. 8-17. - Office space. 
    The chief executive officer or the city council is authorized to designate space in any city-owned or leased building for the local disaster planning organization as its office. 
(Code 1967, § 9-7)
Sec. 8-18. - Mutual aid agreements. 
(a)	The executive officer of the city, with the approval of the governor, may enter into mutual aid arrangements or agreements with other public and private agencies within and without the state for reciprocal civil defense aid. The arrangements shall be consistent with the state survival plan, and in time of emergency it shall be the duty of each local disaster planning organization to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of the mutual aid arrangements or agreements. 
(b)	The coordinator of each local disaster planning organization may assist in negotiation of reciprocal mutual aid agreements between his organization and other public and private agencies and between the governor and the adjoining states or political subdivisions thereof, and shall carry out arrangements or agreements relating to the local unit. 
(Code 1967, § 9-9)
State Law reference- Authority to enter into mutual aid agreements, RSMo 44.090. 
Sec. 8-19. - Utilization of city services. 
    In carrying out the emergency powers under the provisions of this article, the executive officer or city council is directed to use the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of the state and of the city, and the officers and personnel of all city departments, offices and agencies are directed to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the executive officer or city council. 
(Code 1967, § 9-10)
State Law reference- Cooperation of agencies in emergencies, RSMo 44.110(1). 
Sec. 8-20. - Acceptance of state, federal aid. 
    Whenever the federal or state government, or officer or agency thereof shall offer to the city, services, equipment, supplies, material or funds by way of gift, grant or loan, for the purpose of civil defense; the city acting with the consent of the governor and through its executive officer, may accept such offer and upon acceptance the executive officer of the city may authorize any officer of the city to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the city subject to the terms of the office. 
(Code 1967, § 9-11)
Sec. 8-21. - Waiver of statutory requirements during emergencies. 
(a)	In the event of an emergency as defined in RSMo Ch. 44, the coordinator is authorized on behalf of the city, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or obligations, as authorized by RSMo Ch. 44, provided that if the city council meets at such time, he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. 
(b)	In the event of enemy attack, the mayor or city council may waive any time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by statute pertaining to the advertisement for bids for the performance of public work or entering into contracts. 
(Code 1967, §§ 9-12, 9-13)
State Law reference- Authority of city to waive statutory requirements, RSMo 44.080(3). 
Sec. 8-22. - Adoption of emergency preparedness plan. 
    For the purposes of providing a civil disaster plan for the city in the event of a civil emergency there is hereby adopted the Emergency Preparedness Plan for the City of Marshall, and the whole thereof, except any such portions thereof as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended; and the same together with such deletions or modifications as are hereafter enacted, is adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if the same were set out at length; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction of all subjects therein contained within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 9-14; Ord. No. 5932, § 1, 12-5-83)
Secs. 8-23-8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CIVIL EMERGENCIES 

Sec. 8-31. - Emergency powers of mayor; purposes for which declared. 
    It is deemed necessary in the interest of the public health and safety of the citizens of the city to establish in the mayor or mayor pro tem as the case may be, certain emergency powers for the control of certain emergencies including, but not limited to, fire, flood, civil disturbances and riots, and, therefore, it is deemed in the best interest of the citizens of the city to exercise certain emergency powers necessary to and incidental to the maintenance of the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-13)
Sec. 8-32. - When powers may be invoked; publication. 
    The powers of this article shall be placed in the hands of the chief executive and these powers shall be exercised only in the event of an emergency as herein contemplated and shall be exercised only for such periods of time as the actual emergency exists and the powers shall be invoked only after a declaration and proclamation of the emergency by the mayor or mayor pro tem by whatever means are currently available. 
(Code 1967, § 2-14)
Sec. 8-33. - Powers enumerated. 
(a)	In addition to any and all powers enumerated in this Code, the mayor or mayor pro tem, as the case may be, acting as chief executive of the city shall have further emergency powers as follows: 
(1)	The mayor or mayor pro tem, as the case may be, shall have the right to declare an emergency to exist when in his opinion one or more of the following conditions exists: 
a.	Any unusual condition causing or likely to cause danger to life or property;
b.	Extreme or hazardous weather conditions making use of city streets or other areas within the city hazardous or impossible; 
c.	Civil unrest, commotions, uprisings or riots existing or imminent;
d.	Stoppage of electrical power or other utilities of services affecting a major portion of the city. 
(2)	After declaration of such emergency, the mayor or mayor pro tem, as the case may be, acting as chief executive, shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: 
a.	The power to use employees of the city to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb and property of the citizens of the city; 
b.	The power to close streets and sidewalks and if necessary, to delineate areas within the city wherein an emergency exists; 
c.	The power to impose emergency curfew regulations;
d.	The power to close business establishments within the affected area;
e.	The power to close any and all municipally owned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public; 
f.	The power to do any and all acts necessary and incidental for the preservation of life, limb and property of the citizens of the city. 
(b)	No emergency power as set forth herein may be effective for more than twenty-four (24) hours after the declaration of an emergency by the mayor or mayor pro tem, as the case may be. Immediately after the declaration of such emergency by the mayor or mayor pro tem, an immediate call shall be made for the convening of a special session of the city council to meet at the earliest practicable time that a quorum can be obtained and after the convening of such special session, further emergency powers shall be granted to the mayor or mayor pro tem only by authority of a majority vote of the city council. 
(c)	The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the city shall specify the exactness of the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
(d)	This article is declared to be an exercise by the city through its chief executive of its police or governmental function for the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any person in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions hereof shall be liable for any damages sustained by any person or property as the result of such activity. 
(e)	Any person violating any provisions of this article or the orders, rules or regulations promulgated in carrying out the terms of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 2-15)
Chapter 9 - CIVIL RIGHTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Human rights, RSMo Ch. 213; discriminatory labor practices, RSMo Ch. 296; discriminatory practices, RSMo Ch. 314.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Affirmative action plan adopted. 
    The city affirmative action plan of July 1, 1977 is hereby accepted and adopted in its entirety. A copy of the affirmative action plan is on file in the clerk's office and made a part hereof as fully and effectively as though copied into the body of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 101/2-1)
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; officers and employees generally, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 9-2. - Procedures relating to alleged Title VI violations. 
(a)	Complaints. Any person who believes, that on the ground of race, color, national origin or sex and contrary to the provisions of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, he or she has been excluded from participation in, been denied the benefits of, or otherwise been subjected to discrimination under any program or activity of the city that received federal financial assistance may by himself or herself or by representative file with the citizens advisory committee a written complaint. A complaint must be filed not later than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the alleged discrimination unless the time for filing is extended by the committee. 
(b)	Investigation. Upon receipt of a complaint the citizens advisory committee shall make a prompt investigation which shall include, where appropriate, a review of the pertinent practices and policies of the agency or official responsible for the particular program or activity, the circumstances under which the possible discrimination occurred, and other factors relevant to a determination as to the validity of the allegation. As part of the investigation, the committee shall afford the complainant and the responsible agency or official the opportunity to be heard and shall invite the corporation counsel of the city to participate. 
(c)	Informal action. If after making its investigation, the citizens advisory committee determines the complaint to be not valid, it shall so notify the complainant and the responsible agency or official in writing. If the committee determines that within the meaning of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, discrimination has occurred or that discriminatory policies or practices exist, the responsible agency or official will be so informed and the matter will be resolved by informal means whenever possible. 
(d)	Formal action. If the citizens advisory committee determines that the discrimination or the discriminatory policies and practices cannot be corrected by informal means, it shall so notify the mayor, city council and corporation counsel in writing together with its recommendations on the legislative, administrative or legal actions it considers necessary and appropriate to correct the situation. 
(e)	Complainant not to be intimidated; confidentiality. The citizens advisory committee and the city shall not intimidate, threaten, coerce or discriminate against any person for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 or because he or she has made a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in an investigation. The identity of complainant shall be kept confidential except to the extent necessary to carry out the investigation and bring about any necessary corrective action. 
(f)	Publication of section. In order to inform citizens of their rights, this section's procedures will be published annually in the Marshall Democrat News, a newspaper of general circulation in the locality, and will be explained during the official public hearings of the community development block grant application process. 
(Code 1967, § 101/2-19)
Secs. 9-3-9-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING PRACTICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Housing code, § 7-126 et seq.
State Law reference- Discriminatory housing practices, RSMo 213.100 et seq.

Sec. 9-16. - Declaration of policy. 
    The Council of the City of Marshall hereby declares it to be the public policy of the city to eliminate discrimination and safeguard the right of any person to sell, purchase, lease, rent, or obtain real property without regard to race, sex, color, national origin, ancestry, religion, religious affiliation, handicap and familial status. This article shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the city, for the protection of the public welfare, prosperity, health and peace of the people of Marshall. 
(Code 1967, § 101/2-11; Ord. No. 6542, § 1, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 7845, § 1, 10-20-08)
Sec. 9-17. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases are defined as follows: 
    Aggrieved person shall include any person who is attempting to provide housing for himself and/or his family in the City of Marshall, Missouri. 
    Discriminate shall mean distinctions in treatment because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin of any person. 
    Discrimination means to extend differential treatment on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin of any person. 
    Lease includes sublease, assignment or rental and includes any contract to do any of the foregoing. 
    Lending institution means any bank, savings and loan association, insurance company or other persons in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans; any person in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans as an agent or broker; and any person in the business of buying or selling loans or instruments for payment of money which are secured by title to or a security interest in real property. 
    Owner means any person holding any legal interest in property which may be used for dwelling purposes. 
    Person shall include any individual, firm, partnership or corporation. 
    Purchase includes any contract to purchase. 
    Real estate broker means any person who for consideration acts as an employee or agent to manage or to negotiate the sale, purchase or rental of any real property or any interest thereon. Real estate broker includes, but is not limited to, all persons required to be licensed pursuant to the provisions of the laws of the state. 
    Real estate salesman means any person licensed as a real estate salesman in accordance with the laws of the state or who is required thereby to be so licensed. 
    Real estate transaction means the purchase, sale, exchange or lease of any real property or interest therein, or any negotiations, listings or contracts in connection therewith. 
(Code 1967, § 101/2-12; Ord. No. 6542, § 2, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 7845, § 2, 10-20-08)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-18. - Commission on Human Rights. 
    There is hereby created a Commission on Human Rights which shall function as the Fair Housing Committee of the City of Marshall, Missouri. The commission shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the mayor of the city, with the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 7845, § 3, 10-20-08)
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-311 et seq. 
Sec. 9-19. - Knowledge of article provisions prerequisite to issuance of real estate broker license. 
    Before any license of a city real estate broker is issued or renewed by the city, the applicant shall file a sworn statement with the city clerk that he has read this article and will comply with its provisions, and that each real estate salesman employed by him has read this article and will comply with its provisions. 
(Code 1967, § 101/2-13)
Sec. 9-20. - Discrimination practices. 
(a)	It shall be a discriminatory practice and a violation of this article for any person to: 
(1)	Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of any person. 
(2)	Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(3)	Make, print, or publish or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination. 
(4)	Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)	For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood or a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(6)	Discriminate in the sale or rental of housing on the basis of a handicap of that buyer or renter; a person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available, or any person associated with that buyer or renter. The design and construction of new multi-family dwellings containing four (4) or more units is required to meet certain adaptability and accessibility requirement in accordance with Section 804 of the 1988 Fair Housing Amendments Act. 
(7)	Discriminate in the sale or rental of housing on the basis of familial status or because a family has children, exempting certain types of buildings that house older persons (e.g. Section 202 housing) in accordance with Section 807 of the 1988 Fair Housing Amendments Act. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other corporation, association, firm, or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan to a person applying therefore for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against any person in the fixing of the amount or conditions of such loan, because of the race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of such person, or of any person therein associated in connection with such financing. 
(Ord. No. 6542, § 3, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 7845, § 4, 10-20-08)
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6542, § 3, adopted June 17, 1991, amended this Code by repealing § 9-20, pertaining to unlawful real estate practices, as derived from § 101/2-14 of the 1967 Code and replacing § 9-20 with discrimination practices. 
Sec. 9-21. - Discrimination prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any owner, real estate broker, salesman or lending institution, either by themselves or through their officer, employees, agents or salesmen, or for any other person to: 
(1)	Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(2)	Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(3)	Make, print, or publish or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any actual or intended preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(4)	Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)	For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood or a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(6)	Discriminate in the sale or rental of housing on the basis of familial status or because a family has children, exempting certain types of buildings that house older persons (e.g. Section 202 housing) in accordance with Section 807 of the 1988 Fair Housing Amendments Act. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other corporation, association, firm, or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan to a person applying therefore for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against any person in the fixing of the amount or conditions of such loan, because of the race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of such person, or of any person therein associated in connection with such financing. 
(Code 1967, § 101/2-15; Ord. No. 7845, § 5, 10-20-08)
Sec. 9-22. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article, and particularly section 9-20 hereof, shall not apply to the following: 
(a)	A rental or leasing of a dwelling unit in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two (2) families living independently of each other, if the owner or members of his family reside in such dwelling unit. 
(b)	A rental or leasing to less than five (5) persons living in a dwelling unit by the owner if the owner or members of his family reside therein. 
(c)	Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner provided that such house is sold or rented: 
(1)	Without the use of sales or rental facilities or services of real estate brokers, agents, salesmen, or persons in the business of selling or renting dwellings, and 
(2)	Without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisements in violation of section 9-20(a)(3) of this article, provided however, that: 
a.	Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title, and 
b.	That any such private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one time. 
(d)	For the purposes of subsection (c), a person shall be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)	He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or 
(2)	He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or 
(3)	He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by five (5) or more families. 
(Code 1967, § 101/2-16; Ord. No. 6542, § 4, 6-17-91)
Sec. 9-23. - Duties of commission on human rights. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the commission on human rights to initiate, receive and investigate written complaints charging discrimination; and seek conciliation of such complaints, seek compliance by violators, hold hearings, make findings of fact, issue recommendations and publish its findings of fact and recommendation in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	For the purpose of providing conciliation of complaints, the commission on human rights shall designate annually, a conciliation committee consisting of the chairman and two (2) members of the commission. 
(Code 1967, § 101/2-17)
Sec. 9-24. - Complaints and enforcement. 
(a)	Filing of complaint. Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of any provision of this article may file a written complaint with the city clerk. The complaint shall be under oath, addressed to the commission on human rights, and shall state: 
(1)	The name and address of the complainant;
(2)	The name and address of the person against whom the complaint is brought, if known to the complainant; and 
(3)	The facts surrounding the alleged violation of this article.
    Such complaints shall state the name and address of all persons believed to have knowledge concerning the alleged violation. The commission shall provide a printed form of complaint for the use of aggrieved persons. 
(b)	No fee. No fee shall be charged for the filing of the complaint. 
(c)	Service of complaint. After the filing of the complaint, the city clerk shall within three (3) days serve a copy of the complaint personally or by certified mail on the person charged and shall furnish a copy to the chairman of the commission on human rights. 
(d)	Investigation. The conciliation committee of the commission on human rights shall investigate the complaint and if it determines that probable cause exists in support of the allegations of the complaint, it shall set a date for a conference and notify the parties of the time and place thereof. At such conference the conciliation committee shall interview the complainant and the person or persons against whom the complaint has been directed and shall attempt to resolve the complaint by conciliation. 
(e)	Hearing. If the conciliation committee is unable to conciliate the complaint within thirty (30) days of the filing of the complaint, the commission on human rights shall thereupon hold a hearing on the complaint by the full commission. Such hearing shall be conducted upon notice, by certified mail, to all parties at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the hearing. The commission shall cause a record to be made of the hearing. All evidence shall be under oath administered by an officer authorized to administer oaths. All parties may be represented by counsel at their election and shall have the right to call witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses. 
(f)	Action by commission. At the close of the hearing, the commission on human rights may take any one or more of the following actions: 
(1)	Resolve the complaint by conciliation;
(2)	Dismiss the complaint;
(3)	Make findings and recommendations to the council regarding suspension or revocation of license; 
(4)	Make recommendation to the council, supported by findings, that the council instruct the city attorney or city counselor to file a complaint to enjoin the violation or to file a complaint for any other appropriate relief; 
(5)	In the case of any violation of this article by any person in the course of performing under contract or subcontract with the state or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or with the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, to make recommendation to the board, supported by findings, that the board notify, by certified mail, such contracting agency for the purpose of causing it to terminate such contract or any portion thereof, either absolutely or on condition of compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(g)	Action by conciliation committee. If in the judgment of the conciliation committee immediate court action is necessary, it may recommend to the board that it file a petition in the circuit court for a fine, injunction or other appropriate relief. Such action may be taken even though administrative hearings of the complaint are still pending before the conciliation committee or the commission. 
(h)	Action by complainant. At any time after final action by the commission on human rights or after dismissal of a complaint by the conciliation committee or in the event of the refusal of the conciliation committee or the commission to act on a complaint within the time limits herein set forth, the complainant may file a petition in the circuit court for appropriate relief for the alleged violation. Complainant may also file a complaint with the Fair Housing Economic Opportunity Division of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(i)	Limitation of time to file complaints. Any complaint shall be barred from consideration unless it is filed with the city clerk within one hundred eighty (180) days after the alleged discriminatory practice occurred. However, it is recommended that all complaints be filed within seven (7) days of the first knowledge of the alleged discriminatory practice. 
(j)	The final determination of whether or not to prosecute on any complaint shall be left to the city attorney. 
(k)	Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or by confinement in the city jail for not more than thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(l)	Nothing in this Article shall be construed in such manner as to limit administrative enforcement mechanisms and recourse against alleged discriminatory housing practices through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban development, as specified under Section 810 of the Fair Housing Act as amended effective March 12, 1989, or through the Missouri Commission on Human Rights, as specified in applicable state statutes. 
(Code 1967, § 101/2-18; Ord. No. 5778, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 6542, § 5, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 7845, § 6, 10-20-08) 
Secs. 9-25-9-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF HANDICAP[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 6014, §§ 1-4, adopted Aug. 6, 1984, did not specifically amend the Code. Inclusion herein as Art. III, §§ 9-36-9-39, has been at the discretion of the editor.

Sec. 9-36. - Procedure adopted for processing complaints of discrimination. 
    In order for the city to assure that all programs it undertakes are established in a manner which assures that all residents of the city have an equal opportunity to participate or utilize such programs regardless of their handicapped status, the following procedure is adopted for the processing of alleged complaints of discrimination on the basis of handicapped status. 
(Ord. No. 6014, § 1, 8-6-84)
Sec. 9-37. - Filing of complaint. 
    Any person who believes that they have been discriminated against because of handicapped status shall have the right to file a complaint of said discrimination with the city clerk. 
(a)	A complaint should be filed in writing or verbally, contain the name and address of the person filing it, and briefly describe the alleged violation of the regulations. 
(b)	A complaint should be filed within ten (10) days after the complainant becomes aware of the alleged violation. (Processing of allegations of discrimination occurring before this grievance procedure was in place, will be considered on a case-by-case basis.) 
(Ord. No. 6014, § 2, 8-6-84)
Sec. 9-38. - Investigation of complaint; determination of validity; resolution. 
(a)	Within ten (10) days of the receipt of alleged complaint, an investigation, as may be appropriate, shall follow. The investigation will be conducted by the city grievance board. The investigation will be informal, but thorough, affording all interested persons and their representatives, if any, and opportunity to submit evidence relevant to the complaint. 
(b)	A written determination as to the validity of the complaint and description of resolution, if any, shall be issued by the city grievance board and a copy forwarded to the complainant no later than ten (10) days after its filing. 
(c)	The Section 504 Coordinator shall make a written record of all information relating to the complaint filed, and shall provide said record to the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(d)	If it is determined that the complaint is valid, the city council shall make adjustments to the program or service to assure that the discriminatory policy is discontinued. 
(e)	The complainant can request a reconsideration of the case in instances where he or she is dissatisfied with the resolution. The request for reconsideration should be made within ten (10) days of the date of the original determination to the city clerk. At its next regular meeting, the city council shall review the record prepared and submitted by the Section 504 Coordinator and shall make a recommendation as to the validity of the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 6014, § 3, 8-6-84)
Sec. 9-39. - Nondiscrimination in city employment. 
    The city will not discriminate in the hiring, promotion, disciplining or removal of any city employee on the basis of handicapped status. The city has adopted an affirmative action plan, copies of which shall be available for public inspection at the City Offices, 214 N. Lafayette, Marshall, Missouri between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(Ord. No. 6014, § 4, 8-6-84)
Chapter 10 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2.
State Law reference- Municipal courts, RSMo Ch. 479.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Established; jurisdiction. 
    A court is hereby established in the city to be known as the municipal court. Such court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine all complaints or offenses against the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 10-1)
Sec. 10-2. - Rules of procedure. 
    Procedure in the municipal court shall be governed by the rules of procedure established by the Supreme Court of the State of Missouri. 
(Code 1967, § 10-3)
Sec. 10-3. - Fees for services performed by city. 
    The city shall be entitled to fees for services performed by its city officials in connection with arrests and complaints made for trial in its municipal court, and for jurors and witnesses summoned to serve or testify in municipal court as follows: 
(1)	Each complaint filed .....$1.00 
Each summons issued .....1.00 
Each warrant issued .....2.00 
Each arrest .....1.00 
Each arraignment .....5.00 
Docketing each case .....2.00 
Each judgment entered .....2.00 
Crime victim's compensation (in each court proceeding filed for violation of a criminal law of the state, including an infraction and violation of a municipal ordinance; except that no such fee shall be collected for violations of any provision of Chapter 252, RSMo, or any rule or regulation adopted under Chapter 252, RSMo, for any unmoving traffic violations, except violations of weight limit and safety laws; and no such fee shall be collected in any proceeding in any court when the proceeding or the defendant has been dismissed by the court or when costs are to be paid by the state, county or municipality on behalf of an indigent defendant) .....$5.00 
Each witness subpoenaed .....1.00 
Each juror summoned .....0.50 
Each continuance entered .....0.50 
Each commitment issued .....1.00 
Each bond approved and accepted .....2.00 
Each affidavit for appeal .....0.50 
Each transcript for appeal, per hundred words .....0.30 
Each meal served a defendant awaiting trial .....1.60 
(2)	In no event shall costs in any case be less than seventeen dollars ($17.00). In cases where costs are not assessed for crime victims' compensation, costs shall not be less than twelve dollars ($12.00). 
(3)	The sum of twelve dollars ($12.00) for the appearance of each jury summoned.
(4)	The sum of three dollars ($3.00) for each witness appearing in response to a subpoena and an additional three dollars ($3.00) for each day each witness is required to appear other than the day upon which he appears in response to the subpoena. 
(5)	The official of the municipal court responsible for collecting court costs and fines shall assess as court costs two dollars ($2.00) for each court proceeding filed for violations of the ordinances of the city, provided that no such fee shall he collected for nonmoving traffic violations, and no such fee shall be collected for violations of fish and game regulations, and no such fee shall be collected in any proceeding in such court when the proceeding or defendant has been dismissed by the court. All fees collected under this subsection (5) shall be transmitted to the treasurer of the city to be used only for the training of law enforcement officers as provided in RSMo §§ 590.100 to 590.180 and shall he in addition to the costs heretofore enumerated. No more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) of such funds shall be retained for each certified law enforcement officer or candidate for certification employed by the city. Any excess fund shall be transmitted quarterly to the general revenue funds of the city. 
(6)	The official of the municipal court responsible for collecting court costs and fines shall assess as court costs an additional one dollar ($1.00) for each court proceeding filed for violations of the ordinances of the city, provided that no such fee shall he collected for nonmoving traffic violations, and no such fee shall be collected for violations of fish and game regulations. and no such fee shall be collected in any proceeding in such court when the proceeding or defendant has been dismissed by the court. Such fees collected shall he transmitted to the treasurer of the State of Missouri to the credit of the peace officer standards and training commission fund, and shall be in addition to the costs heretofore enumerated. 
(7)	A surcharge of two dollars ($2.00) shall be collected in all cases, except where the proceeding or the defendant has been dismissed by the court or when costs are to be paid by the City of Marshall. Such surcharge collected shall be transmitted to the city treasurer for deposit into the "Inmate Security Fund" which is hereby created. Funds deposited shall be utilized to develop a biometric verification system as provided by Section 488.5026, RSMo. Upon the installation of the biometric verification system, funds in the "Inmate Security Fund" may be used for the maintenance of the biometric verification system and to pay for any expenses related to the custody, housing or other expenses of prisoners. 
(8)	A surcharge of three dollars ($3.00) shall be assessed and collected in all cases, except where the proceeding or the defendant has been dismissed by the court or when costs are to be paid by the City of Marshall. Such surcharge shall be transmitted to the Treasurer of the State of Missouri to the credit of the Sheriffs' Retirement Fund, and shall be in addition to the costs heretofore enumerated. 
(Code 1967, § 10-9; Ord. No. 6366, § 1, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 6734, §§ 1, 2, 11-1-93; Ord. No. 8035, § 1, 2-6-12; Ord. No. 8138, § 1, 10-7-13) 
State Law reference- Court costs, filing fees. RSMo 479.260. 
Sec. 10-4. - Assessment of costs; city not liable. 
    The costs established in section 10-3 shall be assessed against each defendant found guilty, or, if there be more than one defendant found guilty then such costs shall be assessed jointly against each and all of such defendants; and in the event of an acquittal, if it shall appear to the municipal judge that the prosecution was instituted for vexation or without probable cause, the complainant shall be adjudged to pay all the costs provided in section 10-3; provided however, that no police officer of the city or other city official whose duty it is to institute any prosecution shall be liable for any of the costs herein provided. 
(Code 1967, § 10-10)
Sec. 10-5. - Stolen property-Court to direct disposition. 
    When property alleged to have been stolen, embezzled or obtained by false pretenses shall come into the custody of the chief of police, he shall hold the same subject to the order of the municipal judge or other court authorized to direct the disposition thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 10-12)
Sec. 10-6. - Same-Delivery to true owner; costs assessed to owner. 
    Upon satisfactory proof of the title of any owner of the property, the municipal judge may order the same to be delivered to such owner on his paying the reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the safekeeping and preservation of such property; such property shall be certified to by the municipal judge, which order shall entitle the owner to demand and receive such property. 
(Code 1967, § 10-13)
Secs. 10-7-10-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL JUDGE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; officers and employees generally, 2-61 et seq.
State Law reference- Elective officers, RSMo 77.370 et seq.; municipal judges generally, RSMo 479.020 et seq.

Sec. 10-16. - Qualifications. 
    The municipal judge shall be a qualified voter of the city, at least twenty-one (21) years of age, and admitted to practice law in the courts of record of the state. 
(Code 1967, § 10-24)
State Law reference- Qualifications, RSMo 479.020. 
Sec. 10-17. - Compensation to be fixed by city council. 
    The municipal judge shall receive such compensation for his services as is or may be fixed by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 10-25)
Sec. 10-18. - General authority. 
(a)	The municipal judge shall be conservator of the peace, and shall have exclusive original jurisdiction to hear and determine all complaints of offenses against the ordinances of the city. 
(b)	The municipal judge shall be ex officio a magistrate within the limits of the city with jurisdiction as to crimes and misdemeanors but shall not have jurisdiction to hear or determine civil matters. 
(Code 1967, § 10.26)
Sec. 10-19. - Duty of police to assist judge. 
    When the municipal judge shall act in the capacity of ex officio a magistrate, as provided in section 10-18(b), the chief of police or in his absence the assistant chief of police or any regular policeman shall be ex officio a constable to wait upon the municipal judge. 
(Code 1967, § 10-27)
Sec. 10-20. - Docket of cases to be kept; contents; delivery to successor. 
(a)	Required. The municipal judge shall keep a docket in which he shall enter every case commenced before him, and the proceedings therein. 
(b)	Contents. The municipal judge shall state in such docket the name of the complainant, the nature or character of the offense, the date of the trial, the name of all witnesses sworn and examined, the finding of the court or jury, the judgment or fine and costs, the date of payment, if any, the date of issuing, commitment, if any, and all other facts necessary to show the full proceedings of each case. 
(c)	Delivery to successor. The municipal judge shall deliver the docket and all books and papers pertaining to his office to his successor in office. 
(Code 1967, § 10-28)
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE SEARCH WARRANTS 

Sec. 10-21. - Administrative search warrants. 
(a)	Search warrant defined-Who may issue, execute: 
(1)	An administrative search warrant is a written order of the municipal judge commanding the search or inspection of any property, place or thing, and the seizure, photographing, copying or recording of property or physical conditions found thereon or therein, to determine or prove the existence of violations of any ordinance of the City of Marshall, Missouri relating to the use, condition or occupancy of property or structures located within the city, or to enforce the provisions of any such ordinance or code section. 
(2)	The municipal judge having original and exclusive jurisdiction to determine violations against the ordinances of the municipality may issue an administrative search warrant when (i) the property or place to be searched or inspected or the thing to be seized is located within the limits of the City of Marshall at the time of the making of the application and (ii) the owner or occupant of the property or place to be searched or inspected or the thing to be seized has refused to allow same after official request by the building official. 
(3)	Any such warrant shall be directed to the chief of police or any other police officer of the City of Marshall and shall be executed by the chief of police or said police officer within the city limits and not elsewhere. 
(b)	Who may apply for warrant-Contents of application: 
(1)	Any police officer of the city may make application to the municipal judge for the issuance of an administrative search warrant. 
(2)	The application shall:
a.	Be in writing;
b.	State the time and date of the making of the application;
c.	Identify the property or places to be entered, searched, inspected or seized in sufficient detail and particularity that the officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it; 
d.	State that the owner or occupant of the property or places to be entered, searched, inspected or seized has been requested by the Building Official to allow such action and has refused to allow such action; 
e.	State facts sufficient to show probable cause for the issuance of a search warrant, as provided in subsection (c)(1) hereof, to (i) search or inspect for violations of any ordinance or code section specified in the application or (ii) show that entry or seizure is authorized and necessary to enforce an ordinance or code section specified in the application and that any required due process has been afforded prior to the entry or seizure; 
f.	Be verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant; and
g.	Be signed by the applicant and filed in the Municipal Court.
(3)	The application may be supplemented by a written affidavit verified by oath or affirmation. Such affidavit shall be considered in determining whether there is probable cause for the issuance of a search warrant and in filling out any deficiencies in the description of the property or place to be searched or inspected. Oral testimony shall not be considered. 
(c)	Hearing and procedure-Contents of warrant-Execution and return: 
(1)	Hearing and procedure: 
a.	The municipal judge shall hold a non-adversary hearing to determine whether probable cause exists to inspect or search for violation of any city ordinance code section, or to enforce any such ordinance or code section. 
b.	In doing so the municipal judge shall determine whether the action to be taken by the city is reasonable in light of the facts stated. The municipal judge shall consider the goals of the ordinance or code section sought to be enforced and such other factors as may be appropriate, including but not limited to the physical condition of the specified property, the age and nature of the property, the condition of the area in which the property is located, the known violation of any relevant city ordinance or code section and the passage of time since the property's last inspection. The standard for issuing a warrant need not be limited to actual knowledge of an existing violation of a city ordinance or Code section. 
c.	If it appears from the application and any supporting affidavit that there is probable cause to inspect or search for violations of any city ordinance or Code section, or to enforce any such ordinance or code section, a search warrant shall immediately be issued. 
d.	The warrant shall issue in the form of an original and two copies, and the application, any supporting affidavit and one copy of the warrant as issued shall be retained in the records of the municipal court. 
(2)	Contents of search warrant: 
The search warrant shall: 
a.	Be in writing and in the name of the City of Marshall, Missouri;
b.	Be directed to any police officer in the City of Marshall, Missouri;
c.	State the time and date the warrant was issued;
d.	Identify the property or places to be searched, inspected or entered upon in sufficient detail and particularity that the officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it; 
e.	Command that the described property or places be search or entered upon, and that any evidence of any municipal ordinance violations found therein or thereon, or any property seized pursuant thereto, or a description of such property seized, be returned, within ten days after filing of the application, to the municipal judge who issued the warrant, to be dealt with according to law; and 
f.	Be signed by the judge, with his title of office indicated.
(3)	Execution and return: 
a.	A search warrant issued under this ordinance shall be executed only by a City of Marshall police officer, provided, however, that the building official or his designee may accompany the officer, and the warrant shall be executed in the following manner: 
1.	The warrant shall be executed by conducting the search, inspection, entry or seizure as commanded and shall be executed as soon as practicable and in a reasonable manner. 
2.	The officer shall give the owner or occupant of the property searched, inspected or entered upon a copy of the warrant. 
3.	(i)	If any property is seized incident to the search, the officer shall give the person from whose possession it was taken, if the person is present, an itemized receipt for the property taken. If no such person is present, the office shall leave the receipt at the site of the search in a conspicuous place. 
(ii)	The disposition of property seized pursuant to a search warrant under this section shall be in accordance with Section 542.301 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri. 
4.	The officer may summon as many persons as he deems necessary to assist him in executing the warrant, and such persons shall not be held liable as a result of any illegality of the search and seizure. 
5.	An officer making a search pursuant to an invalid warrant, the invalidity of which is not apparent on its face, may use such force as he would be justified in using if the warrant were valid. 
6.	A search warrant shall expire if it is not executed and the required return made within ten (10) days after the date of the making of the application. 
b.	After execution of the search warrant, the warrant, with a return thereon signed by the officer making the search, shall be delivered to the municipal court. 
1.	The return shall show the date and manner of execution and the name of the possessor and of the owner, when not the same person, if known, of the property of places searched or seized. 
2.	The return shall be accompanied by any photographs, copies, or recordings made, and by any property seized, along with a copy of the itemized receipt of such property required by this section; provided, however, that seized property may be disposed of as provided herein, and in such a case a description of the property seized shall accompany the return. 
3.	The court clerk upon request shall deliver a copy of the return, to the possessor and the owner, when not the same person, of the property searched or seized. 
(d)	Warrant invalid, when: 
    A search warrant shall be deemed invalid: 
(1)	If it was not issued by the municipal judge;
(2)	If it was issued without a written application having been filed and verified;
(3)	If it was issued without sufficient probable cause in light of the goals of the ordinance to be enforced and such other factors as provided in subsection (c)(1)b. hereof; 
(4)	If it was not issued with respect to property or places in the City of Marshall, Missouri;
(5)	If it does not describe the property or places to be searched, inspected, entered upon or seized with sufficient certainty; 
(6)	If it is not signed by the judge who issued it; or
(7)	If it was not executed and the required return made within ten (10) days after the date of the making of the application. 
(Ord. No. 7636, § 1, 8-1-05)
Chapter 11 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2.
State Law reference- Election of officers, RSMo 77.040; suffrage and elections, RSMo Ch. 111 et seq.; municipal elections, RSMo Ch. 122.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 6975, §§ 1-13, adopted Aug. 19, 1996, repealed former Art. I, §§ 11-1-11-9, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1967 and Ord. No. 6057, §§ 17, 18, adopted Feb. 4, 1985.

Sec. 11-1. - Date of general election. 
    A general election for the elective officers of this city shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in April of each year. 
(1)	On the first Tuesday after the first Monday in April of odd numbered years an election shall be held by the qualified voters of each ward in the city for mayor, municipal judge, city attorney and treasurer and for one councilman for each ward, who shall hold their respective offices for the term of two years (except the office of the mayor which is a four-year term) and until their successors shall be elected and qualified. 
(2)	On the first Tuesday after the first Monday in April of even numbered years an election shall be held by the qualified voters of each ward of this city for one councilman for each ward, who shall hold their respective offices for the term of two years and until their successors shall be elected and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 6975, § 1, 8-19-96; Ord. No. 7062, §§ 1, 2, 9-15-97)
Sec. 11-2. - Filing of candidates. 
    Any person desiring to seek election for any elective city office at any general city election may do so by filing his name and the office for which he seeks election with the city clerk during the filing period (8:00 a.m. fifteen (15) Tuesdays before the election date to 5:00 p.m. eleven Tuesdays before the election date). The clerk shall keep a permanent record of the names of the candidates, the offices for which they seek election and the date of their filing, and their names shall appear on the ballots in that order. 
(Ord. No. 6975, § 2, 8-19-96)
Sec. 11-3. - Same-Qualifications challenged. 
    Any person who is not qualified for his office as provided by state law or other ordinances shall not be entitled to have his name printed on the ballot. The qualifications of a candidate for office shall be determined by the city council upon hearing given, and upon its own motion, or upon written affidavit by some person that a named candidate is not qualified as such for the office sought. 
(Ord. No. 6975, § 3, 8-19-96)
Sec. 11-4. - Conformance of city election with state law. 
    All city elections shall be conducted and held in conformance with the provisions of the state election laws. 
(Ord. No. 6975, § 4, 8-19-96)
Sec. 11-5. - Conduct of election by county clerk. 
    The county clerk, as the designated election authority, shall conduct city elections. 
(Ord. No. 6975, § 5, 8-19-96)
Sec. 11-6. - Notice of city election. 
    The city clerk shall notify the county clerk prior to 5:00 p.m. on the tenth Tuesday prior to any city election of the forthcoming city election. The notice shall be in writing and shall specify that the city is calling the election, the purpose of the election, the date of the election, and it shall include a certified copy of the legal notice to be published and the sample ballot. 
(Ord. No. 6975, § 6, 8-19-96)
Sec. 11-7. - Voters qualifications. 
    All residents of the city who are qualified and timely and properly registered voters in accordance with state law shall be entitled to vote at city elections. In order to vote at any city election a person must be registered no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fourth Wednesday prior to the election. 
(Ord. No. 6975, § 7, 8-19-96)
Sec. 11-8. - Designation of polling places and judges; election costs. 
    The election authority shall designate the polling places in all city elections. The election authority shall appoint all election judges. The city shall pay all the election costs required by the election authority conducting its election. 
(Ord. No. 6975, § 8, 8-19-96)
Sec. 11-9. - City police officers; assistance. 
    It shall be the duty of the city police to give any assistance or protections required by the election authority, any employee of the election authority, or any election judge, and to comply with all lawful requests and directions of the election authority relating to such assistance. 
(Ord. No. 6975, § 9, 8-19-96)
Sec. 11-10. - Special election dates. 
    Authorized dates for special city elections are the first Tuesday after the first Monday in February or March, August and November of each year. 
(Ord. No. 6975, § 10, 8-19-96)
Sec. 11-11. - Certificate of election results. 
    As soon as practicable after each city election, the election authority shall convene a verification board to verify the count and certify the results of the election. Not later than the second Tuesday after the election, the verification board shall issue a statement announcing the results of each election and shall certify the returns to the city clerk. The city clerk shall issue to each person elected a certificate of election. 
(Ord. No. 6975, § 11, 8-19-96)
Sec. 11-12. - Election ordinance. 
    Prior to each city election the city council shall timely pass an election ordinance authorizing, establishing and providing the election procedure to be followed in the conduct of the city election. 
(Ord. No. 6975, § 12, 8-19-96)
Secs. 11-13-11-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of council to divide city into wards, RSMo 77.030.

Sec. 11-21. - Established. 
    The ward boundaries shall be as presently established or as hereafter adopted by city council. 
(Code 1967, §§ 11-1-11-5)
Chapter 12 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; fire limits designated, § 7-13; setting fires at the city landfill, § 14-37; reckless burning or exploding, § 18-45; negligent burning or exploding, § 18-46; location of hydrants, § 26-2; obedience to fire department officials concerning traffic, § 29-4; directing of traffic by fire department officials, § 29-31; following fire apparatus, § 29-85; crossing fire hose, § 29-86.
State Law reference- Fire protection regulations, RSMo Ch. 320; fire prevention districts, RSMo Ch. 321; authority of city to purchase fire fighting equipment, RSMo 77.190.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 6044, adopted Dec. 3, 1984, amended Art. I, in part by repealing, §§ 12-1 and 12-3, and by adding provisions which the editors, at their discretion, have designated §§ 12-4-12-15.3.

Sec. 12-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 6044, adopted Dec. 3, 1984, repealed § 14-13 of the 1967 Code, from which § 12-1 derived. Said section pertained to the parking of vehicles or otherwise obstructing a fire hydrant. 
Sec. 12-2. - Tampering with fire hydrants. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except when acting under authority of the city, to open or close any fire hydrant within the city, or in any way to tamper with or injure the same. 
(Code 1967, § 14-14)
Sec. 12-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6044, § 3, adopted Dec. 3, 1984, repealed § 14-17 of the 1967 Code, from which § 12-3 derived. Said section contained provisions relative to prohibiting riding on fire apparatus and an exception thereto. 
Sec. 12-4. - Authority at fires and other emergencies. 
    The fire official or duly authorized representatives, as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and/or property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks, or other hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty. The fire official may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department. The fire official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 4, 12-3-84)
Sec. 12-5. - Interference with fire department operations. 
    It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with, attempt to interfere, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire department operation. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 5, 12-3-84)
Sec. 12-6. - Compliance with orders. 
    A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the fire official or to interfere with the compliance attempts of another individual. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 6, 12-3-84)
Sec. 12-7. - Definition of authorized emergency vehicles. 
"Authorized	emergency vehicles" shall be restricted to those which are defined and authorized under the laws of the State of Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 8, 12-3-84)
Sec. 12-8. - Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
    Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible and visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by the fire official or a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 9, 12-3-84)
Sec. 12-9. - Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire department emergency equipment. 
    A person shall not without proper authorization from the fire official in charge of said fire department emergency equipment, cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or to manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 11, 12-3-84)
Sec. 12-10. - Damage or injury to fire department equipment or personnel. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt, or conspire to damage or deface any fire department emergency vehicle at any time, or to injure, or attempt to injure or conspire to injure fire department personnel while performing departmental duties. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 12, 12-3-84)
Sec. 12-11. - Emergency vehicle operation. 
    The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in section 12-7 shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red lights on or disobey any existing traffic regulation, except when said vehicle is responding to an emergency call or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire. Tactical strategies such as, but not restricted to, "move-ups" do not constitute an emergency call. The driver of an emergency vehicle may: 
(a)	Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic regulations;
(b)	Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(c)	Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the action does not endanger life or property; 
(d)	Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions;
(e)	The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 13, 12-3-84)
Sec. 12-12. - Blocking fire hydrants and fire department connections. 
    It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any fire department connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire department connections that are located on public or private streets and access lanes, or on private property. 
    If upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the fire official shall proceed to remove the same. Cost incurred in the performance of necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certificate of the fire official and with the approval of the chief administrative official; and the legal authority of the municipality shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 14, 12-3-84)
Sec. 12-13. - Hydrant use approval. 
    A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of the fire department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first secures a permit for such use from the fire official and the water company having jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a person employed by, and authorized to make such by, the water company having jurisdiction. 
    Authorized or unauthorized personnel shall not operate fire hydrants in any manner which may cause physical damage to the hydrant or to the water mains, consumer water lines or cause a rupture thereof. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 15, 12-3-84)
Sec. 12-14. - Public water supply. 
    The fire official shall recommend in writing to the chief administrative official of the municipality the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and the placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and distribution pattern. A permanent fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from service until after a written reply from the fire official and a work order from the water superintendent of the water company having jurisdiction. The new hydrant shall have the main size, hydrant size and the location not less than the present ISO requirement for the classification of this city. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 16, 12-3-84)
Sec. 12-15. - Yard systems. 
    All new and existing shipyards, oil storage plants, lumberyards, amusement or exhibition parks, and education or institutional complexes and similar occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards, and which are located more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public street or which require quantities of water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system shall be provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the fire official and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted engineering practices. The fire official shall designate and approve the number and location of fire hydrants. The fire official may require the installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment housed in accordance with the approved rules and may require the establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazard involved requires such measures. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 17, 12-3-84)
Sec. 12-15.1. - Maintenance of fire suppression equipment. 
    A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the fire prevention code except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging, or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the fire official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 18, 12-3-84)
Sec. 12-15.2. - Sale of defective fire extinguishers. 
    A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the fire official, or which is not in proper working order, or the contents of which do not meet the requirements of the fire official. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment for junk when said units are permanently disfigured or marked with a permanent sign identifying the unit as junk. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 19, 12-3-84)
Sec. 12-15.3. - Street obstructions. 
    A person or persons shall not erect, construct, place, or maintain any bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type of obstruction in or on any street, within the boundaries of the municipality. The word "street" as used in the section shall mean any roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, private streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the boundaries of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 20, 12-3-84)
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; license tax for pool hall, § 28-24(67).

Sec. 12-16. - Establishment; purpose. 
    There is hereby established for the city a fire department for the welfare and protection of the citizens of the city and of their property. 
(Code 1967, § 14-28)
Sec. 12-17. - Personnel prescribed. 
    There shall be authorized seventeen (17) full-time firemen and nine (9) call firemen for the city, the number to include one fire chief, one assistant fire chief and three (3) station captains. 
(Code 1967, § 14-29; Ord. No. 5614, § I, 9-2-80; Ord. No. 5626, § 1, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 5640, § 1, 11-17-80; Ord. No. 6025, 9-17-84) 
Sec. 12-18. - Compensation. 
    The chief of the fire department and the other firemen shall receive such compensation as is or may be fixed by ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 14-30)
Sec. 12-19. - Qualifications of fire chief, assistant fire chief. 
    The fire chief and assistant fire chief shall have had at least six (6) months' prior experience or training in fire fighting, fire prevention and fire protection. 
(Code 1967, § 14-31)
Sec. 12-20. - Authority of fire chief. 
    The fire chief shall be in general charge of the fire department and fire-fighting equipment of the city and shall serve as the emergency preparedness coordinator for the city. 
(Code 1967, § 14-32)
Sec. 12-21. - Duties of chief, assistant chief, station captains. 
    The chief, assistant chief and station captains of the fire department, in addition to their duties as such officers, shall serve as keepers of the fire department and shall perform such duties as keepers of the fire department as are usually incidental to said officers. The chief of the fire department shall have a superintending control over the assistant chief and station captains and the other firemen, and each firemen shall also be subject to the orders and directions of the assistant chief and station captains. The chief, assistant chief and station captains shall so arrange their affairs that one of them shall at all times be present at the fire station, both day and night, and it shall be their duty to be and remain at the fire station ready to answer all alarms of fire at all time practicable. 
(Code 1967, § 14-33)
Sec. 12-22. - Assistant fire chief to act in place of fire chief. 
    The assistant fire chief shall perform the duties of fire chief at such times as the fire chief may be absent, disqualified or otherwise unable to act, and at other time shall render services as a regular member of the fire department. 
(Code 1967, § 14-34)
Sec. 12-23. - Duties of personnel generally. 
    It shall be the duty of all members of the fire department to attend with utmost haste all alarms of fire, to engage in such drills and practices at such times as the mayor or fire chief may designate, to preserve the equipment and apparatus furnished the department in good condition, and to report to the chief any repairs on equipment that may be needed. 
(Code 1967, § 14-35)
Sec. 12-24. - Duty to attend fires, answer alarms. 
    It shall be the duty of every member of the fire department to so arrange his affairs that he is able to attend every fire and answer every call or alarm. If any member of the fire department is unable to answer an alarm by attendance, it shall be his duty to immediately notify the fire chief or assistant fire chief in such a manner and within such a time that a substitute fireman may attend in the place of the regular fireman. 
(Code 1967, § 14-36)
Sec. 12-25. - Reports of fires attended. 
    It shall be the duty of the fire chief to report to the city council at the first regular meeting in each month the number of fires attended and the names of the regular firemen and substitute firemen so attending. 
(Code 1967, § 14-37)
Sec. 12-26. - Special firemen. 
(a)	Appointment. The mayor, with the consent and approval of a majority of the city council, is authorized to appoint twelve (12) special firemen to serve at such times and places as may be necessary or advisable. 
(b)	Availability. Each special fireman shall be available to fire call and shall promptly respond to any such call. 
(Code 1967, § 14-39)
Sec. 12-27. - Residency requirements for fire department employees. 
    All persons presently employed by or hereafter appointed to a position in the Marshall Fire Department must be a resident of the City of Marshall, Missouri, or must reside within five (5) miles by roadway, from the city limits of Marshall, Missouri. 
(Code 1967, § 14-40; Ord. No. 5939, § 2, 1-16-84; Ord. No. 6270, § 1, 8-3-87; Ord. No. 7341, § 1, 8-6-01) 
Sec. 12-28. - Grievance committee. 
    A grievance committee may be established within the fire department consisting of three (3) members of the fire department elected by a majority vote of the members exclusive of the chief. 
(Code 1967, § 14-41)
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-311 et seq. 
Sec. 12-29. - Work schedule. 
(a)	The fire chief will be required to work six (6) eight-hour days or forty-eight (48) hours per week. 
(b)	All other employees will be required to work shifts of twenty-four (24) hours on duty, followed by twenty-four (24) hours on standby, followed by twenty-four (24) hours off duty. Employees on duty and on stand-by duty will be required to answer all fire calls in accordance with instructions from the chief. Employees off duty will not be required to answer calls except in extreme emergencies as designated by the chief. In computing leave time only on-duty days will be considered and no leave deduction will be made for stand-by and off-duty days. 
(c)	It shall be the responsibility of the fire chief to assure that there are a minimum of three (3) men on duty per twenty-four (24) hour shift. In the absence of the fire chief it shall be the responsibility of the assistant fire chief or captain in charge to assure that there will be three (3) men on duty per twenty-four-hour shift. 
(d)	The fire chief, assistant fire chief or captain in charge may work or appoint stand-by personnel to work in the absence of fire department personnel not responding to the duty day or for some other reason they cannot work the shift assigned to them. 
(e)	Such additional hours worked by stand-by personnel or officers in the absence of regular personnelshall be considered to be a regular part of the work requirements for the personnel of the fire department and no overtime compensation or time off shall be granted for any hours worked by the personnel of the fire department in excess of the established work hours as set out in the personnel policy. 
(Code 1967, § 14-42)
Secs. 12-30-12-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 12-41. - Amendment of fire code. 
    A certain document, one (1) digital copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, including Appendix Chapters B, C, D, E, and F, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Marshall, Missouri, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices; and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the City of Marshall, Missouri; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Marshall, Missouri are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribe in section 12-43. 
(Ord. No. 8058, § 3, 7-16-12; Ord. No. 8236, § 1, 8-3-15)
Editor's note- Ord. No. 8058, § 3, adopted July 16, 2012, amended § 12-41 in its entirety. Former § 12-41 pertained to adoption of fire prevention code, and was derived from Ord. No. 6389, § 1, adopted Feb. 6, 1989; Ord. No. 6583, § 1, adopted Dec. 16, 1991; Ord. No. 6821, § 1, adopted Nov. 7, 1994; Ord. No. 7023, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 1997; Ord. No. 7322, § 1, adopted June 4, 2001; Ord. No. 7596, § 1, adopted Jan. 18, 2005; Ord. No. 7745, § 1, adopted Apr. 16, 2007; Ord. No. 7935, § 1, adopted Apr. 5, 2010. 
Sec. 12-42. - Fire department designated fire prevention bureau. 
    Wherever reference is made to the fire prevention bureau in the fire prevention code adopted in section 12-41, such reference shall be deemed to mean and refer to the fire department of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 14-2)
Sec. 12-43. - Additions, insertions and changes to fire prevention code. 
    The sections of the Fire Code are hereby revised: 
(a)	Section 101.1. Insert: The City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(b)	Section 108.1. Revised to read: 
108.1 General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code shall be heard by the City of Marshall Board of Appeals, as established, adopted and amended from time to time by the City of Marshall, Missouri. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(c)	Section 108.3. Revised to read: 
108.3 Qualifications. The Board of Appeals shall consist of not less than four members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, fire protection or other areas of construction, property maintenance or building trades. Officers and/or employees of the City of Marshall, Missouri, may serve as members of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall follow the practices and procedures followed by the Board of Code Enforcement. 
(d)	Section 109.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $500.00, 90 days. 
(e)	Section 111.4. Insert: $1.00 - $500.00. 
(f)	Section 1103.5.3. Insert: [DATE BY WHICH SPRINKLER SYSTEM MUST BE INSTALLED].
(g)	Section 5601.1. Revised to read. 
The manufacture, display, sale, possession or discharge of fireworks shall comply with the provisions of City Ordinance No. 5745, as adopted on October 19, 1981, and, to the extent not inconsistent with Ordinance No. 5745, with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6389, §§ 3, 4, 2-6-89; Ord. No. 6560, § 1, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 6583, §§ 3, 4, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 7023, §§ 3, 4, 6, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 7322, §§ 3, 6, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 7596, § 2, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7745, § 2, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7935, § 2, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 8058, § 4, 7-16-12; Ord. No. 8236, § 2, 8-3-15) 
Sec. 12-44. - Establishment of limits. 
    That the geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2015 International Fire Code are hereby established as follows: 
(1)	Section 5704.2.9.6.1 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited): No applicable limit other than as set forth in this Code and other Codes and Ordinances of the City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(2)	Section 5706.2.4.4 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited): No applicable limit other than as set forth in this Code and other Codes and Ordinances of the City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(3)	Section 5806.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited): No applicable limit other than as set forth in this Code and other Codes and Ordinances of the City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(4)	Section 6104.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas): No applicable limit other than as set forth in this Code and other Codes and Ordinances of the City of Marshall, Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 7322, § 4, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 7596, § 3, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 7745, § 3, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 7935, § 3, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 8236, § 3, 8-3-15) 
Sec. 12-45. - Safety inspection of temporary amusement facilities required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to conduct or maintain any temporary amusement facility, or to use in connection therewith any vehicle, premises, machine or device in whole or in part, without first obtaining a license or permit therefor. 
(a)	In addition to all other requirements for the issuance of such license or permit, the city clerk shall not issue said license or permit without first obtaining the certification of the fire chief that the facility meets all safety requirements applicable to temporary amusement facilities. 
(b)	Before endorsing his approval of any such license the fire chief, or his designated representative, shall inspect such facility to ensure that the facility does not create an unreasonable risk of fire. 
(c)	The fire chief is hereby authorized to establish minimum fire safety standards for temporary amusement facilities. 
(Ord. No. 8137, § 1, 10-7-13)
Secs. 12-46-12-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to restrict use of fireworks, RSMo 77.570; fireworks regulations, RSMo 320.110 et seq.

Sec. 12-51. - Prohibited use. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, burn, explode or set off any firecracker, torpedo, bomb, rocket, pinwheel, fire balloon, Roman candle, toy cannon, or any other firecracker or fireworks within the city, except as provided in section 12-52. 
(Ord. No. 5745, § 1, 10-19-81)
Sec. 12-52. - Temporary permits for public display. 
    The fire chief is hereby authorized with consent of the city council to issue temporary permits for fireworks displays to be held in such places as, in the opinion of the fire chief, shall provide maximum protection against noise pollution, personal injury and property damage, and under direct supervision and control of such persons as the fire chief shall deem competent for such purposes. The fire chief may revoke the temporary permits at any time he feels that injury to persons, property or the public welfare may be threatened. 
(Ord. No. 5745, § 2, 10-19-81)
Sec. 12-52.1. - Permitted use. 
    On July 4 of each year, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., it shall be lawful for any person to use, burn, explode or setoff, on property owned or possessed by said person, snakes, sparklers, smoke bombs, fountains, pinwheels, party poppers, snap pops, daytime parachutes, blooming "flower" fountains or any similar ground-based products. 
(Ord. No. 7791, § 1, 12-17-07)
Sec. 12-53. - Sale prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or expose for sale any firecracker, torpedo, bomb, rocket, pinwheel, fire balloon, Roman candle, toy cannon or any other firecracker or fireworks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 5745, § 3, 10-19-81)
Sec. 12-54. - Possession prohibited. 
    Except as set forth in section 12-52 and 12-52.1, it shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession an opened package of any packaged fireworks or individual fire cracker, torpedo, bomb, rocket, pinwheel, fire balloon, Roman candle, toy cannon or any other firecracker or fireworks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 5745, § 4, 10-19-81; Ord. No. 7791, § 2, 12-17-07)
Sec. 12-55. - Storage prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store over fifty dollars ($50.00) worth of the following materials: firecracker, torpedo, bomb, rocket, pinwheel, fire balloon, roman candle, toy cannon or any other fireworks within the city, except as provided in section 12-56. 
(Ord. No. 5745, § 5, 10-19-81)
Sec. 12-56. - Temporary permits for storage. 
    The fire chief is hereby authorized with consent of the city council to issue temporary permits to store any of the following materials: firecracker, torpedo, bomb, rocket, pinwheel, fire balloon, roman candle, toy cannon or any other firecracker or fireworks. Such items shall be stored in such manner as the fire chief shall specify to provide maximum protection against personal injury or property damage. The fire chief may revoke the temporary permits at any time he feels that injury to persons, property or the public welfare may occur. 
(Ord. No. 5745, § 6, 10-19-81)
Secs. 12-57-12-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SMOKE DETECTORS 

Sec. 12-68. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Interconnected system shall mean two (2) or more interconnected smoke detectors. 
    Sleeping area shall mean the area of the unit in which the bedrooms or sleeping rooms are located. Bedrooms or sleeping rooms separated by another use area such as a kitchen or living room are separate sleeping areas, but bedrooms or sleeping rooms separated by a bathroom are not separate sleeping areas. 
    Smoke detector shall mean a device which detects particles or products of combustion other than heat. 
(Ord. No. 5827, § 1, 9-7-82)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-69. - Buildings affected. 
    Any building which is used for sleeping or lodging purposes is subject to the rules and regulations contained in this article and includes but is not limited by reason of enumeration to the following: a building all or part of which contains dwelling units, including single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings, hotels and motels, mobile homes, nursing homes and convalescent homes, licensed halfway houses, licensed rooming houses, hospitals or any building which has three (3) or more stories above ground level. 
(Ord. No. 5827, § 2, 9-7-82)
Sec. 12-70. - Location. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to let a building to another for occupancy, occupy a newly constructed building or sell an existing building which does not have installed and in operating condition a smoke detector on each level of the building. 
(b)	In buildings defined in section 12-69 where a common hallway is used, smoke detectors shall be spaced not more than twenty-five (25) feet apart in such hallway, in addition to basement and stairway installation as referred to in subsection (a). Hallway, stairway and basement detectors shall be installed as part of an interconnected system. Each required smoke detector shall be mounted on the ceiling, or a wall not more than twelve (12) inches from the ceiling, at a point centrally located in a corridor or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes. In an efficiency dwelling unit, the detector shall be centrally located on the ceiling of the main rooms. Where sleeping rooms are on an upper level, the detector shall be placed at the center of the ceiling directly above the stairway. Care should be exercised to ensure that the installation will not interfere with the operating characteristics of the detector. When activated, the detector shall provide an audible alarm in the dwelling unit. Smoke detectors with D.C. power supply only are permitted, as are detectors with A.C. power supply backed up by a secondary supply which is D.C. An A.C. powered unit is not permitted for residential type occupancies. Where A.C.-D.C. combination units are used, it is required that all A.C. lines be wired directly to the building's power supply. All D.C. powered detectors shall have built-in protection to warn of battery failure. 
(Ord. No. 5827, § 3, 9-7-82; Ord. No. 6272, § 1, 8-17-87)
Sec. 12-71. - Approval. 
    A smoke detector required under this article shall be approved by Underwriters' Laboratory, Inc., or other comparable testing firm. As an alternative to a smoke detector, a fire detection system may be installed. No fire detection system shall be installed unless a permit is issued therefor by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 5827, § 4, 9-7-82)
Sec. 12-72. - Maintenance. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the occupants of each dwelling unit and structure covered by this article to maintain all smoke and heat detectors in good working order. This requirement applies to smoke and heat detectors required to be installed by any state or federal law as well as smoke and heat detectors required to be installed by this article, unless otherwise required by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 5827, § 6, 9-7-82)
Sec. 12-73. - Inspection and orders. 
(a)	The fire chief, building official or their designated representative shall inspect all residential buildings and may issue orders as may be necessary to ensure compliance with this article. The fire department can be contacted for recommendations when an owner is concerned about installation and number of detectors. 
(b)	Inspection of new construction will be carried out by the building official on his final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 5827, § 7, 9-7-82)
Secs. 12-74-12-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 6016, § 1, adopted Aug. 20, 1984, added §§ 18-82-18-90 to the 1967 Code. At the discretion of the editor, and for purposes of classification, said sections have been redesignated and codified as Art. VI, §§ 12-81-12-89, herein.

Sec. 12-81. - Definitions. 
    In this article, unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association. 
    Underground storage tank means any underground tank containing flammable liquid or combustible liquid. 
(Ord. No. 6016, § 1, 8-20-84)
Sec. 12-82. - Testing of tanks and appurtenant equipment. 
(a)	Notwithstanding the other requirements of this article, the fire chief may require a test of an underground storage tank and appurtenant equipment if: 
(1)	Inventory control records are improperly kept so that it cannot be determined if a shortage of liquid exists. 
(2)	Inventory control records indicate a shortage of liquid.
(3)	Leakage of liquid can be detected visually.
(4)	There is a persistent odor of liquid in the area surrounding the underground storage tank. 
(b)	The fire chief may order the owner or operator of an underground storage tank to cease operations until any leakage in the underground storage tank and appurtenant equipment has been stopped. 
(Ord. No. 6016, § 1, 8-20-84)
Sec. 12-83. - Underground storage tank operator, duties. 
(a)	Every person owning or operating an underground storage tank shall keep accurate inventory control records for the purpose of detecting any leakage in the storage tank and appurtenant equipment. In addition to other records he may keep, the person owning or operating the underground storage tank shall make and keep records of concurrent readings of meters on dispensing units and the level of liquid in the storage tank as measured by dipstick. Such inventory control records shall be open for inspection to the fire chief. 
(b)	Any person owning or operating an underground storage tank shall make a report to the fire chief if such person has a suspicion of leakage because of loss of storage tank contents or because of an abnormal accumulation of water in the storage tank. 
(Ord. No. 6016, § 1, 8-20-84)
Sec. 12-84. - Reporting possible leak. 
    Any person detecting a leak or suspecting that an underground storage tank may be leaking shall report such leak or suspicion of leaking to the fire department immediately. 
(Ord. No. 6016, § 1, 8-20-84)
Sec. 12-85. - Test schedule. 
(a)	All underground storage tanks and their appurtenant equipment shall be tested within eight (8) months after the effective date of this article. Such underground storage tanks and appurtenant equipment shall be retested for leakage every five (5) years. 
(b)	Owners or operators of underground storage tanks who have had a test conducted on their underground storage tanks and appurtenant equipment during the calendar year prior to the effective date of this article shall not be required to retest their underground storage tanks without cause for five (5) years from the date of passage of this article provided that the test results and testing procedure are approved by the fire chief. 
(c)	Testing and repair of any underground storage tank and appurtenant equipment shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of such underground storage tank. 
(Ord. No. 6016, § 1, 8-20-84)
Sec. 12-86. - Report of ownership. 
(a)	Any person owning or operating an existing underground storage tank installation shall file a report with the fire chief on forms provided by the fire department within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this article. Such report shall include the following information: 
(1)	Name and address of owner or operator.
(2)	Location of underground storage tank.
(3)	Type of underground storage tank installation.
(4)	Capacity of underground storage tank.
(5)	Type of flammable or combustible liquid being stored.
(6)	Such other information as the fire chief may determine to be necessary in the administration of this article. 
(b)	Any person installing an underground storage tank after the effective date of this article shall have ten (10) days in which to file a report with the fire chief as required in paragraph (a) of this section. 
(c)	Such underground storage tank shall be tested according to section 12-88 of this Code. The fire chief may inspect such underground storage tank and appurtenant equipment while it is being tested to insure that there are no leaks and that the test is being properly conducted. 
(Ord. No. 6016, § 1, 8-20-84)
Sec. 12-87. - Test procedure for pipelines. 
    All pipelines for underground storage tanks shall be tested at the same time the tank is being tested by the same method. 
(Ord. No. 6016, § 1, 8-20-84)
Sec. 12-88. - Test procedure for storage tanks and pipelines. 
    The testing of underground storage tanks and pipelines shall be conducted using a tank, tester model 1000 of the Kent-Moore Service Tool Division or one of equal standard approved by the fire chief. The date of the test, the model and type of tester, the name of the operator of the equipment, the duration and results thereof shall be recorded and maintained until the date of the next test and shall be available for inspection by the building code engineer or his duly authorized representative upon request. 
(Ord. No. 6016, § 1, 8.20-84)
Sec. 12-89. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate, fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions, regulations or requirements of this article shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in jail for not more than six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 6016, § 1, 8-20-84)
Chapter 13 - FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Garbage, trash, refuse and other solid waste, Ch. 14; health and sanitation, Ch. 15; license tax for butchers, § 28-24(18); license tax for lunch counters, § 28-24(49); license tax for restaurants, § 28-24(69).
State Law reference- Food and drugs generally, RSMo Ch. 196; inspection of animals intended for food, RSMo 71.730; control of slaughterhouses, stockyards, RSMo 77.560.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Responsibility for enforcement of provisions. 
    The health officer of the city shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, and is authorized and directed to formulate and adopt reasonable and necessary rules and regulations to accomplish its enforcement. 
(Code 1967, § 15-1)
Sec. 13-2. - Sale of unwholesome food. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to sell or expose or offer for sale at any place, the flesh of any dead animal which was sick or over-heated or run down by dogs or otherwise at or immediately before the time at which the same was butchered or slain, or which died a natural death or was killed by an accident or otherwise than in the usual or ordinary method of slaughtering animals for food, or to sell or offer for sale any decayed or unsound meat, vegetables, eggs, poultry, fish or other unwholesome articles of food. 
(Code 1967, § 15-3)
Sec. 13-3. - Sanitation regulations for eating and drinking establishments. 
    The sanitation regulations for eating and drinking establishments of the city shall be those presently established or hereafter adopted by the city council and kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 6678, § 1, 12-16-93)
Secs. 13-4-13-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - 1999 MISSOURI FOOD CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 8060, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 2012 repealed ch. 13, art. II, §§ 13-21-13-42 in its entirety. The repealed sections shall remain in effect with respect to any violation occuring prior to the date of passage of Ord. No. 8060. Former ch. 13, art II. pertained to sanitation regulations for eating and drinking establishments and was derived from Code 1967, §§ 15-11-15-32.

Sec. 13-21. - 1999 Missouri Food Code adopted. 
    That the 1999 Missouri Food Code, as set out in the Code of State Regulations, Sections 19 CSR 20.1.025, et seq., as amended, is hereby adopted as the sanitation regulations for eating and drinking establishments within the corporate limits of the city. Any amendment, deletion or addition to the Missouri Food Code, adopted after the date of this section, shall be effective upon publication and adoption by the state. 
(Ord. No. 8060, § 2, 8-6-12)
Chapter 14 - GARBAGE, TRASH, REFUSE AND OTHER SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; food and food handlers, Ch. 13; garbage and rubbish disposal facilities in eating and drinking establishments, § 13-33; health and sanitation, Ch. 15; nuisances, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 30.
State Law reference- Authority to provide for disposal of garbage and refuse, RSMo 71.680, 71.690.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter the following terms shall be deemed to have the meaning indicated below: 
    Approved incinerator means an incinerator which complies with all current regulations of the responsible local and state air pollution control agencies. 
    Bulky rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and noncombustible waste materials from dwelling units, commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural establishments which are either too large or too heavy to be safely and conveniently loaded in solid waste transportation vehicles by solid waste collectors, with the equipment available therefor. 
    Collection means removal of solid waste from its place of storage to the transportation vehicle. 
    Demolition and construction waste means waste materials from the construction or destruction of residential, industrial or commercial structures. 
    Director means the director of the department of municipal services. 
    Disposable solid waste container means disposable plastic or paper sacks with a capacity of twenty (20) to thirty-five (35) gallons specifically designed for storage of solid waste. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a structure, and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or are intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food. 
    Hazardous wastes includes but is not limited to pathological wastes, explosive wastes, pesticides, pesticide containers, toxic or radioactive materials. 
    Multiple housing facility means a housing facility containing more than one dwelling unit under one roof. 
    Occupant means any person, who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall be in actual possession of any dwelling unit or of any other improved real property, either as owner or as a tenant. 
    Processing means incinerating, composting, baling, shredding, salvaging, compacting and other processes whereby solid waste characteristics are modified or solid waste quantity is reduced. 
    Refuse means solid waste. 
    Solid waste means unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid or semisolid state, including but not limited to garbage, ashes, street refuse, rubbish, dead animals, animal and agricultural wastes, yard wastes, discarded appliances, special wastes, industrial wastes and demolition and construction wastes. 
(1)	Commercial solid waste: Solid waste resulting from the operation of any commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural establishment and multiple housing facilities with more than two (2) dwelling units. 
(2)	Residential solid waste: Solid waste resulting from the maintenance and operation of dwelling units, excluding multiple housing facilities with more than two (2) dwelling units. 
    Solid waste container means a receptacle used by any person to store solid waste during the interval between solid waste collections. 
    Solid waste disposal means the process of discarding or getting rid of unwanted material. In particular the final deposition of solid waste by man. 
    Solid waste management means the entire solid waste system of storage, collection, transportation, processing and disposal. 
    Storage means keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste from the time of its production until the time of its collection. 
    Transportation means the transporting of solid waste from the place of collection or processing to a solid waste processing facility or solid waste disposal area. 
    Yard wastes means grass clippings, leaves, tree trimmings. 
(Code 1967, § 16-1; Ord. No. 5947, § 1, 2-21-84)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Director. 
    The collection and disposal of refuse and garbage shall be under the supervision of the director of the department of municipal services. 
(Code 1967, § 16-1; Ord. No. 5947, § 1, 2-21-84)
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; officers and employees generally, § 2-61 et seq. 
Secs. 14-3-14-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE 

Sec. 14-16. - Storage. 
(a)	Containers to be provided. The occupant of every dwelling unit and of every institutional, commercial or business, industrial or agricultural establishment producing solid waste within the corporate limits of the city, shall provide sufficient and adequate containers for the storage of all solid waste except bulky rubbish and demolition and construction waste to serve each such dwelling unit or establishment; and to maintain such solid waste containers at all times in good repair. 
(b)	Placement of waste in containers. The occupant of every dwelling unit and of every institutional, commercial, industrial, agricultural or business establishment shall place all solid waste to be collected in proper solid waste containers, except as otherwise provided herein, and shall maintain such solid waste containers and the area surrounding them in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. 
(c)	Specifications of residential containers. Residential solid waste shall be stored in containers of not more than thirty-five (35) gallons nor less than twenty (20) gallons in nominal capacity. Containers shall be leakproof, waterproof, and fitted with a flytight lid and shall be properly covered at all times except when depositing waste therein or removing the contents thereof. The containers shall have handles, bails or other suitable lifting devices or features. Containers shall be of a type originally manufactured for residential solid waste, with tapered sides for easy emptying. They shall be of lightweight and sturdy construction. The weight of any individual container and contents shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds. Galvanized metal containers, or rubber, fiberglass, or plastic containers which do not become brittle in cold weather, may be used. Disposal solid waste containers with suitable frames or containers as approved by the director may also be used for storage of residential solid waste. 
(d)	Specifications of commercial containers. Commercial solid waste shall be stored in solid waste containers as approved by the director. The containers shall be waterproof, leakproof and shall be covered at all times except when depositing waste therein or removing the contents thereof; and shall meet all requirements as set forth by section 14-21. 
(e)	Reserved. 
(f)	Yard wastes. Yard wastes shall be stored in containers so constructed and maintained as to prevent the dispersal of wastes placed therein the premises served, upon adjacent premises, or upon adjacent public rights-of-way. The weight of any individual container and contents shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds. 
(g)	Disposal of unapproved containers. Solid waste containers which are not approved will be collected together with their contents and disposed of. 
(Code 1967, § 16-2; Ord. No. 6718, §§ 1, 2, 8-16-93)
Sec. 14-17. - Collection. 
(a)	By whom. The city shall provide for the collection of all solid waste in the city, provided, however, that the city may provide the collection service by contracting with a person, county or other city or a combination thereof, for the entire city or portions thereof, as deemed to be in the best interests of the city. 
(b)	Items to be collected. All solid waste from premises to which collection services are provided by the city shall be collected, except bulky rubbish as defined herein, provided however, that bulky rubbish will be collected if tied securely in bundles not exceeding reasonable limitations of weight and bulk to be fixed by regulations to be made and promulgated by the director as herein after provided. All solid waste collected shall, upon being loaded into transportation equipment, become the property of the collection agency. 
(c)	Placement for collection. Tree limbs and yard wastes, as described in section 14-16(e) and (f) respectively, shall be placed at curbside. Solid waste containers as required by this article for the storage of other residential solid waste shall be placed outside an enclosed area for collection. Any solid waste containers, tree limbs, yard wastes or other solid waste permitted by this article to be placed outside an enclosed area for collection shall not be so placed until the regularly scheduled collection day. 
(d)	Entry upon private property. Solid waste collectors, employed by the city or a solid waste collection agency operating under contract with the city are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this article. Solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential buildings for the purpose of collecting residential solid waste. Commercial solid waste may be removed from within commercial establishments upon written request by the owner and approved by the director. 
(e)	Frequency. The following collection frequencies shall apply to collections of solid waste within the city: All residential solid waste, other than bulky rubbish shall be collected at least twice weekly on a regularly scheduled basis as determined by the director during the time of the last Sunday in April each year to the last Sunday in October of the same year. Thereafter, once weekly on a regularly scheduled basis as set forth by the director. All commercial solid waste shall be collected at least once weekly, and shall be collected at such lesser intervals as may be fixed by the director or requested by the commercial establishment upon a determination that such lesser intervals are necessary for the preservation of the health or safety of the public. 
(f)	Storage of containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon private property, unless the owner shall have been granted written permission from the city to use public property for such purposes. The storage site shall be well drained; fully accessible to collection equipment, public health personnel and fire inspection personnel. 
(g)	Responsibility for waste. Solid waste collectors, employed by the city or a solid waste collection agency operating under contract with the city, shall be responsible for the collection of solid waste from the point of collection to the transportation vehicle provided the solid waste was stored in compliance with section 14-16(c), (d), (e) and (f). Any spillage or blowing litter caused as a result of the duties of the solid waste collector shall be collected and placed in the transportation vehicle by the solid waste collector. 
(Code 1967, § 16-3)
Sec. 14-18. - Transportation. 
(a)	Construction and maintenance of vehicles. All transportation vehicles shall be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition, and shall be so constructed, maintained and operated as to prevent spillage of solid waste therefrom. All vehicles to be used for transportation of solid waste shall be constructed with water-tight bodies and with covers which shall be an integral part of the vehicle or shall be a separate cover of suitable material with fasteners designed to secure all sides of the cover to the vehicle and shall be secured whenever the vehicle is transporting solid waste, or, as an alternate, the entire bodies thereof shall be enclosed, with only loading hoppers exposed. No solid waste shall be transported in the loading hoppers. 
(b)	Earth and rock material. Permits shall not be required for the removal, hauling or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities, however, all such material shall be conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles, so constructed and maintained that none of the material being transported shall spill upon the public rights-of-way. 
(c)	Demolition and construction wastes. Transportation and disposal of demolition and construction wastes shall be in accordance with sections 14-19 and 14-20. 
(Code 1967, § 16-4)
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 29. 
Sec. 14-19. - Disposal. 
(a)	Solid wastes shall be deposited at a processing facility or disposal area approved by the city and complying with all requirements of the Missouri Solid Waste Management Law of 1972, Sections 260.200 to 260.245, RSMo, and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder. 
(b)	The director may classify certain wastes as hazardous wastes which will require special handling and shall be disposed of only in a manner acceptable to the director and which meet all local, state and federal regulations. 
(Code 1967, § 16-5)
Sec. 14-20. - Business prohibited. 
    No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the city without the written permission of the director of municipal services. 
(Code 1967, § 16-6; Ord. No. 6676, § 26, 2-1-93)
Sec. 14-21. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)	The director with the approval of the council may make, amend, revoke and enforce reasonable and necessary rules and regulations, governing, but not limited to: 
(1)	Preparation, drainage and wrapping of garbage deposited in solid waste containers;
(2)	Specifications for solid waste containers, including the type, composition, equipment, size and shape thereof; 
(3)	Identification of solid waste containers and of the covers thereof, and of equipment thereto appertaining, if any; 
(4)	Weight limitations on the combined weight of solid waste containers and the contents thereof, and the weight and size limitations on bundles of solid waste too large for solid waste containers; 
(5)	Storage of solid waste in solid waste containers;
(6)	Sanitation, maintenance and replacement of solid waste containers;
(7)	Schedules of and routes for collection and transportation of solid waste;
(8)	Collection points of solid waste containers;
(9)	Collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste;
(10)	Processing facilities and fees for the use thereof;
(11)	Disposal facilities and fees for the use thereof;
(12)	Records of quantity and type of wastes received at processing or disposal facilities;
(13)	Handling of special wastes such as toxic wastes, sludges, ashes, agriculture, construction, bulky items, tires, automobiles, oils, greases, etc. 
(b)	The director shall have the authority to hire the necessary personnel to operate under this article. 
(c)	The city clerk or such other city official who is responsible for preparing utility and other service charge billings for the city, is hereby authorized to make and promulgate reasonable and necessary rules and regulations for the billing and collection of solid waste collection or disposal service charges, as hereinafter provided for. 
(d)	A copy of any and all rules and regulations made and promulgated under the provisions hereof shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 16-7)
Sec. 14-22. - Prohibited practices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container other than his own, without the written consent of the owner of such container and/or, with the intent of avoiding payment of the service charge hereinafter provided for solid waste collection and disposal; 
(2)	Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection and transportation equipment, or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors shall be those of the city, or those of a solid waste collection agency operating under contract with the city; 
(3)	Burn solid waste unless an approved incinerator is provided or unless a variance has been obtained from the appropriate air pollution control agency; 
(4)	Dispose of solid waste at any facility or location which is not approved by the city and the state department of natural resources; 
(5)	Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 16-8)
Sec. 14-23. - Service charges. 
    The service charge for the collection and disposal of solid waste shall be those presently established or hereafter adopted by the city council and kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1967, § 16-9; Ord. No. 5840, § 1, 10-18-84; Ord. No. 6504, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 6678, § 2, 12-16-93; Ord. No. 6718, § 3, 8-16-93; Ord. No. 6807, § 1, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 7497, § 1, 11-3-03; Ord. No. 7976, § 1, 11-15-10) 
Secs. 14-24-14-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY LANDFILL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Solid waste disposal, RSMo 260.200 et seq.

Sec. 14-36. - Charges. 
    The charges for the use of the sanitary landfill of the city shall be those presently established or hereafter adopted by the city council and kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1967, § 16-11; Ord. No. 5840, § 2, 10-18-82; Ord. No. 6504, § 2, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 6678, § 3, 12-16-93) 
Sec. 14-37. - Setting fires. 
    No person, except a duly authorized employee of the city, shall set fire, to, or cause to be burned, any substance upon the property commonly known as the city landfill. 
(Code 1967, § 14-10)
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12. 
Secs. 14-38-14-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTER 

Sec. 14-48. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein: 
    Aircraft is any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
    Authorized private receptacle is a container of water-tight construction with a tight-fitting lid or cover capable of preventing the escape of contents within. Such receptacles shall have handles or other means for safe and convenient handling and be of such size or sufficient capacity to hold all litter generated between collection periods and shall be in compliance with section 14-16. 
    Commercial handbill is any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
(1)	Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; or
(2)	Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or 
(3)	Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; or 
(4)	Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
    Garbage is putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Litter is "garbage," "refuse" and "rubbish" as defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
    Newspaper is any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public. 
    Noncommercial handbill is any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
    Park is a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Private premises is any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
    Public place is any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
    Refuse is all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish is nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
    Vehicle is every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 2, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-49. - Litter in public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in any duly licensed disposal facility. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 3, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-50. - Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 4, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-51. - Upsetting or tampering with receptacles. 
    No person shall upset or tamper with a public or private receptacle designed or used for the deposit of litter or cause or permit its contents to be deposited or strewn in or upon any public place or private premises. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 5, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-52. - Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited. 
    No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 6, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-53. - Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
    No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 7, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-54. - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. 
    No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 8, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-55. - Truck loads causing litter. 
    No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 9, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-56. - Litter in parks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 10, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-57. - Litter in lakes and fountains. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 11, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-58. - Throwing or distributing commercial handbills in public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. Nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 12, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-59. - Placing commercial and noncommercial handbills on vehicles. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 13, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-60. - Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 14, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-61. - Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly posted. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar notice, indicating in any matter that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 15, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-62. - Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited private premises. 
(a)	No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handling or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises. Provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this article, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers (as defined herein) except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 16, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-63. - Dropping litter from aircraft. 
    No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 17, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-64. - Posting notices prohibited. 
    No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 18, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-65. - Litter on occupied private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 19, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-66. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
    The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 20, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-67. - Litter on vacant lots. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 21, 9-21-81)
Sec. 14-68. - Clearing of litter from open private property by city. 
(a)	Notice to remove. The director of the department of municipal services is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property within the city or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to the owner at his last known address. 
(b)	Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within seven (7) days after receipt of written notice provided for in subsection (a), or within ten (10) days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the director of the department of municipal services because of the United States Post Office's inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner, or agent, the director of the department of municipal services is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the city. 
(c)	Charge included in tax bill. When the city has effected the removal of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of nine (9) percent per annum from the date of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the city, and the charge shall be due and payable by the owner at the time of payment of such bill. 
(d)	Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner within sixty (60) days after the disposal of such litter, as provided for in subsections (a) and (b), then, and in that case, the director of department of municipal services shall cause to be recorded in the county recorder's office a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the location of the property on which the work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property, and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made. Such costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of one (1) percent per month or fractional part thereof, not to exceed ten (10) percent of each year's delinquency in the event same is not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which the charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 5736, § 22, 9-21-81; Ord. No. 6083, § 1, 5-6-85)
Chapter 15 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Manner of keeping animals generally, § 6-1; food and food handlers, Ch. 13; garbage, trash, refuse and other solid waste, Ch. 14; massage establishments, Ch. 16; sanitation generally for massage establishments, § 16-8; nuisances, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 30.
State Law reference- Public health generally, RSMo 71.680 et seq.; authority to enact regulations for health of inhabitants, RSMo 77.260; regulations for prevention of contagious diseases, RSMo 77.530; municipal health and welfare generally, RSMo Ch. 96.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Outside toilet buildings; restrictions. 
    All outside toilet buildings located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a sanitary sewer within the city limits of the city shall be removed and the pits under the same shall be covered with at least eighteen (18) inches of dirt. 
(Code 1967, § 17-6)
Sec. 15-2. - Maintenance of privies, closets. 
(a)	Sanitary condition. It shall be unlawful for any owner to have or maintain any privy or closet that is unsanitary. 
(b)	Duty of owner, lessee. It shall be the duty of every owner or lessee to keep clean any privy or closet on premises owned, leased or controlled by him and to clean such closet within such time as shall be fixed by the city, and if the same shall not be cleaned within the time limit, the city shall cause the same to be cleaned and the expense incurred in cleaning shall be paid by the owner or the lessee owning, leasing or controlling the property. All disputes between lessee or owner shall be adjusted among themselves, but each, all or any of them shall be liable to the city for any expenses incurred by reason of such cleaning. 
(Code 1967, § 17-7)
Sec. 15-3. - Vehicles transporting or emitting noxious material, odor; restrictions. 
    No person shall park any vehicle which is used for the transportation of dead animals, manure or human waste or any vehicle which emits any noxious or offensive odor upon any public street or alley of the city; nor within one hundred (100) feet of any place where food is sold or served; nor within one hundred (100) feet of any residence other than the residence of the owner of the vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 17-10)
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 29. 
Secs. 15-4-15-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HEALTH OFFICER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; officers and employees generally, § 2-51 et seq.

Sec. 15-16. - Office created. 
    The office of health officer of the city is hereby created. 
(Code 1967, § 17-23)
Sec. 15-17. - Appointment. 
    The health officer of the city shall be appointed by the mayor and such appointment approved by the council. 
(Code 1967, § 17-24)
Sec. 15-18. - Qualifications. 
    The city health inspector shall be a graduate in chemistry or bacteriology or be a medical technologist, or have had at least two (2) years' experience as a health officer in a city of the first, second or third class in the state. 
(Code 1967, § 17-25)
Sec. 15-19. - Term. 
    The term of office of the city health officer shall be for one year to begin in April of each year. 
(Code 1967, § 17-26)
Sec. 15-20. - Compensation. 
    The health officer shall receive as compensation for his services such sums as may be determined by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1967, § 17-27)
Sec. 15-21. - Duties. 
    The health officer of the city shall enforce all food sanitation rules and regulations, including those provisions set out in chapter 13, and shall perform such other duties pertaining to the health and welfare of the city as are prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 17-28)
Sec. 15-22. - Authority to enter public, private property. 
(a)	Streets, alleys, public places. It shall be the duty of the health officer to examine the streets, alleys and other public places of the city, and specify how the same shall be cleaned and purified, and recommend the same for the action of the city council. 
(b)	Private premises. It shall be the duty of the health officer and he is authorized to enter upon the private premises within the city to examine all wells, cellars, cisterns, privy vaults, stables, hog pens and other places thereon, where offal or unhealthful matter may accumulate, and to direct the abatement, changing, cleaning and purification of any and all places which he may so find, which in his judgment is in a condition detrimental to the public health. 
(Code 1967, § 17-29)
Sec. 15-23. - Police to assist health officer. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the police of the city to accompany and aid the health officer in the performance of his duties, if requested. 
(Code 1967, § 17-30)
Sec. 15-24. - Report to city council. 
    The health officer shall at the meeting of the city council on the first Monday of each month make a detailed report in writing of all his acts as such officer during the preceding month so that the council may be fully advised in regard thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 17-31)
Chapter 16 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 15.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Employee means any person, other than a massagist, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons. 
    Licensee means the person to whom a license has been issued to own or operate a massage establishment as defined herein. 
    Massage means any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or any gratuity therefor. 
    Massage establishment means any establishment having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage, and which has a fixed place of business where any person engages in or carries on any of the activities as defined in "practice of massage." 
    Massagist, masseur or masseuse means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage. 
    Outcall massage service means any business, the function of which is to engage in or carry on massages at a location designated by the customer or patron rather than at a massage establishment. 
    Patron means any person who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any other consideration therefor. 
    Permittee means the person to whom a permit has been issued to act in the capacity of a massagist (masseur or masseuse). 
    Recognized school means any school or educational institution licensed to do business as a school or educational institution in the state in which it is located, or any school recognized by or approved by or affiliated with the American Massage and Therapy Association, Inc., and which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of massage, which school requires a resident course of study not less than seventy (70) hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate or graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course of study or learning. 
    Sexual or genital area means genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 1, 8-4-80)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-2. - Exemptions from chapter 
    This chapter shall not apply to the following individuals while engaged in the personal performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(1)	Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state; 
(2)	Nurses who are registered under the laws of the state;
(3)	Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of this state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp and hair of the customer or client for cosmetic or beautifying purposes. 
(4)	Massage therapists licensed under RSMO § 324.240, et seq.
(Ord. No 5600, § 3, 8-4-80; Ord. No. 7444, § 1, 2-18-03)
Sec. 16-3. - Zoning. 
    The massage establishment premises shall be located in a zoning district now or hereafter designated as "C," or a higher zoning district permitting the same or greater land use in zone "C." 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 25, 8-4-80)
Cross reference- Zoning, Ch. 32. 
Sec. 16-4. - Prohibited hours. 
    No massage business shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 18, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-5. - Employment of permitted massagists only. 
    No person shall employ as a massagist any person unless the employee has obtained and has in effect a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 19, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-6. - Misrepresentation. 
    No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertisement, picture or statement which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any professional massage services. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 15, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-7. - Price rates to be posted. 
    Price rates for all services in a massage establishment shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 15, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-8. - Sanitation generally. 
    Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 15, 8-4-80)
Cross reference- Health and sanitation generally, Ch. 15. 
Sec. 16-9. - Employees. 
    All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall be clean and wear clean nontransparent outer garments, covering the sexual and genital areas, the use of which garments is restricted to the massage establishment A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 15, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-10. - Laundered sheets and towels. 
    All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No, 5600, § 15, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-11. - Minors prohibited. 
    No person shall permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to come or remain on the premises of any massage business establishment, as masseur, employee or patron, unless such person is on the premises on lawful business. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 16, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-12. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverages on the premises of any massage business. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 17, 8-4-80)
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 4. 
Sec. 16-13. - Regulations for practice of massage. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person holding a permit under this chapter to treat a person of the opposite sex, except upon the signed order of a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or registered therapist, which order shall be dated and shall specifically state the number of treatments, not to exceed ten (10). The date and hour of each treatment given and the name of the operator shall be entered on such order by the establishment where such treatments are given and shall be subject to inspection by the police pursuant to section 16-14. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to treatments given in the residence of a patient, the office of a licensed physician, osteopath or registered physical therapist, chiropractor, or in a regularly established and licensed hospital or sanitarium. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage parlor, to place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital part of any other person. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage parlor, to expose his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person, in a massage parlor, to expose the sexual parts or genital parts, or any portions thereof, of any other person. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other person in a massage parlor, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque covering, the sexual or genital parts of his or her body. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage parlor, knowingly to cause, allow or permit in or about such massage parlor, any agent, employee or any other person under his control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in subsections (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section. 
(f)	It shall be further unlawful for any permittee under this chapter to administer massage on an outcall basis. Such person shall administer massage solely within an establishment licensed to carry on such business under this chapter. Any violation of these provisions shall be deemed grounds for revocation of the permit granted hereunder. The restriction on outcall massage shall not apply to a permittee who performs outcall massage upon a customer or client who because of reasons of physical defects or incapacities or due to illness is physically unable to travel to the massage establishment. If any outcall massage is performed under this exception, a record of the date and hour of each treatment, and the name and address of the customer or client, and the name of the employee administering such treatment and the type of treatment administered, as well as the nature of the physical defect, incapacity or illness of the client or customer shall be kept by the licensee or person or employee designated by the licensee. Such records shall be open to inspection by officials charged with the enforcement of public health laws. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such inspection shall be confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by an employee of the business or of the city shall be unlawful. 
(g)	It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. All doors or doorway coverings within a massage establishment shall have an unobstructed opening six (6) inches by six (6) inches in size capable of clear two-way viewing into and out of all cubicles, rooms or booths. The opening shall be not less than four and one-half (41/2) feet from the floor of the establishment nor more than five and one-half (51/2) feet from the floor. Toilets and cubicles used solely for the application of liquid and vapor baths shall have no such opening in the covering door or curtain, but shall be clearly marked as to purpose on the exterior door or curtain of said cubicle, room or booth. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of statute or ordinance concerning the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof, whenever such inspection is deemed necessary by the police or health departments. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 21, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-14. - Inspections. 
    The chief of police or his authorized representative shall from time to time make inspection of each massage business establishment for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this chapter are fully complied with. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or hinder such officer in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 20, 8-4-80)
Secs. 16-15-16-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational license taxes generally, § 28-11 et seq.

Sec. 16-26. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in or carry out the business of massage unless he has a valid massage business license issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this article for each and every separate establishment or place of business conducted by such person. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 2, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-27. - Application; fee. 
(a)	Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application under oath with the city clerk upon a form to be promulgated by the city clerk in accordance with this chapter, and pay a nonrefundable annual license fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per year or any part thereof. The application, once accepted, shall be referred to the chief of police for investigation. Copies of the application shall within five (5) days also be referred to the building official who shall within thirty (30) days cause an inspection to be made of the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment and shall make written verification to the city clerk concerning compliance with the codes of the city. Each application shall contain the following information: 
(1)	A definition of service to be provided;
(2)	The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted; 
(3)	The name and residence address of each applicant (hereinafter all provisions which refer to applicant include an applicant which may be a corporation or partnership): 
a.	If applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of each of the officers and directors of the corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation, and the address of the corporation itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment; 
b.	If applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners including limited partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment. 
(4)	The two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;
(5)	Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(6)	Individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and sex;
(7)	Positive identification such as driver's license or social security card;
(8)	One portrait photograph of the applicant at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches and a complete set of applicant's fingerprints which shall be taken by the police department. If the applicant is a corporation, one portrait photograph at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches of all officers and managing agents of said corporation and a complete set of the same officers' and agents' fingerprints which shall be taken by the police department. If the applicant is a partnership, one front-face portrait photograph at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches in size of each partner, including a limited partner in said partnership, and a complete set of each partner's or limited partner's fingerprints which shall be taken by the police department; 
(9)	Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(10)	The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, is previously operating in this or another city or state has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(11)	All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted; 
(12)	The name and address of each massagist who is or will be employed in the establishment;
(13)	Applicant must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method, profession and work of massage is taught; provided, however, that if the applicant will not himself engage in the practice of massage as defined herein, he need not possess such diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method, profession and work of massage is taught; 
(14)	The name and address of any massage business or other establishment owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given in subsection (a)(3) wherein the business or profession of massage is carried on; 
(15)	A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant; 
(16)	Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit; 
(17)	Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(18)	The names, current addresses and written statements of at least three (3) bona fide permanent residents of the city. These references must be persons other than relatives and business associates. 
(b)	Upon the completion of the above provided form and the furnishing of all foregoing information, the city clerk shall accept the application for the necessary investigations. The holder of a massage establishment license shall notify the city clerk of each change in any of the data required to be furnished by this section within ten (10) days after such change occurs. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 4, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-28. - Causes for denial. 
    The city shall issue a license for a massage establishment upon resolution by the city council if all requirements for a massage establishment described in this chapter are met unless it finds: 
(1)	The correct license fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check, or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation; 
(2)	The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city's building, zoning and health regulations; 
(3)	The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation, any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business; has been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense without the state that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state: 
a.	An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony; 
b.	An offense involving sexual misconduct;
c.	An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons that amounts to a felony. 
    The city may issue a license to any person convicted of any of the crimes described in subparagraph a., b. or c. of this subsection if it finds that such conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to the date of the application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for crimes mentioned in this subsection. 
(4)	The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith; 
(5)	The applicant has had a massage business, masseur or other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the city or any other state or local agency within five (5) years prior to the date of the application; 
(6)	The applicant, if an individual; or any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business; is not over the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 6, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-29. - Minimum requirements for issuance. 
    No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection by the city reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)	Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproofed materials and shall be installed in accordance with the building code and plumbing code of the city: 
a.	Steam rooms and shower compartments shall have waterproof floors, walls and ceilings approved by the city. 
b.	Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one or more floor drains properly connected to the sewer. (Exception: Dry heat rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor drains.) 
c.	A source of hot water must be available within the immediate vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning. 
(2)	The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering massages. Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron. 
(3)	Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas. 
(4)	Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each twenty (20) or more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein. 
(5)	Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels. 
(6)	All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the electrical code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 14, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-30. - Issuance for separate locations. 
    Should any massage business have more than one location within the city where the business of massage is pursued, then a permit, stating both the address of the principal place of business, and of the other location may be issued by the city council upon the tender of a license fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00). Licenses issued for other locations shall terminate on the same date as that of the principal place of business, regardless of the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 9, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-31. - Approval or denial; expiration. 
    The city council shall act to approve or deny an application for a license under this article within a reasonable period of time and in no event shall the city act to approve or deny the license later than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date that the application was accepted by the city clerk. Every license issued pursuant to this article will terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 7, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-32. - Operation under name and at location specified in license. 
    No person granted a license pursuant to this article shall operate the massage establishment under a name not specified in his license, nor shall he conduct business under any designation or location not specified in his license. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 23, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-33. - Display. 
    Every person licensed under this article shall display such a license in a prominent place. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 10, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-34. - Transfer. 
(a)	No license shall be transferable except with the consent of the city council. An application for such transfer shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by fees prescribed in section 16-27. The written application for such transfer shall contain the same information as requested herein for initial application for the license. 
(b)	Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license therefor shall be null and void unless approved as provided in section 16-28; provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the licensee or any co-licensee of the massage establishment, any heir or devisee of a deceased licensee, or any guardian of an heir or devisee of a deceased licensee, may continue the business of the massage establishment for a reasonable period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days to allow for an orderly transfer of the license. 
(Ord. No. 5600, §§ 22, 24, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-35. - Revocation or suspension. 
    Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the city after notice and a hearing, for good cause, or in any case where any of the provisions of this chapter are violated or where any employee of the licensee, including a masseur or masseuse is engaged in any conduct which violates any of the state or local laws or ordinances at the licensee's place of business and the licensee has actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 12, 8-4-80)
Secs. 16-36-16-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MASSAGISTS PERMIT 

Sec. 16-46. - Required. 
    No person shall practice massage as a massagist, employee or otherwise, unless he has a valid and subsisting massagist's permit issued to him by the city pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 2, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-47. - Application; fee. 
    Application for a massagist's business permit shall be made to the city clerk in the same manner as provided above for massage establishment licenses, accompanied by the annual nonrefundable massagist's permit fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or any part thereof. The application shall contain but not be limited to the following: 
(1)	The business address and all telephone numbers where the massage is to be practiced;
(2)	Name and residence address, and all names, nicknames and aliases by which the applicant has been known, including the two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant; 
(3)	Social security number, driver's license number, if any, and date of birth;
(4)	Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes, and sex;
(5)	Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(6)	A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any felony or misdemeanor or violation of a local ordinance, except misdemeanor traffic violations; 
(7)	Fingerprints of the applicant taken by the police department;
(8)	Two (2) front-face portrait photographs taken within thirty (30) days of the date of application and at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches in size; 
(9)	The name and address of the recognized school attended, the dates attended and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation awarded the applicant showing the applicant has completed not less than seventy (70) hours of instruction; 
(10)	The massage or similar business history and experience ten (10) years prior to the date of application, including but not limited to whether or not such person in previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended and the reasons therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation; 
(11)	The names, current addresses and written statements of at least five (5) bona fide permanent residents, other than relatives, of the city that the applicant is of good moral character; 
(12)	A medical certificate signed by a physician, licensed to practice in the state, within seven (7) days of the date of the application. The certificate shall state that the applicant was examined by the certifying physician and that the applicant is free of communicable disease. The additional information required by this subsection shall be provided at the applicant's expense; 
(13)	Such other information, identification and physical examination of the person deemed necessary by the chief of police in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in the application; 
(14)	Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit; 
(15)	Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, such declaration being duly dated and signed in the city. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 5, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-48. - Waiver of education requirements. 
    The city shall waive the requirements of a recognized school and section 16-47(9) if the applicant furnishes satisfactory evidence that he or she attended not less than seventy (70) hours of instruction in a school within or without this state or in any foreign country that provides education substantially equal to or in excess of the educational requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 8, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-49. - Causes for denial. 
    The city shall issue a permit for a masseur or masseuse, upon resolution by the city council if all requirements for a massagist permit described in this chapter are met unless it finds: 
(1)	The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check, or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation; 
(2)	The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city's building, zoning and health regulations; 
(3)	The applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense without the state that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state: 
a.	An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony; 
b.	An offense involving sexual misconduct;
c.	An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons that amounts to a felony. 
    The city may issue a permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes described in subparagraph a., b. or c. of this subsection if it finds that such conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to the date of the application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for crimes mentioned in this subsection. 
(4)	The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith; 
(5)	The applicant has had a massage business, masseur or other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the city or any other state or local agency within five (5) years prior to the date of the application; 
(6)	The applicant is not over the age of eighteen (18) years.
(Ord. No. 5600, § 6, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-50. - Approval or denial; expiration. 
    The city council shall act to approve or deny an application for a permit under this article within a reasonable period of time and in no event shall the city act to approve or deny the permit later than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date that the application was accepted by the city clerk. Every permit issued pursuant to this article will terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 7, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-51. - Display. 
    Every massagist shall post the permit required by this article in his work area. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 10, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-52. - Register of permittees in each establishment. 
    The licensee or persons designated by the licensee of a massage establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed at any time as masseurs or masseuses and their permit numbers. Such register shall be available at the massage establishment to representatives of the city during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 11, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-53. - Transfer. 
    No permit shall be transferable except with the consent of the city council. An application for such transfer shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by fees prescribed in section 16-47. The written application for such transfer shall contain the same information as requested herein for initial application for the permit. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 24, 8-4-80)
Sec. 16-54. - Revocation or suspension. 
    A masseur or masseuse permit issued by the city shall be revoked or suspended where it appears that the masseur or masseuse has been convicted of any offense which would be cause for denial of a permit upon an original application, has made a false statement on an application for a permit, or has committed an act in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5600, § 13, 8-4-80)
Chapter 17 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisance created by dogs or cats, 6-5; abatement of housing nuisances, § 7-127; garbage, trash, refuse and other solid waste, Ch. 14; health and sanitation, Ch. 15; offenses generally, Ch. 18.
State Law reference- Authority to prevent and remove nuisances, RSMo 71.780, 77.530, 77.560.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Enumeration. 
    Public nuisances within the city shall include, but not be limited to the following, each of which is hereby declared to be a nuisance: 
(1)	All pursuits followed or acts done by any person to the hurt, injury, annoyance, inconvenience or damage of the public; 
(2)	All bawdy houses, houses of ill-fame, assignation houses, or any building or room of any building to which persons are allowed or permitted by the owner, keeper or occupants thereof to resort for the purpose of prostitution; 
(3)	All ponds or pools of stagnant water, and all foul or dirty water or liquid when discharged through any drain, pipe or spout into or upon any street, alley, thoroughfare or lot to the injury and annoyance of the public; 
(4)	All privies or privy vaults kept in such condition as to emit an offensive, noxious or disagreeable odor, and all substance's emitting any offensive, noxious, unhealthy or disagreeable effluvia in the neighborhood where they exist; all carcasses of dead animals which the owners or keepers thereof shall permit to remain within the limits of this city exceeding twelve (12) hours after death; 
(5)	Every privy, privy vault, commode, cesspool or water closet, or any other receptacle whatever, of human excrement within the limits of this city which is in an overflowing, leaking, full, stinking, insecure or defective condition; 
(6)	Any dead animal, carcass or any part thereof, or any offal or other filth, in any well, cistern, spring, drinking fountain, trough or basin used for drinking purposes, or in any brook or branch thereof within the city, which is or may be used by the public for drinking purposes, or any wilful or malicious poisoning, defiling or in any way corrupting of the water of the same; 
(7)	Any violation of the Property Maintenance Code which is defined therein as a nuisance, or which is declared to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the residents of the city. This provision shall apply to the 2009 Edition of the Property Maintenance Code as published by the International Code Council, and to any subsequent edition of said Code as may hereafter be adopted from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 6196, § 2, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 6957, § 2, 6-3-96; Ord. No. 8170, § 1, 8-4-14)
Cross reference- Property maintenance code, § 7-166 et seq. 
Sec. 17-2. - Unlawful to keep nuisance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a nuisance to remain in any building or on any premises or lot under his ownership or control. Any such nuisance is hereby declared to be a danger to the public health, safety and welfare, and the owner, occupant and operator of the premises shall each be responsible for the existence and removal of said nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 6196, § 2, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 8170, § 2, 8-4-14)
Sec. 17-3. - Notice not required. 
    Notwithstanding any contrary provision in this Code, the Property Maintenance Code or other ordinances adopted by the council, any person failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a civil infraction. The notice provisions of section 17-46 of this Code and Section 106, Section 107 and Section 302 of the Property Maintenance Code shall apply only to administrative proceedings before the board of building code enforcement, shall not apply to the prosecution of ordinance violations under sections 17-42 and 17-43 and shall not be construed as a condition precedent to the prosecution or enforcement of ordinance violations filed in municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 8170, § 3, 8-4-14)
Secs. 17-4-17-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Section 3, Ord. No. 6196, adopted Sept. 15, 1986, repealed Art. II, §§ 17-21-17-28, pertaining to motor vehicles as nuisances; section 4 of the ordinance enacted in lieu thereof §§ 17-21-17-23, pertaining to similar subject matter. Formerly, §§ 17-21-17-28 derived from §§ 19-17-19-24 of the 1967 Code.
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 29.
State Law reference- Disposition of vehicles left unattended on highways, RSMo 304.155.

Sec. 17-21. - Unusable vehicles, machinery, etc., declared a nuisance. 
    Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind which are no longer safely usable for the purposes for which they were manufactured, which hereinafter are collectively described as "said personalty" (except in licensed junk yards) within the corporate limits of this city, is hereby declared to be a danger to the public health, safety or welfare and a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 6196, § 4, 9-15-86)
Sec. 17-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 8170, § 2, adopted Aug. 4, 2014, repealed former § 17-22 in its entirety which pertained to nuisances under this article being unlawful and derived from Ord. No. 6196, § 4, adopted Sept. 15, 1986. 
Sec. 17-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6957, § 3, adopted June 3, 1996, repealed former section 17-23 in its entirety which pertained to the removal of nuisances on private property and derived from Ord. No. 6196, § 4, adopted Sept. 15, 1986, and Ord. No. 6221, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 1986. 
Secs. 17-24-17-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WEEDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Weeds growing on public or private property, § 17-1(7).

Sec. 17-42. - Declared a nuisance. 
    Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, or other weeds of a like kind, found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city are hereby declared to be a danger to the public health, safety or welfare, and a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds to grow or remain in any such place. 
(Ord. No. 6081, § 1, 5-6-85)
Sec. 17-43. - Height. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants to grow to a height exceeding twelve (12) inches anywhere in the city; any such plants or weeds exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a danger to the public health, safety or welfare and a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 6081, § 1, 5-6-85)
Sec. 17-44. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6957, § 3, adopted June 3, 1996, repealed former section 17-44 in its entirety which pertained to the cutting of weeds or plants or private property by the city and derived from Ord. No. 6081, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 6196, § 5, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 6221, § 1, 12-1-86. 
Secs. 17-45-17-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 6959, § 4, adopted June 3, 1996, added provisions designated as Art. IV, § 17-46. In order to reserve sections for future expansion, the editor has redesignated the provisions of § 4 of said ordinance as § 17-61.
Cross reference- Property maintenance code, § 7-166 et seq.

Sec. 17-46. - Responsibility for nuisances and removal. 
    It shall be the responsibility of each owner, occupant and operator of premises, as those terms are defined in said BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, upon notice, to abate any condition on the premises found to be a nuisance. 
(1)	Notice to remove. The building official or the director of the department of municipal services is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner, occupant and operator of any private property within the city or the agent of such person(s) (hereinafter "responsible party" whether one or more) to abate the nuisance located on such premises which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city. Such notice shall provide that if the nuisance is not abated within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, a hearing before the board of building code enforcement (the "board") shall be held on the date stated in the notice. Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to the responsible party at his last known address, and by personal service, or by posting the notice on the premises if personal service is not made. The notice shall describe the property upon which, in front of which or along which such nuisance is to be removed, by street address and by lot and block numbers, or plat designation. 
(2)	Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any responsible party so notified, to properly remove said nuisance within ten (10) days after written notice provided for in subsection (a), and following a finding by the board that a nuisance exists and has not been abated, the building official or the director of the department of municipal services is hereby authorized and empowered to declare the nuisance a danger to the public health, safety and welfare and in the event the nuisance is not removed within five (5) dates thereafter, to cause the same to be removed. 
(3)	Charge included in tax bill. When the city has effected the removal of the nuisance or has paid for removal thereof, the actual cost thereof shall be certified to the city clerk, who shall cause a special tax bill therefor against the property to be prepared and to be collected by the collector, with other taxes assessed against the property; and the tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be a first lien on the property until paid and shall be prima facie evidence of the recitals therein and of its validity, and no mere clerical error or informality in the same, or in the proceedings leading up to the issuance shall be a defense thereto. Each special tax bill shall be issued by the city clerk and delivered to the collector on or before the first day of June of each year. Such tax bills if not paid when due shall bear interest at the rate of eight (8) per cent per annum. 
(Ord. No. 6957, § 4, 6-3-96)
Chapter 18 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 17; police, Ch. 22; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 29.
State Law reference- Authority to enact police regulations, RSMo 77.570; crimes and punishments, RSMo Ch. 556 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Adoption of misdemeanors under state law. 
    Any act, the commission of which constitutes a misdemeanor or infraction under the laws of the state shall, if committed within the city, constitute a violation of this Code; provided however, that such offense when committed within the city, shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
(Code 1967, § 20-16; Ord. No. 6559, § 1, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 6711, § 1, 7-19-93)
Sec. 18-2. - Fortunetelling, palmistry and related pursuits. 
(a)	Definition. A fortuneteller is any person who, for compensation tells or pretends to foretell the events of one's life, or pretends to foretell future events. 
(b)	Prohibited. The trade or profession of fortunetelling, palmistry or kindred variations thereof shall be and is hereby prohibited within the city limits. 
(Code 1967, § 20-11)
Sec. 18-3. - Sale of cigarettes to minors prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to sell or give, or offer to sell or give, any cigarette or cigarettes, or cigarette paper or wrappers, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Code 1967, § 8-21)
State Law reference- Authority for this section, RSMo 71.740. 
Sec. 18-4. - Handbills, notices-Tacking, posting, painting. 
    No person shall within the city tack or post, paint or stamp any poster, handbill, card, advertisement or notice of any kind whatsoever, except legal notices, upon any wall, door, tree, telephone and light pole, fence or building, without first having obtained the permission in writing of the owner of the same, nor upon any sidewalk. 
(Code 1967, § 20-12)
Sec. 18-5. - Same-Placing in or on vehicle, prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place any handbills upon or in any automobile or other vehicle in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 20-13)
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 29. 
Secs. 18-6-18-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2.
State Law reference- Offenses against the administration of justice, RSMo Ch. 575; offenses affecting government, RSMo Ch. 576.

Sec. 18-16. - Obedience to lawful orders of police required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey or to refuse to comply with the lawful orders and directions of a police officer, given in the course of his duties as such. 
(Code 1967, § 20-17)
Sec. 18-17. - Obstructing process and resisting officer. 
    When any person shall knowingly and willfully obstruct, resist or oppose any officer of the city in serving or executing, or in the attempt to serve or execute, any writ, warrant or process, original or judicial, or in the discharge of any other official duty, such person so offending shall on conviction be adjudged guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1967, § 20-20)
State Law reference- Resisting or interfering with arrest, RSMo 575.150; interference with legal process, RSMo 575.160. 
Sec. 18-18. - False impersonation. A person commits the crime of false impersonation if he: 
(1)	Falsely represents himself to be a public servant with purpose to induce another to submit to his pretended official authority or to rely upon his pretended official acts, and: 
a.	Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b.	Causes another to act in reliance upon his pretended official authority; or
(2)	Falsely represents himself to be a person licensed to practice or engage in any profession for which a license is required by the laws of this state with purpose to induce another to rely upon such representation, and: 
a.	Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b.	Causes another to act in reliance upon such representation.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.120. 
Sec. 18-19. - False reports. 
(a)	A person commits the crime of making a false report if he knowingly:
(1)	Gives false information to a law enforcement officer for the purpose of implicating another person in a crime; or 
(2)	Makes a false report to a law enforcement officer that a crime has occurred or is about to occur; or 
(3)	Makes a false report or causes a false report to be made to a law enforcement officer, security officer, fire department or other organization, official or volunteer, which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property that a fire or other incident calling for an emergency response has occurred; or 
(4)	Makes a false report of a traffic accident to a law enforcement officer.
(b)	It is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) that the actor retracted the false statement or report before the law enforcement officer or any other person took substantial action in reliance thereon. 
(c)	The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction under subsection (b). 
(Code 1967, § 14-15; Ord. No. 6890, § 1, 6-19-95)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.080. 
Sec. 18-20. - Escape. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person lawfully detained or imprisoned in the city prison, or held in legal custody by an officer of this city, to break or escape from such prison or by force or violence to escape, or attempt to escape from such prison or from such officer. 
(Code 1967, § 20-9)
State Law reference- Escape, RSMo 575.195 et seq. 
Sec. 18-21. - Aiding escape. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to assist or attempt to assist any prisoner who is being held in custody or confinement for the purpose of effecting the prisoner's escape from custody or confinement. 
(Code 1967, § 20-20)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.230. 
Sec. 18-22. - Failure to appear; penalty. 
    In addition to the forfeiture of any security which was given or pledged for a person's release, any person who, having been released upon a recognizance or bond pursuant to any provision of law, or who has been issued a summons for a violation of any ordinance of the City of Marshall, or who has been ordered by a judge of the court to personally appear at a certain date and time, and willfully fails to appear before any court or judicial officer as required, shall be guilty of an offense and punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or both, provided that the sentence imposed shall not exceed the maximum fine or maximum period of imprisonment which could be imposed for the offense for which the accused was arrested. 
(Ord. No. 7612, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 7886, § 1, 7-6-09)
Secs. 18-23-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Offenses against the person, RSMo Ch. 565.

Sec. 18-31. - Assault. 
    A person commits the crime of assault if: 
(1)	He attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury to another person; or
(2)	With criminal negligence he causes physical injury to another person by means of a deadly weapon; or 
(3)	He purposely places another person in apprehension of immediate physical injury; or
(4)	He recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave risk of death or serious physical injury to another person; or 
(5)	He knowingly causes physical contact with another person knowing the other person will regard the contact as offensive or provocative. 
(Code 1967, § 20-1)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 565.070. 
Sec. 18-32. - Harassment. 
    A person commits the crime of harassment if for the purpose of frightening or disturbing another person, he: 
(1)	Communicates in writing or by telephone a threat to commit any felony; or
(2)	Makes a telephone call or communicates in writing and uses coarse language offensive to one of average sensibility; or 
(3)	Makes a telephone call anonymously; or
(4)	Makes repeated telephone calls.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 565.090. 
Secs. 18-33-18-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Robbery, arson, burglary and related offenses, RSMo Ch. 569; stealing and related offenses, RSMo Ch. 570.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-44. - Trespass. 
(a)	A person commits the crime of trespass if he knowingly enters unlawfully or knowingly remains unlawfully in a building or inhabitable structure or upon real property. 
(b)	A person does not commit the crime of trespass by entering or remaining upon real property unless the real property is fenced or otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or as to which notice against trespass is given by: 
(1)	Actual communication to the actor; or
(2)	Posting in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders.
(Code 1967, § 20-24.1)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 569.140. 
Sec. 18-45. - Reckless burning or exploding. 
    A person commits the crime of reckless burning or exploding when he knowingly starts a fire or causes an explosion and thereby recklessly damages or destroys a building or an inhabitable structure of another. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 569.060. 
Sec. 18-46. - Negligent burning or exploding. 
    A person commits the crime of negligent burning or exploding when he with criminal negligence causes damage to property of another by fire or explosion. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 560.065. 
Sec. 18-47. - Tampering. 
    A person commits the crime of tampering if he: 
(1)	Tampers with property of another for the purpose of causing substantial inconvenience to that person or to another; or 
(2)	Unlawfully operates or rides in or upon another's automobile, airplane, motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle; or 
(3)	Tampers or makes connection with property of a utility.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 569.090. 
Sec. 18-48. - Property damage. 
    A person commits the crime of property damage if: 
(1)	He knowingly damages property of another; or
(2)	He damages property for the purpose of defrauding an insurer.
(Code 1967, §§ 20-14, 20-15)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 569.120. 
Sec. 18-49. - Altering channel of watercourses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change the natural or legally established channel of any watercourse, without having lawful authority so to do. 
(Code 1967, § 20-28)
State Law reference- Corrupting or diverting water supply, RSMo 577.150. 
Secs. 18-50-18-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STEALING AND RELATED OFFENSES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Stealing and related offenses, RSMo Ch. 570.

Sec. 18-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Adulterated means varying from the standard of composition or quality prescribed by statute or lawfully promulgated administrative regulations of this state lawfully filed, or if none, as set by commercial usage. 
    Appropriate means to take, obtain, use, transfer, conceal or retain possession of. 
    Coercion means a threat, however communicated: 
(1)	To commit any crime; or
(2)	To inflict physical injury in the future on the person threatened or another; or
(3)	To accuse any person of any crime; or
(4)	To expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or
(5)	To harm the credit or business repute of any person; or
(6)	To take or withhold action as a public servant, or to cause a public servant to take or withhold action; or 
(7)	To inflict any other harm which would not benefit the actor. A threat of accusation, lawsuit or other invocation of official action is not coercion if the property sought to be obtained by virtue of such threat was honestly claimed as restitution or indemnification for harm done in the circumstances to which the accusation, exposure, lawsuit or other official action relates, or as compensation for property or lawful service. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of justification as to any threat. 
    Credit device means a writing, number or other device purporting to evidence an undertaking to pay for property or services delivered or rendered to or upon the order of a designated person or bearer. 
    Dealer means a person in the business of buying and selling goods. 
    Deceit means purposely making a representation which is false and which the actor does not believe to be true and upon which the victim relies, as to a matter of fact, law, value, intention or other state of mind. The term "deceit" does not, however, include falsity as to matters having no pecuniary significance, or puffing by statements unlikely to deceive ordinary persons in the group addressed. Deception as to the actor's intention to perform a promise shall not be inferred from the fact alone that he did not subsequently perform the promise. 
    Deprive means: 
(1)	To withhold property from the owner permanently; or
(2)	To restore property only upon payment of reward or other compensation; or
(3)	To use or dispose of property in a manner that makes recovery of the property by the owner unlikely. 
    Mislabeled means varying from the standard of truth or disclosure in labeling prescribed by statute or lawfully promulgated administrative regulations of this state lawfully filed, or if none, as set by commercial usage; or represented as being another person's product, though otherwise accurately labeled as to quality and quantity. 
    Of another property or services is that "of another" if any natural person, corporation, partnership, association, governmental subdivision or instrumentality, other than the actor, has a possessory or proprietary interest therein, except that property shall not be deemed property of another who has only a security interest therein, even if legal title is in the creditor pursuant to a conditional sales contract or other security arrangement. 
    Property means anything of value, whether real or personal, tangible or intangible, in possession or in action, and shall include but not be limited to the evidence of a debt actually executed but not delivered or issued as a valid instrument. 
    Receiving means acquiring possession, control or title or lending on the security of the property. 
    Services includes transportation, telephone, electricity, gas, water, cable television services, or other public service, accommodation in hotels, restaurants or elsewhere, admission to exhibitions and use of vehicles. 
    Writing includes printing, any other method of recording information, money, coins, negotiable instruments, tokens, stamps, seals, credit cards, badges, trademarks and any other symbols of value, right, privilege or identification. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.010. 
Sec. 18-57. - Determination of value. 
    For the purposes of this division, the value of property shall be ascertained as follows: 
(1)	Except as otherwise specified in this section, "value" means the market value of the property at the time and place of the crime, or if such cannot be satisfactorily ascertained, the cost of replacement of the property within a reasonable time after the crime; 
(2)	Whether or not they have been issued or delivered, certain written instruments, not including those having a readily ascertainable market value such as some public and corporate bonds and securities, shall be evaluated as follows: 
a.	The value of an instrument constituting evidence of debt, such as a check, draft or promissory note, shall be deemed the amount due or collectible thereon or thereby, such figure ordinarily being the face amount of the indebtedness less any portion thereof which has been satisfied; 
b.	The value of any other instrument which creates, releases, discharges or otherwise affects any valuable legal right, privilege or obligation shall be deemed the greatest amount of economic loss which the owner of the instrument might reasonably suffer by virtue of the loss of the instrument. 
(3)	When the value of property cannot be satisfactorily ascertained pursuant to the standards set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, its value shall be deemed to be an amount less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.020. 
Sec. 18-58. - Stealing. 
    A person commits the crime of stealing if he appropriates property or services of another under the value of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) with the purpose to deprive him thereof, either without his consent or by means of deceit or coercion. 
(Code 1967, § 20-22)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.030. 
Sec. 18-59. - Aggregation of amounts involved in stealing. 
    Amounts stolen pursuant to one scheme or course of conduct, whether from the same or several owners and whether at the same or different times, constitute a single criminal episode and may be aggregated in determining the grade of the offense. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.050. 
Sec. 18-60. - Lost property. 
(a)	A person who appropriates lost property shall not be deemed to have stolen that property within the meaning of section 18-58 unless such property is found under circumstances which gave the finder knowledge of or means of inquiry as to the true owner. 
(b)	The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of lost property.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.060. 
Sec. 18-61. - Claim of right. 
(a)	A person does not commit an offense under section 18-58 if, at the time of the appropriation, he: 
(1)	Acted in the honest belief that he had the right to do so; or
(2)	Acted in the honest belief that the owner, if present, would have consented to the appropriation. 
(b)	The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of claim of right.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.070. 
Sec. 18-62. - Receiving stolen property. 
(a)	A person commits the crime of receiving stolen property if for the purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest therein, he receives, retains or disposes of property of another under a value of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) knowing that it has been stolen, or believing that it has been stolen. 
(b)	Evidence of the following is admissible in any criminal prosecution under this section to prove the requisite knowledge or belief of the alleged receiver: 
(1)	That he was found in possession or control of other property stolen on separate occasions from two (2) or more persons; 
(2)	That he received other stolen property in another transaction within the year preceding the transaction charged; 
(3)	That he acquired the stolen property for a consideration which he knew was far below its reasonable value. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.080. 
Sec. 18-63. - Issuing a false instrument or certificate. 
    A person commits the crime of issuing a false instrument or certificate when, being authorized by law to take proof or acknowledgment of any instrument which by law may be recorded, or being authorized by law to make or issue official certificates or other official written instruments, he issues such an instrument or certificate, or makes the same with the purpose that it be issued, knowing: 
(1)	That it contains a false statement or false information; or
(2)	That it is wholly or partly blank.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.110. 
Sec. 18-64. - Passing bad checks. 
(a)	Prohibition. A person commits the offense of passing a bad check when, with purpose to defraud, he issues or passes a check or other similar sight order for the payment of money, knowing that it will not be paid by the drawee, or that there is no such drawee. 
(b)	If no account at bank. If the issuer had no account with the drawee or if there was no such drawee at the time the check or order was issued, this fact shall be prima facie evidence of his purpose to defraud and of his knowledge that the check or order would not be paid. 
(c)	Failure to pay upon notice. If the issuer has an account with the drawee, failure to pay the check or order within ten (10) days after notice in writing that it has not been honored because of insufficient funds or credit with the drawee is prima facie evidence of his purpose to defraud and of his knowledge that the check or order would not be paid. 
(d)	Notice. Notice in writing means notice deposited at first class mail in the United States mail and addressed to the issuer at his address as it appears on the dishonored check or to his last known address. 
(e)	Penalty. A person who commits the offense of passing a bad check shall be subject to a maximum penalty of a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or ninety (90) days in jail. 
(f)	Administrative procedures. Any person desiring to file a complaint with the municipal court of Marshall charging a violation of this section, shall have first provided the notice as required by subsection (d) of this section. The individual who wishes to file a complaint under this section shall provide to the municipal court clerk the following: 
(1)	The original check;
(2)	A signed complaint in a form to be prescribed by the municipal court clerk;
(3)	A carbon copy or a photocopy of the notice sent to the alleged passer of the bad check.
(Ord. No. 5876, §§ 1-6, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 6158, § 1, 3-17-86)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.120. 
Sec. 18-65. - Fraudulent use of a credit device. 
    A person commits the crime of fraudulent use of a credit device if he uses a credit device for the purpose of obtaining services or property under the value of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in any thirty (30) day period, knowing that: 
(1)	The device is stolen, fictitious or forged; or
(2)	The device has been revoked or canceled; or
(3)	For any other reason his use of the device is unauthorized.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.130. 
Sec. 18-66. - Deceptive business practice. 
    A person commits the crime of deceptive business practice if in the course of engaging in a business, occupation or profession, he recklessly: 
(1)	Uses or possesses for use a false weight or measure, or any other device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity; or 
(2)	Sells, offers or exposes for sale, or delivers less than the represented quantity of any commodity or service; or 
(3)	Takes or attempts to take more than the represented quantity of any commodity or service when as buyer he furnishes the weight or measure; or 
(4)	Sells, offers or exposes for sale adulterated or mislabeled commodities; or
(5)	Makes a false or misleading written statement for the purpose of obtaining property or credit. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.140. 
Sec. 18-67. - Commercial bribery. 
    A person commits the crime of commercial bribery: 
(1)	If he solicits, accepts or agrees to accept any benefit as consideration for knowingly violating or agreeing to violate a duty of fidelity to which he is subject as: 
a.	Agent or employee of another;
b.	Trustee, guardian or other fiduciary;
c.	Lawyer, physician, accountant, appraiser or other professional adviser or informant;
d.	Officer, director, partner, manager or other participant in the direction of the affairs of an incorporated or unincorporated association; or 
e.	Arbitrator or other purportedly disinterested adjudicator or referee.
(2)	If as a person who holds himself out to the public as being engaged in the business of making disinterested selection, appraisal or criticism of commodities or services, he solicits, accepts or agrees to accept any benefit to influence his selection, appraisal or criticism; 
(3)	If he confers or offers or agrees to confer any benefit the acceptance of which would be criminal under subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.150. 
Sec. 18-68. - False advertising. 
    A person commits the crime of false advertising if, in connection with the promotion of the sale of or to increase the consumption of, property or services, he recklessly makes or causes to be made a false or misleading statement in any advertisement addressed to the public or to a substantial number of persons. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.160. 
Sec. 18-69. - Bait advertising. 
    A person commits the crime of bait advertising if he advertises in any manner the sale of property or services with the purpose not to sell or provide the property or services: 
(1)	At the price which he offered them; or
(2)	In a quantity sufficient to meet the reasonably expected public demand, unless the quantity is specifically stated in the advertisement; or 
(3)	At all.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.170. 
Secs. 18-70-18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 26.
State Law reference- Offenses against public order, RSMo Ch. 574.

Sec. 18-81. - Peace disturbance-Definitions. 
    For the purposes of sections 18-82 and 18-83: 
(1)	Property of another means any property in which the actor does not have a possessory interest. 
(2)	Private property means any place which at the time is not open to the public. It includes property which is owned publicly or privately. 
(3)	Public place means any place which at the time is open to the public. It includes property which is owned publicly or privately. 
(4)	If a building or structure is divided into separately occupied units, such units are separate premises. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 574.030. 
Sec. 18-82. - Same-Generally. 
    A person commits the crime of peace disturbance if: 
(1)	He unreasonably and knowingly causes alarm to another person or persons not physically on the same premises by: 
a.	Loud and unusual noise; or
b.	Loud and abusive language; or
c.	Threatening to commit a crime against any person; or
d.	Fighting; or
e.	Creating a noxious and offensive odor.
(2)	He is in a public place or on private property of another without consent and unreasonably and knowingly causes alarm to another person by: 
a.	Loud and unusual noise; or
b.	Loud and abusive language; or
c.	Threatening to commit a crime against any person; or
d.	Fighting; or
e.	Creating a noxious and offensive odor.
(3)	He is in a public place or on private property of another without consent and purposely causes inconvenience to another person or persons by unreasonably and physically obstructing: 
a.	Vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
b.	The free ingress or egress to or from public or private places.
(Code 1967, §§ 20-5-20-7.1)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 574.010. 
Sec. 18-83. - Same-Private. 
    A person commits the crime of private peace disturbance if he is on private property and unreasonably and purposely causes alarm to another person on the same premises by: 
(1)	Threatening to commit a crime against any person; or
(2)	Fighting.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 574.020. 
Sec. 18-84. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of disorderly conduct or of any conduct tending toward a breach of the peace. The causing or making of any unnecessary loud noise or shouting or yelling shall be considered disorderly conduct. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent, tumultuous, offensive or disorderly conduct; by threatening, traducing, quarreling, challenging to fight or fighting; or by using obscene, offensive, profane or unseemly language to the annoyance, disturbance or vexation of another. 
(Code 1967, § 20-25; Ord. No. 5901, § 2, 8-15-83)
Sec. 18-85. - Rioting. 
    A person commits the crime of rioting if he knowingly assembles with six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons to violate any of the criminal laws of this state or of the United States with force or violence, and thereafter, while still so assembled, does violate any of such laws with force or violence. 
(Code 1967, § 20-21)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 574.050. 
Sec. 18-86. - Refusal to disperse. 
    A person commits the crime of refusal to disperse if, being present at the scene of a riot, he knowingly fails or refuses to obey the lawful command of a law enforcement officer to depart from the scene of such riot. 
(Code 1967, § 20-26; Ord. No. 6057, § 20, 2-4-85)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 574.060. 
Sec. 18-87. - Curfew for minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of seventeen (17) years to wander or lounge or loaf or loiter or play in, upon or about any public street, sidewalk, alley, vacant lot, public square or other public place within the city, between the hours of 12:30 a.m. to 5:30 a.m., and it shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian of any person under the age of seventeen (17) years knowingly to suffer or permit any such person to wander or lounge or loaf or loiter or play in, upon or about any public street, sidewalk, alley, vacant lot, public square or other public place within the city between the hours of 12:30 a.m. to 5:30 a.m. 
(Code 1967, § 20-2; Ord. No. 6422, § 1, 8-21-89)
Secs. 18-88-18-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Weapons offenses, RSMo Ch. 571; public safety offenses, RSMo Ch. 577.

Sec. 18-101. - Throwing missiles. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to throw any stone, stick or other missile from any public highway into any private enclosure, or against any fence or building. 
(Code 1967, §§ 20-23, 20-24)
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously throw any stone, stick or anything into or at any car, locomotive or motor vehicle while the same is in motion. 
Sec. 18-102. - Unlawful use of weapons; adoption of state statute. 
    Section 571.030 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri, commonly known as "Unlawful Use of Weapons-Exceptions-Penalties," is hereby adopted as and for the unlawful use of a weapons ordinance of this city with the like effect as if recited at length herein, with the exception of the following portions of said Statute, which are not so adopted and which are hereby expressly deleted: Paragraphs 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12. 
(Code 1967, § 20-29; Ord. No. 8103, § 1, 3-18-13)
Sec. 18-103. - Discharge of firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any firearms within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 20-30)
State Law reference- Shooting offenses, RSMo 571.030 et seq. 
Sec. 18-104. - Abandonment of airtight or semiairtight containers. 
(a)	A person commits the crime of abandonment of airtight icebox if he abandons, discards or knowingly permits to remain on premises under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other airtight or semiairtight container which has a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more and an opening of fifty (50) square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without rendering such equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. 
(b)	Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semiairtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman. 
(c)	The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue under subsection (b) of this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 577.100. 
Sec. 18-105. - Prohibited noise. 
(a)	No person shall play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated, any radio, tape recorder, cassette player or other machine or device for reproducing sound, if it is located in or on any of the following: 
(1)	Any public property, including any public street, highway, building, sidewalk, park or thoroughfare; or 
(2)	Any motor vehicle on a public street, highway or public space;
and if the sound generated is audible at a distance of 100 feet from the device producing the sound. 
(b)	Possession by a person or persons of any of the machines or devices enumerated in subsection (a) shall be prima facie evidence that such person operates, or those persons operate, the machine or device. 
(Ord. No. 7103, § 1, 3-16-98)
Sec. 18-106. - Enforcement of section 18-105. 
(a)	Powers of arrest or citation. Any authorized police officer shall issue a citation for any violation under section 18-105, except they may arrest for instances when: 
(1)	The alleged violator refuses to provide the officer with such person's name and address and any proof thereof as may be reasonably available to the alleged violator. 
(2)	When the alleged violator refuses to cease such person's illegal activity after being issued a citation. 
(b)	Citation. 
(1)	There shall be provided for use by authorized police officers a form of citation for use in citing violators of section 18-105 which does not mandate physical arrest of such violators. The form and content of such citation shall be adopted or prescribed by the presiding judge of the Municipal Court and shall be printed on a form commensurate with the form of other citations used in modern methods of arrest, so designed to include all necessary information to make the same valid within the laws and regulations of the State of Missouri and the City of Marshall. 
(2)	In every case when a citation is issued, a copy of the same shall be given to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 7103, § 1, 3-16-98)
Secs. 18-107-18-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Sexual offenses, RSMo Ch. 566; prostitution, RSMo Ch. 567; gambling, RSMo Ch. 572; pornography and related offenses, RSMo Ch. 573.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-116. - Indecent exposure. 
    A person commits the crime of indecent exposure if he knowingly exposes his genitals under circumstances in which he knows that his conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm. 
(Code 1967, §§ 20-55, 20-59)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 566.130. 
Secs. 18-117-18-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PORNOGRAPHY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo Ch. 573.

Sec. 18-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Displays publicly means exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street, highway or public sidewalk, or from the property of others. 
    Explicit sexual material means any pictorial or three (3) dimensional material depicting human masturbation, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual intercourse, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, sadomasochistic abuse, or emphasizing the depiction of post-pubertal human genitals; provided, however, that works of art or of anthropological significance shall not be deemed to be within the foregoing definition. 
    Furnish means to issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or otherwise provide. 
    Material means anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, or pictorial representation or any statute or other figure, or any recording or transcription, or any mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or anything which is or may be used as a means of communication. "Material" includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates and other latent representational objects. 
    Minor means any person under the age of eighteen (18). 
    Nudity means the showing of post-pubertal human genitals or pubic area, with less than a fully opaque covering. 
    Performance means any play, motion picture film, dance or exhibition performed before an audience. 
    Pornographic, any material or performance is "pornographic" if, considered as a whole, applying contemporary community standards: 
(1)	Its predominant appeal is to prurient interest in sex; and
(2)	It depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive way; and
(3)	It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
In determining whether any material or performance is pornographic, it shall be judged with reference to its impact upon ordinary adults. 
    Pornographic for minors, any material or performance is "pornographic for minors" if it is primarily devoted to description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse and: 
(1)	Its predominant appeal is to prurient interest in sex; and
(2)	It is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors; and 
(3)	It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for minors.
    Promote means to manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer, transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same. 
    Sadomasochistic abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification. 
    Sexual conduct means acts of human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse; sexual intercourse; or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or the breast of a female in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
    Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
    Wholesale promote means to manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer, transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate or to offer or agree to do the same for purposes of resale. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 573.010. 
Sec. 18-122. - Promoting pornography. 
    A person commits the crime of promoting pornography if, knowing its content and character, he: 
(1)	Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any pornographic material for pecuniary gain; or 
(2)	Produces, presents, directs or participates in any pornographic performance for pecuniary gain. 
(Code 1967, §§ 20-56-20-58)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 573.030. 
Sec. 18-123. - Furnishing pornographic materials to minors. 
    A person commits the crime of furnishing pornographic material to minors if, knowing its content and character, he: 
(1)	Furnishes any material pornographic for minors, knowing that the person to whom it is furnished is a minor or acting in reckless disregard of the likelihood that such person is a minor; or 
(2)	Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance pornographic for minors that is furnished to a minor knowing that any person viewing such performance is a minor or acting in reckless disregard of the likelihood that a minor is viewing the performance. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 573.040. 
Sec. 18-124. - Evidence in pornography cases. 
(a)	In any prosecution under this division evidence shall be admissible to show:
(1)	What the predominant appeal of the material or performance would be for ordinary adults or minors; 
(2)	The literary, artistic, political or scientific value of the material or performance;
(3)	The degree of public acceptance in this state and in the local community;
(4)	The appeal to prurient interest in advertising or other promotion of the material or performance; 
(5)	The purpose of the author, creator, promoter, furnisher or publisher of the material or performance. 
(b)	Testimony of the author, creator, promoter, furnisher, publisher or expert testimony, relating to factors entering into the determination of the issues of pornography, shall be admissible. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 573.050. 
Sec. 18-125. - Public display of explicit sexual material. 
    A person commits the crime of public display of explicit sexual material if he knowingly: 
(1)	Displays publicly explicit sexual material; or
(2)	Fails to take prompt action to remove such a display from property in his possession after learning of its existence. 
(Code 1967, §§ 20-56-20-58)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 573.060. 
Sec. 18-126. - Injunctions and declaratory judgments. 
(a)	Whenever material or a performance is being or is about to be promoted, furnished or displayed in violation of section 18-122, 18-123 or 18-125, a civil action may be instituted in the circuit court by the prosecuting or circuit attorney or by the city attorney against any person violating or about to violate those sections in order to obtain a declaration that the promotion, furnishing or display of such material or performance is prohibited. Such an action may also seek an injunction appropriately restraining promotion, furnishing or display. 
(b)	Such an action may be brought only in the circuit court of the county in which any such person resides, or where the promotion, furnishing or display is taking place or is about to take place. 
(c)	Any promoter, furnisher or displayer of, or a person who is about to be a promoter, furnisher or displayer of, the material or performance involved may intervene as of right as a party defendant in the proceedings. 
(d)	The trial court and the appellate court shall give expedited consideration to actions and appeals brought under this section. The defendant shall be entitled to a trial of the issues within one day after joinder of issue and a decision shall be rendered by the court within two (2) days of the conclusion of the trial. No restraining order or injunction of any kind shall be issued restraining the promotion, furnishing or display of any material or performance without a prior adversary hearing before the court. 
(e)	A final declaration obtained pursuant to this section may be used to form the basis for an injunction and for no other purpose. 
(f)	All laws regulating the procedure for obtaining declaratory judgments or injunctions which are inconsistent with the provisions of this section shall be inapplicable to proceedings brought pursuant to this section. There shall be no right to jury trial in any proceedings under this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 573.070. 
Secs. 18-127-18-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROSTITUTION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo Ch. 567.

Sec. 18-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Patronizing prostitution, a person "patronizes prostitution" if: 
(1)	Pursuant to a prior understanding, he gives something of value to another person as compensation for that person or a third person having engaged in sexual conduct with him or with another; or 
(2)	He gives or agrees to give something of value to another person on an understanding that in return therefor that person or a third person will engage in sexual conduct with him or with another; or 
(3)	He solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual conduct with him or with another, or to secure a third person to engage in sexual conduct with him or with another, in return for something of value. 
    Promoting prostitution, a person "promotes prostitution" if, acting other than as a prostitute or a patron of a prostitute, he knowingly: 
(1)	Causes or aids a person to commit or engage in prostitution; or
(2)	Procures or solicits patrons for prostitution; or
(3)	Provides persons or premises for prostitution purposes; or
(4)	Operates or assists in the operation of a house of prostitution or a prostitution enterprise; or 
(5)	Accepts or receives or agrees to accept or receive something of value pursuant to an agreement or understanding with any person whereby he participates or is to participate in proceeds of prostitution activity; or 
(6)	Engages in any conduct designed to institute, aid or facilitate an act or enterprise of prostitution. 
    Prostitution, a person commits "prostitution" if he engages or offers or agrees to engage in sexual conduct with another person in return for something of value to be received by the person or by a third person. 
    Sexual conduct occurs when there is: 
(1)	"Sexual intercourse" which means any penetration, however slight, of the female sex organ by the male sex organ, whether or not an emission results; or 
(2)	"Deviate sexual intercourse" which means any sexual act involving the genitals of one person and the mouth, tongue or anus of another person; or 
(3)	"Sexual contact" which means any touching, manual or otherwise, of the anus or genitals of one person by another, done for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire of either party. 
    Something of value means any money or property, or any token, object or article exchangeable for money or property. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 567.010. 
Sec. 18-132. - Prostitution. 
    A person commits the crime of prostitution if he performs an act of prostitution. 
(Code 1967, §§ 20-60, 20-66)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 567.020. 
Sec. 18-133. - Patronizing prostitution. 
    A person commits the crime of patronizing prostitution if he patronizes prostitution. 
(Code 1967, § 20-65)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 567.030. 
Sec. 18-134. - Prostitution and patronizing prostitution; sex of parties no defense, when. 
    In any prosecution for prostitution or patronizing a prostitute, the sex of the two (2) parties or prospective parties to the sexual conduct engaged in, contemplated or solicited is immaterial, and it is no defense that: 
(1)	Both persons were of the same sex; or
(2)	The person who received, agreed to receive or solicited something of value was a male and the person who gave or agreed or offered to give something of value was a female. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 567.040. 
Sec. 18-135. - Prostitution houses deemed public nuisances. 
(a)	Any room, building or other structure regularly used for sexual contact for pay as defined in section 18-131 or any unlawful prostitution activity prohibited by this division is a public nuisance. 
(b)	The attorney general, circuit attorney or prosecuting attorney may, in addition to all criminal sanctions, prosecute a suit in equity to enjoin the nuisance. If the court finds that the owner of the room, building or structure knew or had reason to believe done for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire of either party. 
(c)	All persons, including owners, lessees, officers, agents, inmates or employees, aiding or facilitating such a nuisance may be made defendants in any suit to enjoin the nuisance, and they may be enjoined from engaging in any sexual contact for pay or unlawful prostitution activity anywhere within the jurisdiction of the court. 
(d)	Appeals shall be allowed from the judgment of the court as in other civil actions.
(Code 1967, § § 20-3, 204, 20-62, 20-63)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 567.080. 
Chapter 19 - PARKS, RECREATION AND CITY PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch, 26; parks and playgrounds in subdivisions, § 27-53.
State Law reference- Authority for parks and recreation in cities, RSMo Ch. 90.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - City park description. 
    The tract of land conveyed to the city in sections 12 and 13, township 50, range 21, Saline County, Missouri, by Ralph H. Duggins and Juanita Beth Duggins dated March 28, 1933, and recorded in Book 237 at page 340, Recorder's Office, and other land acquired since then for the purpose, shall be and the same is hereby designated as the city park of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 22-1)
State Law reference- Authority of city to acquire land for use as public park, RSMo 90.550. 
Sec. 19-2. - "City property" defined. 
    As defined in this article, "city property" shall include any property owned, operated or leased by the city and shall include, but not be limited to, all of the city park property, dog pound area, landfill areas, land leased or used for farm property and airport property in which the city has an interest as either lessor, lessee or owner. 
(Code 1967, § 22-12)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-3. - Police jurisdiction to extend to city park. 
    All provisions of this Code insofar as applicable shall be in full force and effect upon the premises comprising the city park, in like manner and effect as such provisions are within the corporate limits of the city. Any violation of such provisions shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the municipal court, and the members of the police force shall have the same powers and duties with respect to the enforcement of all ordinances of the city upon the premises comprising the city park as the officers have within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 22-2)
Sec. 19-4. - Limitations on entering and remaining in the city park. 
    No person shall enter into the municipally owned or leased public park in the city which is known as Indian Foothills Park, at any place other than through the gates provided for public use; and no person shall enter into or remain in the park at any time after the gates thereto have been closed; provided that nothing in this section shall pertain to any officer or employee of the city while the officer or employee is representing or engaging in any sort of endeavor for the city. 
(Code 1967, § 22-3)
Sec. 19-5. - Alcoholic beverages in city park. 
(a)	Consumption. No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage in any Indian Foothills Park parking area. No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage in or within fifty (50) feet of the following areas: 
(1)	Lyon's Bowl;
(2)	Osage Field;
(3)	Basketball courts;
(4)	Tennis courts;
(5)	Travis Guthrey Playground;
(6)	Swimming pool;
(7)	Lion's Club shelter house;
(8)	Lakeview shelter house;
(9)	Golden age shelter house;
(10)	Hill top shelter house.
(b)	Possession; exception. No person shall have in his possession in Indian Foothills Park in the city any alcoholic beverage, except that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages in the park in areas not referred to in subsection (a) above or the possessing of any alcoholic beverage in an automobile operating on, over or along the roads and driveways of the park. 
(Code 1967, § 22-4; Ord. No. 6264, § 1, 6-15-87)
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 4. 
Sec. 19-6. - Operation of motor vehicles in city park. 
(a)	Every person operating a motor vehicle on and over the roadways of the city park, shall drive the same in a careful and prudent manner and at a rate of speed so as not to endanger the property or the life and limb of any person; and every person operating a motor vehicle on and over the roadways of the city park, shall operate the vehicle at a rate of speed not to exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(b)	No person operating a motorcycle, motorbike or any other motor-propelled vehicle over and upon the roadways of the city park shall operate the motor vehicle at a speed exceeding fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(Code 1967, § 22-6)
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 29. 
Sec. 19-6.1. - Regulation of vehicles; license required; exceptions. 
(a)	Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
(1)	Vehicle means every device upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(2)	Operate means to ride in or on and control the operation of a vehicle. 
(3)	Operator means any person who operates or is in actual physical or constructive control of a vehicle. 
(4)	Roadway means that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
(b)	Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park a vehicle upon city-owned property which is not a roadway designed for vehicular travel or which is not specifically designated for parking. 
(c)	Licensed operators. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not in possession of a valid driver's license to operate a vehicle upon the roadways of Indian Foothills Park. 
(d)	Exception. This section shall not apply to vehicles operated pursuant to expressed written authority granted by the city or its authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 6256, §§ 1-4, 5-18-87)
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6256, §§ 1-4, adopted May 18, 1987, being not expressly amendatory of this Code, has been codified as § 19-6.1 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 19-7. - Use of city-owned property by individuals or groups using electric amplification equipment. 
    The use of city-owned property by individuals or groups using electric amplification is hereby absolutely prohibited unless the persons or groups desiring to use amplification equipment have obtained prior written permission from the park superintendent or his designated representative; and in any event, no person or group shall play or cause to be played on any city-owned property, whether electrically amplified or not, any instrument, instruments or devices so as to cause a disturbance to residents in the vicinity of city-owned property or to other users of city-owned property. 
(Code 1967, § 22-10)
Sec. 19-8. - Responsibility of groups using parks or other city-owned property; violation of article to bar use of property; notice, hearing. 
(a)	Any organized groups of persons who have been heretofore or who shall hereafter be authorized to use city-owned property in the city park area or on any other city-owned property for recreational purposes, for fund-raising purposes, for family entertainment, or for any other authorized purposes shall be responsible for the group activities and if any of the group shall permit or allow any violation of this article by the members of their group, the group shall be subject to being permanently barred from use of the park privileges or from the use of any other city-owned property for any type of recreational activity. 
(b)	Before depriving the group of any further use of city-owned property, such groups accused of violation of any of these provisions, shall be notified of such violation by the city clerk within ten (10) days from such violation and shall be granted a hearing in connection with the accusations, the hearing to be conducted by the city council, and the determination by the city council shall be binding on such groups. The decision of the city council shall be reviewed from time to time and may be modified or amended. 
(Code 1967, § 22-11)
Sec. 19-9. - Permit required for gatherings or groups of fifty (50) or more persons in city parks. 
(a)	Permit requirement. No group, company, society or organization, consisting of fifty (50) or more individuals, shall use public parks owned or operated by the City of Marshall Parks and Recreation Department for any purpose without first obtaining a permit from the parks and recreation department. A person seeking issuance of a permit shall file an application with the parks and recreation department. The application must state: 
(1)	The name and address of the person applying for the permit;
(2)	The name and address of the person, group, company, society or organization sponsoring the activity; 
(3)	The day and hours for which the permit is desired;
(4)	The purpose and an estimate of the anticipated attendance; and
(5)	Any other information which the parks and recreation department shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued hereunder or whether additional police protection may be required. 
(b)	Issuance of permit. The parks and recreation department shall issue a permit when it is found: 
(1)	That the proposed activity or use of the park will not interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park; 
(2)	That the proposed activity and use will not interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation; 
(3)	That the proposed activity or use is not anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; 
(4)	That the proposed activity will not entail excessive expense or excessive utilization of police by the city; and 
(5)	That the activity will not interfere with activities already planned for the park.
(c)	Effect of permit. A permittee shall be bound by all parks and recreation department rules and all applicable ordinances as though the same were inserted in said permits. 
(d)	Exhibiting permits. No person shall fail to produce and exhibit any permit he or she claims to have upon request of any law enforcement officer or any authorized park department employee who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(e)	Limitation on park use. A permittee shall not continue activities or uses for which a permit has been granted between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(f)	Fee required. The fee for a permit shall be as established by a resolution of the Marshall Parks and Recreation Department's Park Board, and shall be in an amount to offset the additional expense of providing the permit. In addition to the fee described in this paragraph (f), where the safety and protection of the city may be impacted by the policing of any such activity, the director of the parks and recreation department, in consultation with the chief of police, shall require an additional fee equal to the direct cost to the city for providing police protection for the permitted activity. 
(g)	Procedural standards. The parks and recreation department shall issue permits in the priority which applications are received. Persons seeking to obtain such a permit must, at least two (2) weeks prior to the planned use of park facilities, submit an application to the parks and recreation department. Such permits shall be issued or denied within five (5) days of submission of a completed application, unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time. 
(h)	Liability. The person, group, company, society or organization to which a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage, or injury sustained by any person, or park or city property as a result of the activity for which the permit is issued. 
(i)	Permit revocation. The parks and recreation department shall have the authority to revoke a permit if ordinances, rules or regulations are violated by the permittee, or when such action is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public, or upon good cause shown. 
(j)	Penalty. Any person who shall violate, fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions, regulations or requirements of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 8011, § 1, 9-6-11)
Secs. 19-10-19-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-311 et seq.
State Law reference- Park board, RSMo 90.520 et seq.

Sec. 19-21. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a board of directors to be known as the park board. 
(Code 1967, § 22-20)
State Law reference- Authority to establish a park board, RSMo 90.520. 
Sec. 19-22. - Membership, qualifications. 
    The park board shall consist of nine (9) citizens who shall reside in the city and who shall not be members of the city government. 
(Code 1967, § 22-21)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 90.520. 
Sec. 19-23. - Appointment, term. 
    The mayor shall before the first day of June of each year appoint three (3) members of the park board who shall hold office for a term of three (3) years and until their successors are appointed. 
(Code 1967, § 22-22)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 90.530. 
Sec. 19-24. - Compensation. 
    The members of the park board shall receive no compensation for the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1967, § 22-24)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo. 90.540. 
Sec. 19-25. - Vacancies. 
    All vacancies on the park board shall be reported to the city council and thereafter the mayor shall appoint a qualified citizen to fill such vacancy. 
(Code 1967, § 22-23)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo. 90.540. 
Sec. 19-26. - Removal from office. 
    The mayor may remove from office any member of the park board for misconduct or neglect of duty. 
(Code 1967, § 22-25)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo. 90.530. 
Sec. 19-27. - Organization. 
    The park board shall annually elect from its members a president and such other officers as it deems necessary. Such organizational meeting for the purpose of electing such officers shall take place at the first meeting after the three (3) annually appointed members, as provided in section 19-23 take office. 
(Code 1967, § 22-26)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo. 90.550. 
Sec. 19-28. - Powers and duties. 
(a)	Rules, regulations. The park board shall make and adopt such by-laws, rules and regulations for their own guidance and for the government of the park as may be expedient. 
(b)	Supervision, control of park. The park board shall have the exclusive control of the supervision, improvement, care and custody of the park. 
(c)	Expenditures. The park board shall have exclusive control of expenditures of all moneys collected to the credit of the park fund. 
(Code 1967, § 22-27)
State Law reference- Powers of park board, RSMo. 90.550. 
Sec. 19-29. - Deposit of funds; method of expenditures. 
    All moneys received for the park shall be deposited in the city treasury to the credit of the park fund and shall be kept separate and apart from the moneys of the city. All moneys expended shall be drawn upon by the proper officers of the city upon the properly authenticated vouchers of the park board. 
(Code 1967, § 22-28)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo. 90.550. 
Sec. 19-30. - Annual report required. 
    The park board shall make, on or before the second Monday in June of each year a report to the city council, containing such information as the city council shall require. 
(Code 1967, § 22-29)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo. 90.560. 
Secs. 19-31-19-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARK BOARD ADVISORY COUNCIL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-311 et seq.

Sec. 19-42. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a consulting group to be known as the park board advisory council. 
(Ord. No. 5708, § 1(22-31), 7-1-81)
Sec. 19-43. - Membership. 
    The members of the park board advisory council shall be appointed for a one-year term by the mayor and shall consist of the president of the senior class of Marshall High School, the president of the student body of Missouri Valley College and either the Chairman of the Board of Education or the Superintendent of Schools of the Marshall School District. 
(Ord. No. 5708, § 1(22-32), 7-1-81)
Sec. 19-44. - Duties. 
    The park board advisory council shall serve as an advisory group to the park board concerning issues relevant to the development of park facilities and implementation of recreational programs within the city. Members of the park board advisory council shall have no vote on the park board and shall be required to attend park board meetings only when so requested by the president of the park board. 
(Ord. No. 5708, § 1(22-33), 7-1-81)
Secs. 19-45-19-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TREES AND SHRUBS IN PUBLIC AREAS 

Sec. 19-51. - Tree board. 
(a)	Establishment. There is hereby established a Tree Board for the City of Marshall, Missouri. The Tree Board shall be composed of three (3) members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Each member shall be a resident or employee of the City of Marshall, Missouri and shall serve without compensation. 
(b)	Term of office. The term of office of each City Tree Board member shall be three years. The initial appointments shall be so staggered that the terms of each member shall expire in different years. 
(c)	Duties and responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the City Tree Board to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and administer written plans (annual and long range) for the care, replacement, maintenance, and removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan shall be presented annually to the City Council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive City Tree Plan for the City of Marshall, Missouri. The City Tree Board, when requested by the City Council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question relating to trees. 
(d)	Operation. The Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 7093, §§ 1-4, 1-5-98)
Sec. 19-52. - Street tree species to be planted. 
    The City of Marshall, Missouri shall maintain an extensive list of recommended trees for planting in public areas. The purpose of this listing will be to maintain diversity in the total tree population. This list shall be available to residents of the City upon request to aid in the selection of trees for private and public properties. The list of recommended trees shall be updated periodically to reflect new developments or species that will affect the population of the community forest. 
(Ord. No. 7093, § 5, 1-5-98)
Sec. 19-53. - Distances and clearances for planting. 
    Street trees shall be planted no closer than three (3) feet from a sidewalk, driveway or street. No street tree shall be planted closer than thirty-five (35) feet from any street corner, measured from the point of the nearest intersection of curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten (10) feet from any fire hydrant. Every effort will be made to coordinate with the Municipal Utilities when planting street trees within twenty (20) feet of any point on a line on the ground immediately below any overhead utility wires. 
(Ord. No. 7093, § 6, 1-5-98)
Chapter 20 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- License tax for hawkers and peddlers, § 28-24(35); license tax for solicitor, § 28-24(78).
State Law reference- Authority to license and regulate hawkers and peddlers, RSMo 94.110; itinerant vendors generally, RSMo 150.380 et seq.; peddlers generally, RSMo 150.470 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall be construed to have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
    Canvasser means one who goes about from place to place, and from house to house, taking, or attempting to take, orders for the sale or purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, extermination services or personal property of any nature whatsoever. 
    Hawker or peddler means a small retail dealer who carries his merchandise with him, traveling from place to place and from house to house, exposing his goods for sale and selling them. 
    Transient merchant shall include all persons who engage in a temporary, or transient business in the city, either in one locality, or in traveling from place to place within the city, who buy or sell goods, wares and merchandise, whether or not the persons, for the purpose of carrying on the business, hire, lease or occupy any building, structure, room, space, place, vacant lot, railroad boxcar, boat, vessel or vehicle of any kind, for the exhibition and sale or purchase of goods, wares and merchandise. 
(Code 1967, § 18-146; Ord. No. 5650, § 1, 12-3-80)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- "Peddler" defined, RSMo 150.470; "itinerant vendor" defined, RSMo 150.380. 
Sec. 20-2. - Exceptions to chapter provisions. 
    The terms of this chapter shall not be held to include persons selling for bona fide wholesale establishments to retail dealers in the city, nor to the acts of bona fide local retail merchants of the city or their employees in delivering goods so ordered by their customers, nor to farmers, or truck gardeners, who offer for sale, or sell, or who peddle from house to house or in the markets, vegetables, butter, eggs or other farm or garden products produced and raised by the farmer or truck gardener from lands occupied and cultivated by him within this state. 
(Code 1967, § 18-147)
Sec. 20-3. - Unlawful to sell goods on public streets, avenues, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares and merchandise from any stand, wagon, truck or other vehicle or place, within or on any of the public streets, avenues or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1967, §§ 18-154, 18-155)
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 20-4. - Selling near public square prohibited. 
    No license shall be construed to authorize any peddler to hawk or peddle his wares on or within one block of the public square. 
(Code 1967, § 18-156)
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 20-5. - Unlawful to enter private premises under certain conditions. 
    The practice of going in and upon a private residence in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise, under false pretenses, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or personal service, and for disposing of and peddling or hawking the same; or remaining on private residences or on the premises thereof after the owner or occupant shall request any peddlers, hawkers or transient merchants to leave; or going in and upon the private residences, by a solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor of merchandise, for any such purposes, when the owner or occupant thereof has displayed a "No Soliciting" sign on the premises, is declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such. 
(Code 1967, § 18-157)
Secs. 20-6-20-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational license taxes generally, § 28-11 et seq.

Sec. 20-16. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful within the city for any person to engage in, or carry on, the business of transient merchant, hawker, peddler or canvasser, without first obtaining a license to carry on the business in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 18-148)
State Law reference- Itinerant vendor's license required, RSMo 150.390; peddler's license required, RSMo 150.480. 
Sec. 20-17. - Application. 
    Any person wishing to engage in business as a transient merchant, hawker, peddler or canvasser, within the city shall make application to the city clerk on forms to be provided by the city, setting forth accurately and in detail the nature and kind of business, an inventory of the goods, wares and merchandise to be sold, the place in which the business is to be conducted, and complete identity as to owners and operators of the business, and shall make payment of the license fees as provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 18-149)
Sec. 20-18. - Fees. 
    Transient merchants, peddlers operating with motor vehicles, push cart or by foot shall pay the license fees as are prescribed in sections 28-24(35) and 28-24(78). 
(Code 1967, § 18-151)
State Law reference- Itinerant merchant's license fees, RSMo 150.390(2); peddler's license fees, RSMo 150.500; authority of city to levy a license fee, RSMo 94.110. 
Sec. 20-19. - Investigation; issuance. 
    The license application shall be thoroughly investigated by the city clerk, who thereafter shall make personal inspection of the goods, wares and merchandise to be sold, and certify to the facts contained in the application, together with his recommendation to the city council for the approval or disapproval of the license, and, if approved by the city council, the city clerk shall be authorized to issue the license in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 18-150)
Sec. 20-20. - Surety bond. 
    Every company, corporation or individual represented by one or more individual transient merchants, hawkers, peddlers or canvassers operating within the city in addition to the license fee herein specified shall deposit with the city clerk, a cash deposit or surety bond in the sum of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or a certificate of the same on deposit with the state. The bond shall be executed by a surety company holding a certificate of the insurance commissioner of the state, and authorized to do business in the state, conditioned upon the faithful compliance with the terms and requirements of this article, and also conditioned to indemnify or reimburse any purchaser of goods, wares or merchandise in a sum equal to at least the amount of any payment or payments the purchaser may have been induced to make through misrepresentation as to the kind, quality or value of the goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Code 1967, § 18-152)
State Law reference- Deposit by itinerant vendor required, RSMo 150.390(2). 
Sec. 20-21. - Possession of license required. 
    It shall be the duty of every person licensed under this article to have with him while engaged in the business, the license received by him from the city. 
(Code 1967, § 18-153)
Chapter 21 - PHOTOGRAPHERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- License tax for photographers, § 28-24(64).

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Defined. 
    The term "photographer" as used in this chapter, shall mean any person engaged in the business of taking photographs either in a studio or upon the streets, whether the photographer be a resident or nonresident of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 18-168)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-2. - Exemptions for chapter. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to amateur photographers taking pictures not for pay, or to persons engaged solely in the business of photographing persons, objects or scenes for news agencies, or for scientific, educational, fact-finding or entertainment purposes. 
(Code 1967, § 18-169)
Secs. 21-3-21-15. - Reserved. 
    ARTICLE II. LICENSE [2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational license taxes generally, § 28-11 et seq.
State Law reference- Authority to license photographers, RSMo 94.110.

Sec. 21-16. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of photographer within the city limits without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 18-170)
Sec. 21-17. - Application; fee. 
    All applicants for license as a photographer shall make application therefor to the city clerk, first having paid to the city collector the license fee prescribed in section 28-24(64). 
(Code 1967, § 18-171)
Sec. 21-18. - Display, exhibit of license. 
    The license issued to a photographer shall be prominently displayed in the studio; if issued to an itinerant photographer or solicitor it shall at all times be carried by them while engaged in such business activity, and shall be displayed on the demand of any prospective customer or on demand of a police officer of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 18-172)
Chapter 22 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; civil disasters and emergencies, Ch. 8; courts, Ch. 10; offenses generally, Ch. 18; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 29; obedience to police department officials concerning traffic, § 29-4; directing of traffic by police department officials, § 29-31; notice to police of accidents, § 29-411 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2.
State Law reference- Merit system police departments in third class cities, RSMo 86.541 et seq.

Sec. 22-16. - Merit system police department established. 
    There is hereby created and established a merit system police department within and for the city, under and subject to the provisions of RSMo 85-541 to 85.571. 
(Code 1967, § 24-1)
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish merit system police department, RSMo 85.541. 
Sec. 22-17. - Applicability to present employees. 
    Any person presently holding a position in the police department shall be retained without preliminary or performance tests, and no reappointment shall be necessary, but such person shall thereafter be subject in all other respects to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 24-2)
State Law reference- Terms of officers unaffected by adoption of merit system, RSMo 85.571. 
Sec. 22-18. - Personnel; compensation. 
    The merit system police department shall have a chief of police, an assistant chief of police, and such number of lieutenants, sergeants and regular policemen of such rank and grade as may be prescribed by ordinance, to be paid such salaries as may be established from time to time by ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 24-3; Ord. No. 5734, § 2, 9-21-81; Ord. No. 6017, § 1, 8-20-84; Ord. No. 7836, § 1, 9-15-08) 
State Law reference- Personnel of police department, RSMo 85.541(l). 
Sec. 22-19. - Competitive examinations-Restrictions. 
    The personnel board shall adopt and provide for open, free and competitive examinations as to fitness and qualifications for all the positions of the police department; provided however that no person shall be eligible to take an examination and be appointed to the police department unless such person be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Code 1967, § 24-4; Ord. No. 7104, § 1, 3-16-98)
State Law reference- Competitive examinations required, RSMo 86.541(2)(2). 
Sec. 22-20. - Same-Eligibility list compilation. 
    The personnel board shall provide for the returns of the examinations an eligible list of persons for each classification of positions in the competitive classification service of the police department, whose general average standing upon said examination or class is not less than the minimum fixed by the rules of the board and who are otherwise eligible, and such persons shall take rank upon the eligible list as candidates in the order of their relative excellence as determined by examination, without reference to priority of time of examination. In the event of more than one applicant receiving the same mark at an examination, priority of time of application shall determine the order in which their names shall be placed on the eligible list. The board shall have authority to revise the eligible list from time to time, as circumstances may warrant. 
(Code 1967, § 24-5)
Sec. 22-21. - Classification of police officers; requirements for appointment. 
(a)	Classifications. The classification of police officers shall be as follows: 
(1)	Police lieutenant;
(2)	Police sergeant;
(3)	Police officer, Class I;
(4)	Police officer, Class II;
(5)	Police officer, probationary.
(b)	Appointment to Class II. No person shall be appointed a police officer Class II who has not completed at least six (6) months experience as a probationary police officer. 
(c)	Appointment of Class I. No person shall be appointed a police officer Class I who has not completed at least six (6) months experience as a Class II police officer. 
(d)	Appointment of sergeant. No person shall be appointed police sergeant who has not completed two (2) years of law enforcement experience. 
(e)	Appointment to lieutenant. No person shall be appointed to police lieutenant unless, prior to the appointment, he has held the rank of Class I police officer or police sergeant and has a minimum of two (2) years full-time police experience. 
(Code 1967, § 24-6; Ord. No. 5957, § 2, 3-19-84; Ord. No. 6113, § 1, 9-3-85; Ord. No. 7836, § 1, 9-15-08) 
Sec. 22-22. - Designation of classification at time of appointment. 
    The mayor and city council shall designate, at the time of appointment, the class to which each police officer shall be appointed, but if, in the discretion of the mayor and a majority of the city council, a lower or subordinate class of appointment is desired, then such appointment can be made irrespective of the qualifications and training of the applicant. 
(Code 1967, § 24-7)
Sec. 22-23. - Appointment of chief of police. 
    The mayor, with the advice and consent of a majority of the city council, shall appoint the chief of police and the assistant chief of police from a list of eligibles certified to the mayor by the personnel board. 
Sec. 22-24. - Appointment of regular police officers. 
    The police personnel board shall recommend one man for each opening in the police department for regular police officers to the city council, for appointment from a list of previously certified eligibles. Before making its recommendation to the city council, the personnel board shall consult with the chief of police and consider his suggestions as to whom should be appointed. The chief of police shall have the right to interview any man appearing on the certified list of eligibles before his consultation with the personnel board. 
(Code 1967, § 24-9; Ord. No. 6051, § 1, 1-7-85)
State Law reference- Appointment of regular police officers, RSMo 85.541(2)(2), (3). 
Sec. 22-25. - Oath required. 
    Before entering into his duties each regular and each reserve police officer shall take an oath administered by the city clerk that he will uphold the Constitution of the United States, State of Missouri, the laws of the state, and the ordinances of the city, and will faithfully demean himself in the performance of his duties. 
(a)	A "regular police officer" shall be defined as follows: A salaried, full-time law enforcement officer and member of the police department of the city. 
(b)	A "reserve officer" shall be defined as follows: A nonsalaried, volunteer, part-time law enforcement officer and member of the police department of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 24-10; Ord. No. 6051, § 1, 1-7-85)
Sec. 22-26. - Probationary period of appointment; removal during period. 
(a)	After his initial appointment to the police force, an officer shall serve a six (6) month probationary period. This probationary period, or working test period, shall be regarded as an integral part of the examination process and shall be utilized for closely observing the officer's work and for rejecting any officer whose performance does not meet the required work standards. A review of the officer's work shall be made before expiration of the probationary period. 
(b)	An officer removed during this probationary period may request a hearing before the personnel board. Such request shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk within twenty-four (24) hours of his removal. The probationary officer may be represented by counsel at the hearing and the hearing will be public, if he so requests. 
(Code 1967, § 24-11)
Sec. 22-27. - Temporary appointments. 
    Temporary appointments to fill immediate needs may be made by the mayor from a list of eligibles certified by the police personnel board. No temporary appointment, however, shall be made for a period in excess of sixty (60) days. 
(Code 1967, § 24-12; Ord. No. 6182, § 1, 7-21-86)
Sec. 22-28. - Promotion of police officers. 
    Elevation of regular police officers to higher classifications may be made at any regular council meeting by resolution of the mayor and a majority of the council. 
(Code 1967, ;s ;24-13)
Sec. 22-29. - Suspension, demotion, discharge of chief of police, assistant chief; right of appeal. 
    The mayor may, with the consent of a majority of all the members elected to the city council, suspend, demote or discharge the chief of police and assistant chief of police, for cause. The city council may by a two-thirds vote of all the elected members, independent of the mayor's approval or recommendation, suspend, demote or discharge the chief of police and assistant chief of police shall have the right of appeal to the personnel board and within five (45) working days of the suspension, demotion or discharge action. A decision of the personnel board shall be final. If the decision is in favor of the officer, he shall be paid all wages lost as a result of the suspension, demotion or discharge, and shall be reinstated with all rights unimpaired. 
(Code 1967, § 24-14; Ord. No. 5605, § 1, 8-18-80)
State Law reference- Right to appeal granted to police officers after suspended, demoted or discharged, RSMo 85.541(2)(5); power of city council and mayor to remove appointive officers, RSMo 77.340. 
Sec. 22-30. - Authority of chief of police to suspend police officer; right of appeal. 
    The chief of police shall have authority to suspend, with or without pay and/or benefits, for a definite period of time, any officer of the police department for cause. The chief of police shall provide the aggrieved officer with a written statement of cause for the action. Such statement may be amended or supplemented at any time prior to hearing before the police personnel board. In the event the chief of police recommends the discharge of the suspended officer, the period of suspension shall extend to the date of the final decision of the police personnel board, pursuant to section 2-31. If the officer considers himself aggrieved, the policemen's advisory committee shall act according to the procedure as herein provided. In the event of an appeal to the personnel board, the decision of that board shall be final. If the decision is in favor of the aggrieved officer, he shall be paid all wages lost as a result of the suspension. 
(Code 1967, § 24-15; Ord. No. 6065, § 1, 3-4-85)
State Law reference- Right to appeal granted to police officers after suspension, discharge or demotion, RSMo 85.541(2)(5). 
Sec. 22-31. - Authority of chief of police to discharge, demote police officers; right of appeal. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to recommend the discharge and demotion of any officer of the police department for cause, but the aggrieved police officer shall be granted the right of appeal in advance of the recommended discipline. The chief of police may suspend the officer, with or without pay and/or benefits, pending the final decision of the police personnel board. If the officer considers himself aggrieved, the policemen's advisory committee shall act according to the procedure as herein provided. If the aggrieved officer does not appeal within forty-eight (48) hours after being advised of the charges, then the recommendation of the chief of police shall become effective. In the event of an appeal to the personnel board, the decision of that board shall be final. If the decision is in favor of the aggrieved officer, he shall be paid for all wages lost as a result of the discharge or demotion. 
(Code 1967, § 24-16; Ord. No. 6065, § 1, 3-4-85)
Sec. 22-32. - Discrimination prohibited. 
    Persons holding positions in the classified service shall not be discriminated against in any way because of their political or religious beliefs, or opinions, or affiliations, or because of their exercise of the right to vote as they may please. 
(Code 1967, § 24-17)
Sec. 22-33. - Activity with political groups; restrictions. 
    No person holding an office in the classified service provided for in this article shall accept or seek election, nomination or appointment as an officer of a political club or organization, or take an active part in a political campaign or serve as a member of a committee of any such club or organization, or act as a worker at the polls, or distribute badges or literature favoring or opposing a candidate for election or nomination to any public office; provided, however, nothing herein shall prevent such person from becoming or continuing to be a member of a political club or organization, or from attending any political meeting, or from enjoying freedom from interference in casting his vote. Leaves of absence may be granted at the discretion of the police personnel board for the purpose of seeking public office or other just causes. 
(Code 1967, § 24-18; Ord. No. 6057, § 21, 2-4-85)
Sec. 22-34. - Police officers to be uniformly dressed. 
    All police officers shall be uniformly dressed in the uniform described by the chief of police and approved by the city council, and shall wear such uniform at all times while upon duty. 
(Code 1967, § 24-19)
Sec. 22-35. - Residency requirements for chief of police. 
    All persons presently or hereafter appointed to the position of Chief of Police in the Marshall Police Department must be a resident of the City of Marshall, Missouri, or must reside within five (5) miles, by roadway, from the city limits of Marshall, Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 6102, § 1, 8-5-85; Ord. No. 7388, § 1, 4-15-02)
Secs. 22-36-22-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERSONNEL BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards commissions and committees generally, § 2-311 et seq.
State Law reference- Personnel board generally, RSMo 85.541(2).

Sec. 22-46. - Established. 
    A personnel board is hereby established to administer the operation of the police department. 
(Code 1967, § 24-1)
Sec. 22-47. - Membership; appointment. 
    The personnel board provided for herein shall consist of six (6) members, appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of a majority of the city council. The members of the personnel board shall be divided equally between the largest and the second largest political parties, and in filling vacancies, the mayor shall preserve this requirements. 
(Code 1967, §§ 24-30, 24-31; Ord. No. 5671, § 1(24-30), 2-17-81)
Sec. 22-48. - Qualifications. 
    No person shall be appointed to the personnel board unless he has attained his twenty-first birthday, is a legal voter of the city and has been a resident of the city for at least one (1) year prior to his appointment. He shall be a person of good character and reputation and shall not hold any other office or public employment under the city, nor shall he hold any office in any partisan political committee or political club during the term of his office as a member of the personnel board. 
(Code 1967, § 24-32; Ord. No. 5671, § 1(24-32), 2-17-81)
Sec. 22-49. - Terms. 
    The expiration of appointments shall be so staggered that the terms of no more than two (2) members shall expire at the same time. All terms of the members of the personnel board shall be for three (3) years and until their respective successors are appointed. 
(Code 1967, § 24-30; Ord. No. 5671, § 1(24-30), 2-17-81)
Sec. 22-50. - Vacancies. 
    The mayor shall have power to fill all vacancies on the board for unexpired terms in like manner as original appointments are made. 
(Code 1967, § 24-30; Ord. No. 5671, § 1(24-30), 2-17-81)
Sec. 22-51. - Removal from office. 
    The mayor may with the consent of a majority of all the members elected to the city council, remove any member of the personnel board from office. A member may also be removed by two-thirds vote of all the members elected to the city council, independently of the mayor's approval or recommendation. A removal from office as herein provided shall result in a vacancy in such office. 
(Code 1967, § 24-33; Ord. No. 5671, § 1(24-33), 2-17-81)
Sec. 22-52. - Organization; powers and duties. 
    The personnel board shall organize itself and it shall be the board's duties, as a body, to: 
(1)	Hold regular meetings at least once each quarter or more often as may be required in the proper discharge of its duties; 
(2)	Choose one of the members of the board each year to act as chairman, but no member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive years in this capacity; 
(3)	Require a majority of the members to constitute a quorum to transact business;
(4)	Enact such rules and regulations as are necessary to conduct its business and to carry out the intent of this chapter but no such rule shall be effective until approved by the city council; 
(5)	Prepare or cause to be prepared and give examinations to candidates for appointment and promotion and to certify lists of eligibles to the mayor or other appointing authority as herein provided; 
(6)	Perform such other duties as the city may by ordinance prescribe.
(Code 1967, § 24-34; Ord. No. 5671, § 1(24-34), 2-17-81)
Sec. 22-53. - Efficiency records to be kept; purpose. 
    The personnel board shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of efficiency for each employee in the police department for making promotions on the basis of merit, to be ascertained by competitive examination, by conduct in office, conduct as a citizen and by seniority in service, and all vacancies shall be filled by promotion from a promotion list in all cases where it shall be for the best interest of the service to fill such vacancies. The method of examination for promotion, and the method for certifying therefor shall be the same as provided for applicants for original appointments. 
(Code 1967, § 24-35)
Sec. 22-54. - Authority to modify, uphold, reduce disciplinary action. 
    The personnel board shall have the authority and the power to uphold or reduce, or modify the severity of any disciplinary action which results in an appeal to such board, as the facts may require. 
(Code 1967, § 24-36)
Sec. 22-55-22-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POLICEMEN'S ADVISORY COMMITTEE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-311 et seq.

Sec. 22-66. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created and established a policemen's advisory committee. 
(Code 1967, § 24-47)
Sec. 22-67. - Composition. 
    The policemen's advisory committee shall be composed of three (3) police officers, one of whom shall be a sergeant and two (2) of whom shall be regular police officers below the rank of sergeant. 
(Code 1967, § 24-47; Ord. No. 7855, § 1, 12-1-08; Ord. No. 7836, § 1, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 8224, § 1, 7-6-15) 
Sec. 22-68. - Election of members. 
    The members of the policemen's advisory committee shall be elected by the popular vote of all the police officers of the city holding the rank of lieutenant or below. The members of the committee shall be elected annually, and the personnel board shall have charge of the conduct of such annual election. 
(Code 1967, § 24-48; Ord. No. 7836, § 1, 9-15-08)
Sec. 22-69. - Vacancies. 
    If a vacancy should occur on the policemen's advisory committee, a new member shall be elected in the same manner as members are elected at the annual election, but such successor member shall serve only for the duration of his predecessor's unserved term. 
(Code 1967, § 24-49)
Sec. 22-70. - Consideration of all grievances. 
    The policemen's advisory committee shall function within the police department and shall consider all grievances arising as a result of disciplinary action in the following manner: 
(1)	Hearing. The aggrieved officer shall apply for a hearing before this committee within twenty-four (24) hours of the action causing the grievance. 
(2)	Investigation. The committee shall immediately investigate the matter as completely as possible and shall consult with the chief of police and the aggrieved officer and seek to resolve the matter within the department. 
(3)	Right of appeal; procedure. If no solution to the grievances can be reached within seventy-two (72) hours of the action causing the grievance, the aggrieved officer shall have the right to appeal to the personnel board for a public hearing, at which he may be represented by counsel, if he so chooses. The appeal to the personnel board must be made within five (5) days of the action causing the grievance, and only after effort has been made to resolve the matter within the department as above provided. This appeal shall be taken by the aggrieved officer filing with the city clerk a written statement signed by such officer in which he states that he appeals to the personnel board from the policemen's advisory committee and, if he so desires, asks for a public hearing. 
(Code 1967, § 24-50)
Sec. 22-71. - Complaints between chief of police and police officers; hearing with board. 
    The policemen's advisory committee shall hear any complaints by police officers and seek to resolve the situation between the chief of police and the complaining officer. If, in the opinion of the committee, a complaint is justified and the committee is unable to resolve the problem with the chief, it may request a private hearing with the personnel board to discuss the matter. At this hearing the personnel board shall consult with the chief of police concerning the matter in controversy. 
(Code 1967, § 24-51)
Chapter 23 - RAILROADS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Certain buses and trucks to stop at railroad crossings, § 29-124; stops required at railroad grade crossings, § 29-125.
State Law reference- Authority to regulate railroads, RSMo 77.540; common carriers generally, RSMo Ch. 387; railroad corporations, RSMo Ch. 388; regulation of railroad corporations, RSMo Ch. 389.

Sec. 23-1. - Railroad crossings-Standards prescribed. 
    All railroad crossings within the city shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)	All crossings shall be placed and maintained to the established street grades of the city. 
(2)	All crossings adjoining or abutting streets which are paved, curbed or curb and guttered, shall be a standard type of traffic street crossing consisting of timber or of bituminous paving materials and shall conform to the following general specifications: 
a.	Ballast, ties or other construction shall be removed if necessary and sufficient drainage provided. All ties through the crossing shall be provided with tie plates. 
b.	Timber crossings shall consist of heavy plank resting on ties and surfaced with a lighter plank of sufficient thickness to bring the surface level with the top of the rails. The necessary oak or concrete headers and materials for flangeways shall be provided to hold the crossing securely in place. Headly oil or equal material and thoroughly rolled or tamped until a smooth even surface is formed at a level even with the top of the rails. 
c.	In the construction of bituminous crossings all ballast and dirt shall be removed to at least two (2) inches below the ties and filled in with clean stone and thoroughly rolled or tamped. The surface of this stone shall be four (4) inches below the top of the rails after compacted, a four (4) inch thickness of pavement shall then be constructed in two (2) layers (a bonder course and a surface course), with crushed stone mixed with asphalt. 
(3)	The minimum width of crossings on paved and curbed streets shall be from curbline to curbline and on unpaved or curbed streets the minimum width shall be twenty-eight (28) feet. The width of crossings shall preferably be extended to the inside line of the sidewalk. 
(4)	Concrete sidewalks conforming to the specifications of article IV of chapter 26 shall be built from right-of-way line to right-of-way line on both sides of the street crossed by any railroad, except that when a paved crossing is used for such purpose the sidewalk shall be constructed from the right-of-way lines to the paved crossing. 
(5)	Grades for sidewalks and traffic crossings shall be set by the city engineer and the improvements as herein provided shall be under the supervision of the engineer and final acceptance of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 25-1)
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Railroad crossings, how constructed, by whom, RSMo 389.610. 
Sec. 23-2. - Same-Defective or dangerous crossings. 
    Whenever in the opinion of the city engineer or the director of municipal services a railroad crossing shall be or become defective or dangerous for use or shall not conform to the specifications contained in section 23-1, he shall report the same to the city council recommending the condemnation of the same. The council may thereupon proceed to condemn the same and to cause notice of the proceedings to be served on the railroad company, notifying them that if the crossing is not brought into conformity with the specifications within thirty (30) days of the notice the city will proceed to build the same and to assess a tax against the railroad company for the building of the same with double recovery as provided in RSMo 389.610. 
(Code 1967, § 25-2; Ord. No. 6676, § 27, 2-1-93)
State Law reference- Railroad crossings, how constructed, by whom, RSMo 389.610. 
Sec. 23-3. - Blocking streets, alleys, highways. 
(a)	Time limit. It shall be unlawful for any railroad or railway company or for any employee of any such company, to occupy by means of a car or locomotive, or train of cars, for more than five (5) minutes, any street, alley or public highway within the city. 
(b)	Exception. Nothing in this section shall be so construed as to prevent the passage of a car or locomotive or train of cars, along the street where such right has been or may hereafter be granted by the city, nor to the standing of cars on industrial tracks which have been placed in the streets or alleys of the city by virtue of a grant obtained from the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 25-3)
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 23-4. - Speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful within the limits of the city for any railroad, engine, or car to be run at a speed exceeding twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(Code 1967, § 25-4)
Annotation-Negligence involving violation of speed ordinance: State ex rel. Alton R. Co., v. Shain, 346 Mo. 686, 143, S.W. 2d 234, and Brown v. Alton R. Co., 236 Mo. App. 27, 151 S.W. 2d 727, resulted in holding that ordinance limiting speed to 15 miles per hour at travelled railroad crossing was not unreasonable. In this regard, also see State ex rel. Brown v. Alton R. Co., 132 S.W. 2d 713. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate speed of railroad engines, RSMo 77.540. 
Sec. 23-5. - Cars to be attached to engine. 
    No person owning or operating any railroad in or through the city, nor any officer, agent, servant or employer thereof, shall run any railroad car upon, along or across any public highway in the city unless such car be at all times while in motion securely fastened to the engine pushing or pulling the same. 
(Code 1967, § 25-5)
Sec. 23-6. - Unlawful riding. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, minor or adult, to climb upon, hold to or in any manner attach himself to any locomotive engine or car of any railroad while the same shall be in motion or running into or through the city. 
(Code 1967, § 25-6)
Chapter 24 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- License tax for auctioneer, § 28-24(3); license tax for traveling or auction store, § 28-24(85).

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PAWNBROKERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 8136, § 1, adopted Oct.7, 2013, amended former Art. II, §§ 24-11-24-17, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1967, §§ 18-129-18-135.
State Law reference- Authority to license and regulate pawnbrokers, RSMo 94.110; pawnbroker loans, RSMo 367.011 et seq.

Sec. 24-11. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this Article II are defined as follows: 
(1)	"Pawnbroker" is any person engaged in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or who deals in the purchase of tangible personal property on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, within a fixed period of time, or who makes a public display at his place of business of a sign or display generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their business, to-wit: three (3) gilt or yellow balls, or who publicly exhibits a sign indicating money to loan on deposit of personal property, is hereby declared for purposes of this article to be a pawnbroker. 
(2)	"Pawnshop" is the location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly conducts business. 
(3)	"Person" is an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association or any other legal entity however organized. 
(Ord. No. 8136, § 1, 10-7-13)
Sec. 24-12. - License. 
    No person shall do business as a pawnbroker without having first obtained a business license in a form designated by the city clerk. In the event the pawnbroker is licensed to deal in firearms, he must supply a copy of the current applicable federal firearms license to the city clerk before a pawnbroker license is issued. Before any license shall be issued, the city clerk shall secure the endorsement of the chief of police on the back of the application therefor. Each pawnshop location shall require a separate license and application. 
(Ord. No. 8136, § 1, 10-7-13)
Sec. 24-13. - Application required; affidavit. 
    Application for such license shall be in writing in such form as the city clerk designates. The application shall be and made to the business license administrator. The application shall conform to the provisions of this article and of RSMo. § 367.011, et seq., shall state the address where the business is to be carried on, shall be accompanied by the bond described in section 24-15 hereof, and include an affidavit in which the applicant shall subscribe and make oath that he will faithfully carry out the provisions of RSMo. § 367.011, et. seq. and the provisions of this chapter. Every applicant for such license shall contain the applicant's authorization for the chief of police, or his designee, to conduct an investigation of the applicant's background, including a check of the applicant's criminal history. The city clerk may impose an investigation fee for a new business not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). The city clerk may impose an investigation fee for a renewal of a license not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 8136, § 1, 10-7-13)
Sec. 24-14. - Revocation. 
    The city clerk shall have the power and authority to revoke any license issued under this article for a violation by a licensed pawnbroker of the provisions or conditions contained herein; provided that such license may be revoked only after the licensee shall have been notified of the violations in writing. Said notice shall be a) sent by regular mail addressed to the pawnbroker at the address listed in the application; and b) delivered to the pawnshop during regular business hours. The pawnbroker shall have been afforded a reasonable opportunity to have a hearing thereon before the board of the city responsible for hearing administrative appeals. 
(Ord. No. 8136, § 1, 10-7-13)
Sec. 24-15. - Bond prerequisite to license. 
    Every person to whom a license shall be granted to carry on the business of pawnbroker shall enter into a bond with good and sufficient security in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000,00). Such bond shall run to the state for the use of the state and of any person or persons who may have a cause of action against the licensee under the provisions of RSMo. §§ 367.011 to 367.060. Such bond shall be conditioned that the licensee will comply with the provisions of said sections and of all rules and regulations lawfully made by the city, and will pay to the state and to any such person or persons any and all amounts of money that may become due or owing to the state or to such person or persons from such obligor under and by virtue of the provisions of said sections during the time such bond is in effect. The bond shall be approved by the city clerk before the delivery of the license, and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 8136, § 1, 10-7-13)
Sec. 24-16. - Register to be kept; availability for inspection. 
(a)	Every pawnbroker shall keep a register of all loans and purchases of articles made by him, which register shall show the date of all loans and purchases and the names of all persons who have left any property of any description on deposit as a collateral security or as a delivery on sale thereof. Opposite each name and date shall be written in plain hand the person's age and motor vehicle operator's or chauffeur's license number, and such other identification of public record, with photographs, as may be required by the city clerk; a full description of such property purchased or received or deposited as collateral security; the manufacturer's identifying insignia or serial number if applicable; the time when the loan falls due; the amount of purchase money or the amount loaned; and the interest charged. 
(b)	The pawnbroker shall maintain a document signed by all persons who have left any property of any description on deposit as a collateral security or as a delivery on sale, providing that the seller/borrower has the right to sell or pledge the property, 
(c)	The register shall, at all times, be open to inspection by the chief of police, or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 8136, § 1, 10-7-13)
Sec. 24-17. - Receipt to borrower. 
    Every pawnbroker shall give the borrower a receipt, written in plain hand or printed, for and describing the tangible personal property purchased or subjected to the security interest to secure the payment of a loan; and the manufacturer's identifying insignia or serial number, and all other entries thereon as required by law. The pawnbroker shall not be entitled to make any charge for such receipt, 
(Ord. No. 8136, § 1, 10-7-13)
Sec. 24-18. - Business with minors. 
    It shall be a crime for any pawnbroker or his employee to accept any goods, articles or things whatsoever, other than agricultural products, from any individual under the age of eighteen (18), unless the minor's custodial parent or guardian is present at the transaction and consents thereto. 
(Ord. No. 8136, § 1, 10-7-13)
Sec. 24-19. - Hours of business. 
    No pawnbroker shall accept any goods, articles or things whatsoever from any person between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 8136, § 1, 10-7-13)
Sec. 24-20. - Place of business. 
    It shall be unlawful to conduct business as a pawnbroker or as agent for a pawnbroker at any place other than the location stated in the application for license. 
(Ord. No. 8136, § 1, 10-7-13)
Sec. 24-21. - Serial numbers required. 
    No pawnbroker shall accept as collateral security or purchase any property or item which, at the time it was manufactured, had a serial number or identification number affixed to it, unless such item shall have plainly visible thereon, the manufacturer's serial number or other identifying insignia. 
(Ord. No. 8136, § 1, 10-7-13)
Sec. 24-22. - Information furnished to law enforcement. 
    All pawnbrokers shall furnish the chief of police, or his designee: 
(1)	A description of the property or pledged goods, including the manufacturer's identifying insignia or serial number if applicable; and other identifying characteristics; and 
(2)	A signed document from the seller providing that the seller has the right to sell or pledge the property. 
    In lieu of providing such information, the pawnbroker may satisfy the requirements of this section by transmitting such information electronically to a database in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 8136, § 1, 10-7-13)
Secs. 24-23-24-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKYARDS, JUNK DEALERS, ITINERANT JUNK DEALERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- License tax for auto wrecking shops, § 28-24(6); traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 29.
State Law reference- Authority to license, regulate, restrain, prohibit and suppress junkyards, RSMo 94.110; junkyards, RSMo 226.650 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-26. - Definitions. 
    Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
    Business premises or premises shall mean the area of a junkyard as described in a junk dealer's license or application for license, as provided for in this article. 
    Junk shall mean old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be prepared to be used again in some form; and any or all of the foregoing; and motor vehicles, no longer used as such, to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts; but "junk" shall not include materials or objects accumulated by a person as by-products, waste or scraps from the operation of his own business or materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing processes. 
    Junk dealer shall mean a person who operates a junkyard within the city. 
    Junkyard shall mean a yard, lot or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building, containing junk as defined above, upon which occurs one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling or offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such act or acts are to be used for charity. 
    Itinerant junk dealer shall mean an individual (natural person) who buys, sells, collects or delivers junk within the city as a business or employment within the city, but who is not an operator of a junkyard within the city or an employee of such an operator. 
(Code 1967, § 18-191)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 24-27. - General operating requirements. 
    The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk dealers licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article: 
(1)	The license issued pursuant to this article shall be plainly displayed on the business premises. 
(2)	The junkyard, together with things kept therein, shall at all times be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(3)	No space not covered by the license shall be used in the licensed business.
(4)	No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
(5)	Weeds and vegetation on the premises, other than trees, shall be kept at a height not to exceed fifteen (15) inches. 
(6)	No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises; nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept on the premises, unless such refuse is junk as described herein and is in use in the licensed business. 
(7)	No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public property, street, alley, walkway or curb or become scattered or blown off the business premises. 
(8)	Junk shall be stored in piles not exceeding fifteen (15) feet in height.
(9)	No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the licensed business shall be kept on the premises; nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire hazard. 
(10)	No junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in any incinerator not meeting the requirements of the building code. 
(11)	No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried on in connection with the licensed business on Sunday, Christmas, Thanksgiving, or at any time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(12)	The area on the premises where junk is kept (other than indoors) shall be enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a solid, vertical wall, chain link fence or existing permanent-type hedge of a minimum height of six (6) feet measured from ground level. Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of the licensed business. 
(13)	No junkyard shall be allowed to become a nuisance, as provided in section 17-1; nor shall any junkyard be operated in such manner as to become injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the community. 
(Code 1967, § 18-197)
Sec. 24-28. - Unlawful transactions with a minor. 
    A junk dealer commits the crime of unlawful transactions with a minor if he or any employee with criminal negligence buys or receives any personal property other than agricultural products from an unemancipated minor, unless the minor's custodial parent or guardian has consented in writing to the transaction. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 568.070. 
Secs. 24-29-24-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational license taxes generally, § 28-11 et seq.

Sec. 24-36. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a junk dealer or itinerant junk dealer in the city whether personally, by agents or employees, singly or along with some other business or enterprise, without first having obtained a license therefor from the city clerk in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1967, § 18-192)
Sec. 24-37. - Application. 
    An applicant for the license under this division shall file with the city clerk a written application upon forms provided by the city clerk, and payment of a fee as prescribed in this division. The application shall contain the following: 
(1)	Name, residence address and telephone number of applicant;
(2)	Exact address or location of the place where the business is or is proposed to be carried on, including the legal description of the premises. 
(Code 1967, § 18-193)
Sec. 24-38. - Investigation; approval and issuance. 
(a)	Upon receipt of an application for a junk dealer's license as provided for herein, the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's business responsibility and moral character. 
(b)	The city clerk shall issue a license if all requirements for a junk dealer described in this article are met unless he finds: 
(1)	The correct license fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check, or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation; 
(2)	The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city's building, zoning and health regulations; 
(3)	The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation, any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business; has been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense without the state that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state: 
a.	An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony; 
b.	An offense involving sexual misconduct;
c.	An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons that amounts to a felony. 
The city may issue a license to any person convicted of any of the crimes described in subparagraph a., b. or c. of this subsection if it finds that such conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to the date of the application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for crimes mentioned in this subsection. 
(4)	The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith; 
(5)	The applicant has had a similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the city or any other state or local agency within five (5) years prior to the date of the application; 
(6)	The applicant, if an individual; or any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business; is not over the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Code 1967, § 18-194)
Sec. 24-39. - Fees; bond. 
    The annual fee to be paid for any license or renewal license issued under this division shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in the case of junk dealers, and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in the case of itinerant junk dealers, together with a surety bond in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1967, § 18-195)
Sec. 24-40. - License not transferable. 
    No license issued under this division shall be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1967, § 18-196)
Chapter 25 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 6733, §§ 1, 2, adopted October 25, 1993, repealed former Ch. 25, §§ 25-1, 25-11-25-18, in its entirety, and added a new Ch. 25, §§ 25-1-25-4, 25-11-25-15, 25-21-25-25, and 25-31-25-35. Former Ch. 25 pertained to similar provisions and derived from the Code of 1967, §§ 7-18-7-26.
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7.
State Law reference- Billboards, RSMo 226.500 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate all exterior signs so as to protect the property values as well as the character of the various zoning districts in the city, to protect health, safety and morals and to promote the public welfare. It is the intention of this article to regulate the maintenance of all signs both for appearance and safety and to provide for the removal of unsafe, unsightly and unlawful signs. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Sec. 25-2. - Definitions. 
    Advertising sign: Any sign that advertises, promotes or gives information on products or businesses not conducted within the premises or location upon which the sign is located. 
    Applicant: Any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership and the like, singular or plural. 
    Approved combustible material: Wood, or materials not more combustible than wood, and approved combustible plastics. 
    Approved combustible plastics: Those plastics which, when tested in accordance with American Society for Testing Materials standard methods for test for flammability of plastics over five-hundredths (0.05) inch in thickness (D635-44), burn no faster than two and one-half (2.5) inches per minute in sheets of six-hundredths-inch thickness. 
    Area of sign. That area enclosed by one or more rectangles, the side of which makes contact with the extreme points or edges of the sign, excluding the supporting structure which does not form part of the sign proper or of the display. When calculating the area one side shall be included. Wall signs: The area shall be within a single, continuous perimeter composed of any straight line geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of the advertising message. If the sign is composed of individual letters or symbols using the wall as the background with no added decoration, the total sign area shall be calculated by measuring the area within the perimeter of each symbol or letter. The combined areas of the individual figures shall be considered the total sign area. 
    Attention-attracting devices: Any flasher, blinker, animation, banner, clock or other object designed or intended to attract the attention of the public to an establishment or sign. 
    Awning: A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of nonrigid materials on a supporting framework. 
    Billboards: Same as advertising sign. 
    Building sign: Any sign attached to or projecting from a building, at a ninety-degree angle, and is made an integral part of the building. 
    Changeable copy sign: Any panel which is characterized by changeable copy illuminated or unilluminated regardless of method of attachment. Changeable copy signs shall be permitted in accordance with the requirements for the same type primary sign. 
    Code enforcement officer: The city inspector or other person within the city charged with the administration and enforcement of the sign ordinance. 
    Combination sign: Any sign which combines the characteristics of two (2) or more types of signs. Combination signs shall conform to all requirements for all types of signs comprising the combination sign. 
    Detached sign type "A": Any free-standing sign not attached to a building which has a clearance of less than ten (10) feet but does not rise from the ground. 
    Detached sign type "B": Any free-standing sign which has a clearance of ten (10) or more feet. 
    Detached sign type "C": A monument type identification sign which rises from the ground, is either illuminated or unilluminated, and generally has no clearance under it. 
    Electrical sign: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, faces, backgrounds of outlines illuminated by incandescent or fluorescent lamps or luminous parts of the sign proper, these light sources being either external or internal, or any sign which uses electrical/mechanical equipment or devices in its operation. 
    Embellishment: Cutouts or letters on top of signs, which shall not project out over the sign more than six (6) feet. 
    Erect: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix and shall also include the painting of signs on the exterior of a building or structure. 
    Facade: The front or main face of any building or structure on which the street or frontage road the structure has established a permanent address as listed in the city directory. 
    Free-standing sign: Any sign supported by uprights, braces, poles or other vertical members in or upon the ground and not attached to a building. 
    Highway signs: Same as "advertising signs." 
    Identification sign: A sign giving the name and address of a building, business, development or establishment. Such signs may be wholly or partly devoted to a readily recognized symbol. 
    Illuminated sign: 
(1)	Semi-illuminated sign. Any sign which is uniformly illuminated internally over its entire area, including the area of the sign, by use of electricity or other artificial light. 
(2)	Indirectly illuminated sign. Any sign which is partially or completely illuminated at any time by an external light source which is so shielded as to not be visible at eye level. 
(3)	Fully illuminated sign. Any sign which is illuminated by an external or internal light source which is visible. 
    Letter display: Individual letters mounted on a facade or parapet wall. 
    Location: A lot, premises, building, wall, property, or any place whatsoever, upon which a sign is located. 
    Mansard roof: A roof which appears to be a part of the facade (wall), usually constructed for appearance only. 
    Marquee or canopy: A covering structure projecting from and attached to a building. 
    Nonilluminated sign: Any sign which is lighted by natural sunlight only. 
    Painted wall sign: A sign which is painted directly on a building or structure. Painted wall signs will be permitted subject to the same restrictions as wall signs. 
    Permanent sign: A sign constructed to remain indefinitely. 
    Portable sign: A sign which is not permanently affixed to one location and has the capability of being moved from one site to the next without disassembly. 
    Roof level: Where the eaves of the roof connect to the top of the wall, except where a mansard roof is used. Mansard roof level shall be the uppermost elevation of the roof. 
    Roof line: That part of the roof or parapet which covers the major area of the building. 
    Roof sign: A sign, any part of which extends above the high point of a roof or parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partially supported by said building. 
    Sign: The term "sign" shall mean and include every sign, name, number, identification, description, announcement, declaration, demonstration, device, display, flag, banner, pennant, illustration, beacon, light, or insignia and structure supporting any of the same, affixed directly or indirectly to or upon any building or outdoor structure, or erected or maintained upon a piece of land and which directs attention to an object, product, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business. 
    Structure: The supports, uprights, bracing and framework for the sign. 
    Subdivision amenity sign: A sign directing traffic to amenities such as a clubhouse or swimming pool within the subdivision. 
    Subdivision entrance marker: A sign identifying the subdivision, located at one or more of the subdivision entrances. 
    Temporary sign: A sign of noncombustible or combustible material, with or without a frame, which is usually attached to the outside of a building on a wall or store front, fence, tree, utility pole, or temporary structure, for a limited period of time; or a sign which is not permanently attached to the ground, building or other load-bearing structure. Temporary signs are intended to be displayed for a short period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days, but real estate "for rent", "for sale", or similar signs may be displayed for longer periods. 
    Wall sign: A sign attached to or erected against an exterior wall of a building or structure, which projects not more than twelve (12) inches from a wall and presents only one face of advertising copy to the public. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Sec. 25-3. - Responsibility for violation. 
    The applicant, the owner of the sign, the owner of the land or structure, and the person in charge of erecting the sign or structure are all subject to the provisions of this article and therefore subject to the penalty hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Sec. 25-4. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any applicant, person, firm, corporation or other entity violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Secs. 25-5-25-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 

Sec. 25-11. - Permit required. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no sign shall hereafter be erected, constructed, or altered except as provided by this chapter, and until a permit for same has been issued by the building inspector. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Sec. 25-12. - Application for sign permit. 
    Application for permits shall be made on forms as provided by the city. The permit application shall be signed by the applicant and when the applicant is any person other than the owner of the property, the permit application shall also be signed by the owner of the property, or his agent or lessee and shall contain the location of the sign structure, the name and address of the sign owner and the sign erector, drawings showing the design, dimensions and locations of the sign and such other pertinent information as the building inspector may require to insure compliance with the laws of Marshall. 
    An illuminated sign shall bear the Underwriters Laboratories label or be built to comply with Underwriters requirements. If, upon application, it shall appear that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this article, the building code and all other laws and ordinances of the city, the building inspector shall then issue the permit. If the work authorized under the permit has not been completed within one hundred twenty (120) days after date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. A permit may be renewed by the building inspector and no additional fee shall be collected for the renewal. In the event the building inspector denies the application, the reasons for denial shall be forwarded to the applicant in written form, and signed by the building inspector. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Sec. 25-13. - Permit fees. 
    Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder, shall pay a building permit fee to the City of Marshall, Missouri. Any changes made to the sign other than maintenance, shall require a new building permit. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Sec. 25-14. - Exemptions. 
    A permit will not be required for the following listed signs. These exemptions, however, shall apply only to the requirement of the permit and shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility for its erection, maintenance, and appearance. 
(1)	Construction project signs: 
a.	Maximum size one hundred (100) square feet per face.
b.	One per street frontage.
c.	To be removed at completion of construction.
d.	To be located on premises.
(2)	Commercial and industrial structure "for sale" or "for rent" signs: 
a.	Maximum size thirty-two (32) square feet per face.
b.	Two (2) per street frontage.
c.	To be removed within ten (10) days after sale or letting.
d.	To be located on premises.
(3)	Residential, commercial and industrial acreage "for sale" or "for rent" signs: 
a.	Maximum size dependent upon the vehicular speed limit imposed upon the street on which the sign fronts. 
1.	Maximum speed limit 15-35 m.p.h.: Thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face permitted.
2.	Maximum speed limit 40-55 m.p.h.: Fifty (50) square feet per sign face permitted.
b.	Two (2) per street frontage.
c.	To be removed within ten (10) days after sale or letting.
d.	To be located on premises.
(4)	Residential structure "for sale" or "for rent" signs: 
a.	Maximum size nine (9) square feet per face.
b.	One per street frontage.
c.	To be removed within ten (10) days after sale or letting.
d.	To be located on premises.
(5)	Temporary signs: 
a.	Maximum size nine (9) square feet per face area in residential districts except on the event premises, in which case the maximum size shall be thirty-two (32) square feet in face area. 
b.	Maximum size thirty-two (32) square feet in face area in commercial and industrial areas. 
c.	Shall be placed back of the property line on the lot where displayed.
d.	It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to have the signs removed not later than ten (10) days after the event to which they pertain and they shall not be erected earlier than forty-five (45) days prior to the event to which they pertain. The prohibition in this sub-section shall not apply to signs displaying a political message, although citizens and property owners are encouraged to give due regard to the duration and proliferation of such signs to avoid visual clutter of neighborhoods and to avoid blocking sight restrictions for public safety reasons. 
(6)	Traffic or other municipal signs or informational signs: Legal notice, railroad crossing signs, danger, warning and such temporary, emergency or nonadvertising signs necessary for traffic control or as may be approved by the city council. 
(7)	Memorial signs or tablets: Names of buildings, and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other metal. 
(8)	Temporary signs inside buildings: Inside windows, or painted on windows or on glass portions of doors of buildings for the advertisement of a particular item, event, or sale. 
(9)	Reserved. 
(10)	Occupational signs or other signs: Denoting only the name and profession of an occupant in a commercial building, public institutional building, or a resident and not exceeding two (2) square feet in area. 
(11)	Flags, emblems, or insignia of any governmental body, decorative displays: For holidays, or public demonstrations, which do not contain advertising and are not used as such. 
(12)	Church or school signs: One illuminated or nonilluminated sign per church or school, on church or school premises, indicating activities and services therein provided and not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet per side. Illuminated signs shall be prohibited in residential areas. 
(13)	Residential development signs: Residential developments shall be permitted two (2) detached signs type "C", identifying the name of the development only for each entrance of the development. Such sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area. Said sign shall be maintained on private property, no closer than ten (10) feet to the property line. 
(14)	Small direction type signs: Small signs, not exceeding three (3) square feet in area, displayed on private property for the convenience of the public, including signs to identify entrance and exit drives, parking areas, one-way drives, restrooms, freight entrances, and other similar signs. 
(15)	Scoreboards: Scoreboards in athletic stadiums. 
(16)	Incidental sign: A small sign, emblem, or decal, placed within the establishment, informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises, e.g., a credit card sign or a sign indicating hours of business. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94; Ord. No. 7606, § 1, 3-7-05)
Sec. 25-15. - Revocation of permits. 
    The building inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued by him upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any amendment hereto. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Secs. 25-16-25-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS WITHIN ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 25-21. - Signs allowed. 
    The following sign standards by district shall apply in the city. The districts are as defined by the zoning ordinance and official zoning map. Only signs as described herein and as may be described under section 25-14, "Exemptions," shall be permitted in each particular district. 
(1)	District A1:
a.	Signs permitted in this district shall include business signs pertaining only to the sale of agricultural products produced on the premises and home occupations, construction signs, identification signs, name plate signs and real estate signs. Both wall signs and detached signs are permitted. 
b.	Only two (2) signs per six hundred sixty (660) feet of frontage are permitted. Construction signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet, business signs for home occupations and name plate signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet, agricultural business signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet, and real estate signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet. 
c.	No sign shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and only signs identifying churches, hospitals, police stations, fire stations, and other similar public facilities may be illuminated and then only on one side and only signs, the area of which does not exceed twelve (12) square feet on one side. 
(2)	District RI, R2, R3, MH-P, MH-S and residential area of P.D.'s: 
a.	Developments shall be permitted two (2) nonilluminated detached signs, identifying the name of the project only for each entrance of the development. Such sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area and not more than five (5) feet in overall height. Said sign shall be maintained on private property, no closer than ten (10) feet to the property line. 
(3)	District C1, C2, and commercial areas of P.D.'s: 
a.	Any single-family, duplex or multifamily units existing in these districts must comply with RI, R2, R3 and residential areas of P.D.'s regulations. 
b.	Each business or commercial establishment shall be permitted only one (1) wall sign, mounted on the building, the total area of which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the facade upon which it is placed. No such sign shall extend above the height of the wall upon which it is mounted. In addition, each business shall be permitted two (2) "Class B" signs, the surface area of which shall not exceed two (2) square feet for each lineal foot of street frontage, provided no single sign shall exceed a gross surface area of one hundred (100) square feet, however, "Class B" signs located within two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) lineal feet of the center line of U.S. 65 right-of-way may have a gross surface area not to exceed seven hundred (700) square feet. One (1) free standing sign with total measurements not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet, per side, may be placed at one (1) major entrance to a shopping area. This sign shall reflect the shopping center name only. Awnings shall be permitted in this district. 
c.	An office building shall be permitted not more than two (2) nonilluminated wall signs, not more than nine (9) square feet in area per sign, and shall indicate only the name of the building or establishments housed therein. In lieu of one nonilluminated wall sign, each office building may be permitted one illuminated wall sign, but said sign shall not be erected within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential district unless lighting is shielded from view. 
d.	No sign shall be placed closer to the front property line than one-half (1/2) the distance of the front yard. In addition, no sign shall exceed district height limitations (35 feet). 
(4)	District I-L and I-H: 
a.	Signs permitted in this district shall include business signs, construction signs, identification signs, name place signs and real estate signs. Wall signs and detached signs shall all be permitted. 
b.	Detached signs shall be limited to two (2) signs per lot, no limitation is placed on the number of wall signs. No sign shall exceed two (2) square feet in area for each lineal foot of frontage and in no case shall any sign exceed one hundred (100) square feet per side in gross area. 
c.	No sign in this district shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet.
d.	One free-standing sign with total measurements not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet per side may be placed at one major entrance to a shopping area. This sign shall reflect the shopping center name only. 
e.	Class B signs located within two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) lineal feet of the center line of the U.S. Highway 65 right-of-way may have a gross surface area not to exceed seven hundred (700) square feet. 
f.	Only the name of the establishment shall be placed on a sign for an industrial use. The total area of the sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the facade upon which it is placed. 
g.	No sign shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height unless the building exceeds forty-five (45) feet in height. In such event, the sign may be equal to the height of the building. No sign shall exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area. Signs shall not turn, move or flash. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94; Ord. No. 7090, § 1, 12-15-97)
Sec. 25-22. - Billboard or advertising signs. 
(a)	Advertising signs shall be permitted only along highways in Missouri's primary highway system, only in areas zoned A1, C1, C2, I-L or I-H, and shall not be permitted in the following areas: 
(1)	Highway 20 (Arrow Street) from U.S. 65 (Lafayette Avenue) to English Avenue;
(2)	The south side of Highway 240/41 from U.S. 65 to Lincoln Avenue;
(3)	Highway 41 from the north city limits to Highway 240 (Santa Fe Trail);
(4)	Odell Avenue from Black Street to Eastwood Street;
(5)	Eastwood Street from Odell Avenue to Lafayette Avenue;
(6)	Lafayette Avenue from Eastwood Street to Boyd Street;
(7)	Boyd Street from Lafayette Avenue to Miami Avenue;
(8)	Miami Avenue from Boyd Street to Highway 240; and
(9)	Highway 240 from Miami Avenue to Highway 65.
(b)	In no case shall advertising signs be constructed closer than five hundred (500) feet apart, per roadway side, and all advertising signs must comply with the Missouri Highway Department's setback regulations. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Sec. 25-23. - Nonconforming existing signs. 
    Signs that were erected before the adoption of this chapter may continue to exist and be maintained in a safe manner, however, such nonconforming signs may not be replaced, expanded, enlarged, modified to denote the change in the type of business or a change in ownership or substantially improved other than in compliance with the regulations. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Sec. 25-24. - Variances. 
    In obtaining a sign permit, the applicant may apply to the administrator for a variance from the specific requirements of this Code. A variance may be granted by the planning commission, where the literal application of the Code would create a particular hardship for the sign user and the following criteria are met: 
(1)	The granting of the requested variance would not be materially detrimental to the property owners in the vicinity. 
(2)	Hardship caused the sign user under a literal interpretation of the Code is due to conditions unique to that property, does not apply generally to other properties in the city, and is not based solely upon economic hardship. 
(3)	The granting of the variance would not be contrary to the general objectives of this Code. 
    In granting a variance, the planning commission may attach additional requirements necessary to carry out the spirit and purpose of this chapter in the public interest. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94; Ord. No. 7752, § 1, 5-7-07)
Sec. 25-25. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited (in all districts) and shall be removed in accordance with section 25-35, "Removal." 
(1)	Signs containing any indecent, obscene, or immoral matter.
(2)	Signs which are located on any public right-of-way, except that traffic or other nonadvertising signs as provided in paragraph 6, section 25-14, "Exemptions," shall be allowed in rights-of-way. 
(3)	Signs illuminated to an intensity to cause glare or brightness to a degree that could constitute a hazard or nuisance. Revolving, flashing, intermittently lighted or changing color signs shall be a minimum of five-second intervals. Beacons or similarly constructed signs shall not be allowed. 
(4)	Any detached sign when any portion thereof extends beyond a vertical plane two (2) feet inside the right-of-way line. 
(5)	Illuminated signs erected within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential district, unless lighting is shielded from view. 
(6)	Signs which are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring, or manner of illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic-control device or which hide from view any traffic street sign or signal or which obstruct the view in any direction at a street or road intersection. 
(7)	Signs which advertise an activity, business or service that is no longer conducted or advertises a product that is no longer produced shall be removed as provided for in section 25-35, "Removal," except where the owner or lessor of a premises is seeking a new tenant, such signs may remain in place for not more than ninety (90) days from the date of vacancy. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Sec. 25-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN MAINTENANCE AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 25-31. - Engineering design and materials. 
(a)	Wind pressure resistance. All signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot. 
(b)	Except as specifically provided elsewhere, all permanent signs, sign structures, and nonstructural trim shall be constructed of approved combustible or noncombustible materials. 
(c)	Signs along all streets and boundaries shall not interfere with line of sight within twenty (20) feet of the point of intersection of pavement of: 
(1)	A vehicular accessway or driveway and a street.
(2)	A vehicular accessway or driveway and a sidewalk.
(3)	Two (2) or more vehicular accessways or driveways.
No sign which obstructs sight lines at elevations between two (2) feet and eight (8) feet above roadways shall be located on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the intersection of the roadway center lines, connecting them at points seventy (70) feet from their point of intersection for roads of collector category or less and one hundred twenty (120) feet for arterials. 
(d)	Obstruction of egress, openings, ventilation. A sign shall not be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, window, door, or other opening; or so as to prevent free passage from one part of the roof to any other part thereof. A sign shall not be attached in any form, shape or manner to a fire escape, or shall not be so placed as to interfere with an opening which is required for legal ventilation. 
(e)	Letters, figures, characters or representations in cutout or irregular form maintained in conjunction with, attached to or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure. 
(f)	Illuminated signs. Illuminated signs produced in quantity (other than signs custom-built for specific locations) shall be constructed in accordance with the "Standards for Electric Signs (U.L. 48) of Underwriters Laboratories, Inc." and bear the label of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. 
(g)	Electrical signs. All electrical signs, either temporary or permanent, shall be connected to permanent electrical service installed according to the requirements of the electrical code for the city. All wiring for newly constructed detached signs shall be underground, unless this is determined to be prohibited by the building inspector. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Sec. 25-32. - Inspection. 
    As soon as a sign has been erected, the permittee shall notify the building inspector, who shall inspect such sign and approve the same if it is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The building inspector may from time to time as he deems necessary, inspect all signs or other structures regulated by this chapter, for the purpose of ascertaining whether they are secure or whether they are in need of removal or repair. If the sign does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, the building inspector shall notify the applicant in writing of such noncompliance and give the applicant thirty (30) days, or less if the building inspector determines a hazardous situation exists, to comply. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Sec. 25-33. - Maintenance. 
    Every sign or other advertising structure, together with all its supports or braces, shall be kept in good repair. The sign location shall be free of rubbish and weeds. All structural members and all copy areas are to be kept painted and clean so as to prevent deterioration, oxidation, rust, paint fading, paint peeling or other unsightly conditions. After thirty (30) days' notice, in writing, the building inspector may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Sec. 25-34. - Abandoned signs. 
    Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted, or a product sold, shall be removed by the owner, agent or lessee having the beneficial use of the building, structure or land upon which such sign may be found. If the own, agent or lessee fails to remove the sign, the building inspection shall remove it in accordance with section 25-35, "Removal." These removal provisions shall not apply where a succeeding owner, agent or lessee conducts the same type of business, or advertises a current product and agrees to maintain the signs as provided in this article, makes application for permit and pays the fee, as provided for in section 25-13. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Sec. 25-35. - Removal. 
    The building inspector shall order the removal of any sign erected in violation of this chapter. Thirty (30) days' notice, in writing, shall be given to the owner of such sign, or of the building, structure or premises on which sign is located, to remove the sign or to bring it into compliance with this article. Upon failure to remove the sign or comply with this notice, the building inspector shall cause the removal of the sign. Any costs of removal incurred by the building inspector shall be assessed to the owner of the property on which sign is located and may be collected in the manner of ordinary debt or in the manner of taxes and such charge shall be a lien on the property. The building inspector shall refuse to pay costs so assessed. The building inspector may cause any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily without notice. 
(Ord. 6733, § 2, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 6746, § 2, 2-7-94)
Chapter 26 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-5(6); any ordinance establishing or prescribing the street grade of any street in the city saved from repeal, § 1-5(7); driving animals on sidewalks, § 6-3; designated animals and fowl prohibited at large, § 6-4; does prohibited at large, § 6-46; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; offenses against public peace, § 18-81 et seq.; parks, recreation and city property, Ch. 19; unlawful for peddlers to sell goods on public streets and avenues, § 20-3; selling near public square by peddlers prohibited, § 20-4; railroad crossings, § 23-1 et seq.; blocking streets, alleys, highways and railroads, § 23-3; signs extending over public way restricted, § 25-1; subdivisions, Ch. 27; street arrangement in subdivisions, § 27-42; system of streets and subdivisions, § 27-43; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 29; utilities, Ch. 30; vehicles for hire, Ch. 31; zoning, Ch. 32.
State Law reference- Control of streets and sidewalks, RSMo 77.520.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Location of sidewalks. 
(a)	Prescribed. All sidewalks running parallel and along with the streets shall be located and placed a distance of one foot from the property line adjacent to the street. 
(b)	Scope of provisions. Subsection (a) shall apply to all sidewalks built within the city limits, and to sidewalks located on property which shall be hereafter brought into the city by extension of the city limits. 
(c)	Disputes. In case there is dissension between one or more property owners as to where a property line is located or where to locate a walk within one foot of the property line or whether it would be injurious to other resident owners, or for any other cause in which the council might see fit, then the council as a whole shall view such location under dispute and by a majority vote determine a location of the walk and require an engineer to furnish a grade for that particular location. 
(d)	Violations. Anyone violating this section shall be notified to move the sidewalk; and if the party violating this section shall refuse, he thereupon shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code; and if the party does not comply with this Code, within ten (10) days thereafter, it shall be deemed a second offense against the provisions of this Code; and every like neglect for ten (10) days thereafter, shall be considered an additional offense. 
(Code 1967, § 26-1)
Sec. 26-2. - Location of poles and hydrants. 
    All telegraph, telephone and electric light posts and poles and fire hydrants shall be located upon the streets at such points as the street commissioner shall direct, and shall be located at such points as will least interfere with the free use of the streets by the public. Upon streets that are or may hereafter be paved or macadamized the same shall be located upon the parkway at or near the curb. 
(Code 1967, § 26-2)
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; utilities, Ch. 30. 
Sec. 26-3. - Use limited on streets under repair. 
(a)	Driving prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person except under the direction of the city engineer or street commissioner, to drive upon any street or public highway in the city while the same is being resurfaced, improved, oiled or repaired. 
(b)	Interfering with barricades. It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down, remove or destroy any barricade placed across any street or public highway in the city which has been placed across any street to protect the same while it is being resurfaced, improved, oiled or repaired. 
(Code 1967, § 26-10)
Sec. 26-4. - Barbed wire fences prohibited adjacent to public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain along any public street, alley or highway adjoining any sidewalk within the cityany fence composed in whole or part of barbed wire. 
(Code 1967, § 26-14)
Sec. 26-5. - Fencing for swimming pools. 
(a)	Required. Every outdoor swimming pool or family pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four (4) feet in height, which shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes, or gaps larger than four (4) inches in any horizontal dimension. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. 
(b)	Gates, doors to be locked. All gates or doors entering through such enclosure shall be kept securely locked when said swimming pool is not in use. 
(Ord. No. 6063, § 1, 3-4-85)
Sec. 26-6. - Markers, monuments on tract on which building is to be erected or enlarged. 
    No person shall begin the erection or construction of any building, or make any addition to any existing building by which the area of such existing building would be enlarged until there shall have been first established a permanent marker or monument at each corner of the tract of land upon which such erection or construction is to be done or such addition is to be made as said tract is described in the application made to the city for a permit for such erection, construction or addition, provided that the provisions of this section insofar as they relate to additions to existing buildings may be waived by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 6063, § 1, 3-4-85)
Sec. 26-7. - Numbering of houses and buildings. 
(a)	All houses and buildings fronting on the north and west sides of public streets and avenues of the City of Marshall shall be assigned odd numbers and all buildings located on the south and east sides of public streets and avenues of the city shall be assigned even numbers. 
(b)	That Lafayette Avenue shall be the base line from which the streets running east and west shall be numbered and Arrow Street shall be the base line from which the streets running north and south shall be numbered. Except for the first block east of Lafayette Avenue between High Street and Morrow Street, blocks shall be numbered increments of one hundred (100), with the first block from the base line being the one hundred block and the second block being the two hundred block, and so forth. The first block east of Lafayette on all streets between High Street and Morrow Street, inclusive, shall be numbered 1 to 99. A distance of twenty (20) feet shall be allowed for each house number in blocks one thousand feet in length, or less. In blocks more than one thousand feet (1,000) in length, forty (40) feet shall be allowed for each house number. The number to apply to any house or building shall be determined by the lot upon which the entrance door is located. Buildings containing more than one (1) unit shall have one (1) address with the units having a designation of office, suite, apartment, or room with assigned numbers or letters. 
(c)	The Code Official shall establish the street numbers of all houses and buildings in the city. A full and complete record thereof shall be maintained in the office of the Code Official. Upon proper application, the Code Official shall assign the appropriate number for each house or building within the city. 
(Ord. No. 7855, § 1, 12-1-08)
Sec. 26-8. - Duty of owner. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the owner of each house or building fronting on a public street to keep and maintain the number so established on such house or building in numerals at least two (2) inches high and clearly visible from such street. In addition, it is hereby made the duty of the owner of each house or building in the central building district, as defined in Ordinance No. 5757, which abuts an alley to keep and maintain the number so established on such house or building in numerals at least two (2) inches high and clearly visible from such alley. 
(Ord. No. 7855, § 1, 12-1-08)
Sec. 26-9. - Violation. 
    Any person violating this section who fails to abate or correct such violation within fifteen (15) days of receiving notice of such violation shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 7855, § 1, 12-1-08)
Secs. 26-10-26-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 26-16. - Duty of abutting owner to maintain street, alley in unobstructed condition. 
    It shall be the duty of any owner, or the person in charge of any property along any street or alley within the city, to keep the same in such condition that it will not endanger the life, limbs or person of any passerby; and when any such owner or person in charge shall be notified by the street commissioner, chief of police or any policeman to repair or to remove any tree, or limb thereof, building, roof, chimney, wall, shed, awning, cellar door, stairway or other structure of any kind so that the same will not be dangerous to any passerby, it shall be unlawful for any such person to fail to comply with said notice as soon as reasonable. 
(Code 1967, § 26-3)
Sec. 26-17. - Obstructing, obscuring light of street light. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any awning or sign board or other obstruction on any sidewalk or street, in such manner as to obstruct or obscure the light of any street light. 
(Code 1967, § 20-18)
Sec. 26-18. - Awnings, clearance over public way prescribed. 
(a)	Sidewalks. All rigid or permanent awnings overhanging any sidewalk in the city shall be so constructed that they shall clear the surface of the sidewalk by at least seven (7) feet; and all retractable awnings shall be so hung that they shall clear the surface of the sidewalk by at least six and one-half (61/2) feet. 
(b)	Vehicular way. No awning in the city shall be so constructed or hung that it shall clear the vehicular portion of any street or alley by a distance of less than fourteen (14) feet. 
(Code 1967, § 7-3)
Sec. 26-19. - Mischievous obstruction. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to mischievously obstruct any street, sidewalk or alley within the city by placing boxes, barrels or any other matter on such streets, sidewalks or alleys, or to stretch ropes, wires or strings across the same. 
(Code 1967, § 26-5)
Sec. 26-20. - Material, improvements, excavations causing obstruction of street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in making any improvements on any lot or tract of ground in the city to block or obstruct any street or alley near the same, or to place any material used, or to be used, in the improvements in, along or upon the street or alley without leaving reasonable room for use and passage by the public; or to make any excavation in or near any street or alley while making said improvements, and not fully guard the same against damage or injury to any person, while using the street or alley; or to fail, refuse or neglect to construct or provide railings or barriers along the lots or improvement, to protect the public from danger or injury, during the construction or repairing of any building; or to fail at night to keep upon such material, obstruction or excavation a bright light sufficient to reveal all the same. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4)
Sec. 26-21. - Construction materials placed in streets; duty upon completion of work. 
    It shall be the duty of every contractor or other person who shall place material of any character in any street or alley for the construction of any building, sidewalk, curbing or other work, to remove all such material and the refuse and debris therefrom within five (5) days after such work is completed and to clean up the street or alley and have same in as good condition as it was prior to the placing of such material in such street or alley. 
(Code 1967, § 26-6)
Sec. 26-22. - Snow removal from sidewalks by abutting occupants, owners; removal by city. 
(a)	Whenever there is snow on the sidewalk in the city, the occupants of property abutting such sidewalks shall clean the snow from the sidewalk fronting or abutting the property occupied by them, within six (6) hours after the snow ceases to fall; provided, that if such snow falls during the night, then it shall be removed from such sidewalk before 12:00 noon on the day immediately after the fall of the snow; and provided further, that if any such property abutting the sidewalk is unoccupied or vacant, then such sidewalk shall be cleaned by the owner of such property; and provided further, that if the owner of such property is a nonresident of the city, such sidewalk shall be cleaned by the resident agent of the owner of such property. 
(b)	It is further provided herein that the street commissioner or his authorized representative shall be responsible for enforcement of this section and responsible for giving notice to any and all occupants who are in violation of this section, and if the occupant or owner of the premises does not comply with the provisions of this section immediately upon receiving notice that he is in violation that the city acting through the street commissioner or his authorized representative, shall have the right and duty to remove the snow from the areas in question and shall bill the occupant, occupants or owner of the premises for such removal. 
(Code 1967, § 26-7)
Sec. 26-23. - Dirt or mud; removal from sidewalks by abutting occupants, owners. 
    Whenever there is dirt or mud on a sidewalk of the city the occupants of the property abutting such sidewalk shall clean the dirt and mud from the sidewalk fronting or abutting the property occupied by them, within twenty-four (24) hours after being notified to do so by the street commissioner, or by any police officer of the city; provided, that if any property abutting the sidewalk is unoccupied or vacant, then such sidewalk shall be cleaned by the owner of such property within the time above provided, after a service of notice, as aforesaid; provided further, that if the owner of such unoccupied or vacant property is a nonresident of the city, then such sidewalk shall be cleaned by the resident agent of the owner of such property within the time provided after service of notice as aforesaid. 
(Code 1967, § 26-8)
Sec. 26-24. - Gravel, rock, dirt, etc.; removal, deposit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to take from or deposit on any street, alley, thoroughfare, sidewalk or other public place of the city, or from or on property not controlled or owned by him, without having lawful authority so to do any turf, loam, gravel, rock, dirt or other material. 
(Code 1967, § 26-9)
Sec. 26-25. - Moving of buildings. 
(a)	Permit required. No person shall be permitted to move houses or any other buildings in the streets of the city without first having obtained a permit from the mayor therefor. 
(b)	Liability of contractor. The contractor performing the work of moving any house or building shall be liable for any and all damages done to any property whatsoever while performing the work; and shall also be liable for any and all damages which may result against the city on account of such moving. 
(c)	Bond of contractor. The contractor shall give bond in an amount to be fixed by the city engineer, to cover any damages done to property owners in the moving of any houses or buildings and to indemnify the city for any damages and losses sustained, which bond shall be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 26-13)
Sec. 26-26. - Gates over sidewalks prohibited. 
    No gate shall be constructed or swung or maintained in such manner as to open across or over any sidewalk laid along any public street within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 26-15)
Sec. 26-27. - Roofs projecting over street, alley, highway. 
(a)	Gutters. All buildings that may be constructed so that the roof extends to or over any street, alley or public highway, in the city shall have a roof gutter of a size sufficient to catch all the water that drains from the roof, and conduct it to downspouts of sufficient size to carry off the water without causing the roof gutter to overflow. 
(b)	Downspouts. Such downspouts leading from the roof gutter shall extend to the ground and shall be so constructed that the water carried thereby shall not run across or upon any sidewalk, and so that such water shall not interfere in any manner with traffic upon such street, alley or other highway. 
(Code 1967, § 26-16)
Sec. 26-28. - Open, insecure cellar doors, gratings, wells, other holes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or leave open any cellar door or grating of any vault, on any street, highway or sidewalk, or to suffer any such grating or door belonging to the premises occupied by him to be in any insecure or unsafe condition, or to suffer any well, cistern or other excavation adjacent to any street or public place, on premises owned or occupied by him to remain uncovered or in an unsafe condition. 
(Code 1967, § 26-17)
Sec. 26-29. - Displays of merchandise, etc., on streets, sidewalks around "Square." 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to display, place or set out any goods, implements, merchandise, stand or any other thing on any part of any street, alley or sidewalk around the "Square" or within two (2) blocks of the square or to cause or suffer the same to be done without prior approval of the city council. 
(b)	The owners or operators of any of the property hereinabove designated may with the prior approval of the city council, after obtaining a building permit and under the direction of the city engineer, improve and beautify their property by placing thereon things of an ornamental nature, including planters, plants and ornamental structures on sidewalks in front of their business, providing such structures are so placed that they will not interfere with pedestrian traffic in the vicinity thereof. Owners shall be responsible for keeping such structures in good repair and shall carry liability insurance in regard to such structures. 
(c)	This section shall not apply to the erection and placing on the sidewalk of a storm door during the winter months, provided the storm door shall not extend out from the building more than three and one-half (31/2) feet. 
(Code 1967, §§ 26-19, 26-20)
Sec. 26-30. - Loading or unloading merchandise from street. 
(a)	Use of alleys during certain hours. No vehicle shall remain upon any public street for the purpose of receiving and discharging freight between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. whenever there is a public alley which has connection with the premises where the freight is to be delivered or received and such delivery or receipt is practicable through the alley. 
(b)	Backing to curb. A vehicle shall remain backed to the curb only long enough to be loaded or unloaded. 
(c)	Loading, unloading in congested district. When taking or discharging freight, vehicles in the congested district, being the area within one block of the public square, so far as the same is practicable, shall be loaded or unloaded from the right side and not from the end of the vehicle, and the vehicle shall be drawn in close to the curb. 
(d)	Manner of parking; time limit. Wagons or trucks for the delivery of merchandise will be required to pull in close to the curb and parallel with it for the purpose of loading and unloading and shall remain for no longer period than is absolutely necessary, and in no case shall any vehicle of whatever class be permitted to stop abreast of another, except in case of an emergency which cannot be avoided. 
(e)	Standing near theatre, hotel, church. No vehicle shall be left standing longer than necessary to load or unload in front of or within ten (10) feet of either side of the entrance to any theatre, hotel or church. 
(Code 1967, § 26-21)
Sec. 26-31. - Vehicles not to obstruct public way. 
    No vehicle shall be permitted to stand upon any boulevard, parkway, avenue, street or public place to the obstruction of the same or to the inconvenience of travel. 
(Code 1967, § 26-22)
Sec. 26-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1, Ord. No. 6176, adopted July 7, 1986, repealed § 26-32 pertaining to washing of vehicles, formerly, § 26-32 derived from § 26-23 of the 1967 Code. 
Sec. 26-33. - Planting trees on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any trees or shrubs upon any streets within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 26-28)
Sec. 26-34. - Cutting, trimming trees to improve public way-Authority of city. 
    It shall be the duty of the street commissioner under the direction of the committee on streets and alleys to cut, remove and trim the trees growing upon the streets and alleys of the city, where it shall be necessary for the purpose of using the streets and alleys for the purpose of running wires for any purpose, or for the purpose of improving the condition of the streets, alleys or trees; and it shall be lawful for the street commissioner to enter the premises of any landowner or tenant adjacent to any of the streets and alleys of the city and to cut the limbs and branches of any trees that may extend into or upon any such street or alley. All such trimming and cutting shall be done in such manner as to do as little injury as possible to any tree so cut or trimmed. 
(Code 1967, § 26-29)
Sec. 26-35. - Same-Duty of owner, occupant of property. 
    It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant of any premises upon which trees may be growing the branches and limbs of which shall extend into and over the streets of the city to trim and cut off the branches of such trees so extending into any such street or alley, upon being notified so to do by the street commissioner; and it shall be unlawful for any person so notified to fail or refuse to comply with the request, so made, within three (3) days after being notified. 
(Code 1967, § 26-30)
Sec. 26-36. - Trimming hedge fences-Duty of owner. 
    Every person owning a hedge fence over five (5) years old, upon the line of any public street or alley in the city, is hereby required to cut the same down to the height of not more than five (5) feet nor less than four (4) feet, once every two (2) years; provided that hedge fences enclosing orchards, house yards and stockyards shall be exempted from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 26-31)
Sec. 26-37. - Same-Authority, duty of city. 
(a)	Notice; contents, service. It shall be the duty of the street commissioner when upon the line of any public street or alley is situated a hedge fence exceeding the height prescribed in section 26-36 once in every two (2) years to notify the owner of such fence to cut the same down to the height therein provided; said notice shall be in writing, and shall be served by the street commissioner delivering the same to the owner or owners or agents of any such fence, or by leaving said notice at the usual place of abode of such owner or his agent, or by posting the same upon the line of such street or alley, when the owner or his agent cannot be found. 
(b)	Effect of noncompliance by owner. If, after thirty (30) days from the date of the service of the notice hereinbefore described, the owner or his agent shall fail or refuse to cut the same down to the height herein required, then it shall be the duty of the street commissioner forthwith to proceed to have the same cut down according to the provisions of this section; and all costs and expenses which he shall necessarily incur shall be reported by the street commissioner to the city council and after said report has been adopted by the council the amount specified in said report shall be charged against the owner of the land upon which such fence is situated, shall constitute a tax upon such land, and shall be collected as other revenues of said city are now collected by law. 
(Code 1967, § 26-32)
Sec. 26-38. - Regulation of intersections sight distances. 
(a)	It is deemed necessary, in the interest of the public health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the city, and for the free flow of traffic within the city that the intersection sight distances be regulated within the city. 
(b)	It shall hereafter be unlawful for any tree, shrub, bush, vine, hedge or plant, or any other vegetation of any kind, to be grown, maintained or cultivated in such a manner so that any portion of such tree, shrub, bush, vine, hedge, plant or vegetation obstructs the sight distance triangle hereinafter described; provided, however, that all established shade trees now growing at any street intersection may be trimmed in such a manner that no overhanging or low branches shall obstruct the sight distance triangle. 
(c)	It shall hereafter be unlawful for any board fence, billboard, advertising sign, solid utility appurtenance greater than eighteen (18) inches in diameter, and similar appurtenances to be placed, maintained in such manner so that any portion of the objects obstructs the sight distance triangle; provided, however, that this does not include buildings and parts thereof existing on October 4, 1982. 
(d)	It shall hereafter be unlawful to park any motor vehicle within the sight distance triangle, except permitted on-street parking, and the motor vehicles parked in the sight distance triangle are hereby declared to be nuisances. 
(e)	The sight distance triangle for the purposes of this section shall mean an area of each quadrant of a street intersection in which vision of motor vehicle drivers shall not be materially impeded between the heights of two and one-half (21/2) feet and eight (8) feet above the grade of the adjacent street gutter or edge of pavement, measured from the point of intersection of the centerlines of the streets, sixty-five (65) feet in each direction along the centerline of the streets. At the intersection of arterial streets, shown on the major street plan of the city, the sixty-five-foot distance shall be increased to ninety-five (95) feet. The term "street" for the purposes of this section means the existing pavement or travelway surfaces and is irrespective of property lines. 
(f)	It shall be the duty of the owner of any lot or parcel of ground in the city to maintain the sight distance triangle clear of vegetation, trees and other visibility obstructions to the curbline or travelway of adjacent streets. 
(g)	The street commissioner, or his duly authorized representative, shall inspect street intersections which come to his attention as having a sight distance blockage and shall make an examination thereof. If the street commissioner finds that the intersection has a sight distance blockage, he shall issue a notice in writing, sent by certified mail to the owners of the real estate where such obstruction is located and the owners shall have twenty (20) days within which to remove the sight distance blockage from the date of the notice. If the owners do not remove the sight distance obstructions in the aforementioned time, the city shall remove or cause to be removed the objects, trees, bushes or vegetation causing the sight distance blockage and the city clerk shall issue a special tax bill against the respective owners for the cost of the sight distance removals, including those on adjacent street right-of-way. 
(h)	It shall be lawful for the street commissioner or contractor working under his direction to enter the premises of any landowner or tenant adjacent to any of the street intersections as necessary to remove or prevent the sight distance obstruction. 
(Code 1967, § 26-33; Ord. No. 5833, §§ 2-9, 10-4-82)
Secs. 26-39-26-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public works and special assessments, RSMo Ch. 88.

Sec. 26-51. - Letting to lowest bidder required. 
    All contracts for public improvements, except temporary repairs which may be executed by day labor, shall be let to the lowest and best bidder by the council. 
    Sections 26-52 to 26-58 shall be mandatory only when the public improvement is to be paid for by the issuance of special tax bills. 
(Code 1967, § 26-43; Ord. No. 6285, §§ 1, 2, 10-5-87)
Sec. 26-52. - Advertisement for bids; frequency, content. 
    Whenever the council shall order any work of a public nature done in a part of the city for which a written contract is required it shall be the duty of the city clerk to advertise for bids in some newspaper printed in the city, by advertisement inserted seven (7) consecutive times if the same be a daily paper, and for two (2) consecutive times if the same be a weekly paper, that sealed proposals will be received in his office up to a certain time to be stated in said advertisement for doing said work, giving a general description of the work and notice that the plans and specifications for the same can be seen at his office, which plans and specifications shall have been furnished by the city engineer at or prior to the time of the advertisement for bids. Such notice shall also contain the statement of the fact that the city reserves the right to reject any and all bids. 
(Code 1967, § 26-44)
Sec. 26-53. - Submission of bids. 
    The city clerk shall note on the back of each proposal the time of receiving the same and shall file the same in his office for reference. No proposals shall be filed by him unless it is securely sealed and directed to the city council. No proposals shall be withdrawn from said officer or the seal broken by anyone until the meeting of the city council to examine the same. 
(Code 1967, § 26-45)
Sec. 26-54. - Check to accompany bid. 
(a)	Required; amount. Each bidder for any public work or improvement, the cost of which shall exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall submit with his bid a certified check on some bank, payable to the order of the finance director, in a sum equal to one percent of the amount of his bid unless otherwise determined by the city council, as a guarantee that he will enter into a contract and bond for the doing of the work. 
(b)	Return. The checks of unsuccessful bidders shall be returned to them. Those contractors whose bids are accepted shall be held until they have entered into a proper contract and bond as required by ordinance with their bids, at which time such checks or bonds shall be returned to them. 
(c)	Forfeiture. In case any person whose bid is accepted shall fail, refuse or neglect to enter into written contract and proper bond as required by this article, within ten (10) days after the acceptance of his bid the certified check deposited by him shall be forfeited to the city as liquidated damages on account of such failure of such person to enter into the contract and bond as aforesaid. 
(d)	Disposition of moneys. All money realized from such checks or bonds shall be paid into the city treasury and placed to the credit of the general expense account. 
(Code 1967, § 26-46; Ord. No. 6676, § 11, 2-1-93)
Sec. 26-55. - Action on bids. 
    After the time shall have expired for receiving proposals the city council shall convene and examine all bids submitted and shall award the contract to the lowest and best bidder; provided that the city council shall have the right to reject all bids. 
(Code 1967, § 26-47)
Sec. 26-56. - Acceptance of bid; manner, effect. 
    If the council shall desire to accept any bid received for any public work or improvement they shall accept the same by a majority vote of the members elected to the council, the yeas and nays to be entered on the record of proceedings. Such an acceptance of a bid shall be considered an award of the contract for the work or improvement bid for and the successful bidder shall enter into a proper contract and required bond within ten (10) days after the award is made. 
(Code 1967, § 26-48)
Sec. 26-56.5. - Contract to be made, bond filed. 
(a)	Contract. Every person to whom a contract for any public work or improvement is awarded, shall within ten (10) days thereafter enter into written contract with the city to do and complete the same according to the plans, specifications and ordinances, within the time prescribed by ordinance or agreed upon between the city and contractor. 
(b)	Bond. At the same time every such contractor shall enter into a bond in such sufficient amount as the city council shall determine with two (2) or more good and sufficient securities, or surety bond, to be approved by the mayor, conditioned that the contractor will faithfully and in every particular comply with all the terms of his contract and with the terms, conditions and requirements of the ordinances of the city with reference thereto, or in any manner affecting or controlling the terms of said contract and bond, and with the plans and specifications for said work or improvement. 
(c)	Custody of documents. All such contracts and bonds shall be filed in the office of the city clerk where they shall be safely kept and preserved, and shall be open to inspection by any person interested therein and to none other except by the permission of the city clerk, except that the purpose of such inspection desired by anyone else shall appear to be reasonable. 
(Code 1967, § 26-49)
Sec. 26-57. - Manner of execution of contracts. 
    Whenever any contract shall be entered into for any public work such contract shall be signed on behalf of the city by the mayor and the seal of the city and by the contractors under their hands. 
(Code 1967, § 26-50)
Sec. 26-58. - Supervision, approval of work. 
(a)	Authority of director of municipal services. All work done under any contract entered into under the provisions of this article shall be done and carried on under the supervision and direction of the director of municipal services, who shall personally inspect the work as it progresses and see that the same is done in accordance with the plans, specifications, contract and ordinances governing the same. 
(b)	Appointment, authority of inspector. The council shall have the right to appoint a suitable and competent person as inspector of any such work. The appointment of such person shall not, however, relieve the director of municipal services from a personal inspection of the work and material used therein, as often as it may be deemed necessary to ensure that the contract for the same shall be complied with in every particular. 
(c)	Approval of work. On the completion of any such work, if, in the opinion of the director of municipal services, such work has been completed in accordance with the contract, plans, specifications and ordinances, he shall so report to the council. If the council shall approve such report such approval shall be deemed an acceptance of the work by the city and the council shall thereupon provide for payment thereof, or issue special tax bills against the property liable therefor in accordance with law and the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 26-51; Ord. No. 6676, § 28, 2-1-93)
Sec. 26-59. - Contracting procedure for public improvements where no special tax bill is to be issued. 
    The quantitative criteria for determining the degree of formality to be observed for all contracts for public improvement (other than those to be paid for by special tax bill) shall be as follows: 
(a)	Contracts under one thousand dollars. Budgeted purchases under one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be made directly by the department heads without formality. 
(b)	Contracts from one thousand dollars to two thousand five hundred dollars. For budgeted repairs or improvements from one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), the city administrator of department heads, without council approval, shall solicit at least three (3) bids, either in writing, by telephone, or both. The execution of the bid requirement should be documented on a prescribed form, which form shall include a statement from the finance director that the budgeted funds are available for immediate disbursement. The bids shall be submitted to the city council for subsequent award of the contract of services to the lowest responsible bidder who submits a responsive bid which is not advantageous to the city (hereafter referred to as the "lowest responsible bidder"). 
(c)	Contracts over two thousand five hundred dollars. Whenever any contemplated purchase or contract for services is for more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), the city council, by motion, or the city administrator shall direct the city clerk to solicit at least three (3) written sealed bids for the items or services. The city council shall award the purchase or contract of services to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(d)	Solicitation of bids. Whenever any contemplated purchase or contract for services requires solicitation for bids, the city clerk, upon request of the city administrator, a department head or by order of the city council, shall cause to be published in no less than one (1) issue of a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice inviting bids. The first such notice shall be published at least seven (7) days prior to the date set for the receipt of the bids. Such notice shall include a general description of the repairs or improvements and the time and place for opening bids. In addition, the city clerk shall post a notice inviting bids in the city administrative offices and may mail to all responsible prospective contractors for services performed a copy of the notice inserted in the newspaper as required in this subsection. This provision shall not apply to those cases in which bids are solicited by telephone as set forth in subsection (b) hereof. 
(e)	Notwithstanding any provision of this section, bids may be opened and reviewed in public by a council committee, or by the city administrator, city clerk and department head meeting together, and subsequently reported to the council for its consideration and award. 
(f)	Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the city administrator may, with council approval, extend any contract awarded hereunder for the same or similar projects by no more than fifty (50) percent of the original contract amount. 
(g)	The provisions of sections 26-53, 26-54 and 26-56.5 shall apply to any contract awarded hereunder only if said contract is in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). For contracts less than twenty-five dollars ($25,000.00) the city administrator may establish requirements for bid bonds, bonding and contracts as he deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 6180, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 6676, § 11, 2-1-93)
Secs. 26-60-26-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to construct or repair sidewalks, RSMo 88.533.

Sec. 26-66. - Maintenance in good repair. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the street commissioner to inspect all sidewalks and see that the same are at all times kept in good repair. 
(b)	When he finds a sidewalk that is in need of repair, he shall at once notify the owner or agent of such property to repair same. If such owner or agent fails to repair such sidewalk within ten (10) days after being notified so to do, the street commissioner shall make report thereof to the city council and the council may authorize the street commissioner to repair the same forthwith and report to the council the actual cost of such repairs. 
(c)	The council shall thereupon issue special tax bills against each lot or piece of property abutting, fronting or lying on the sidewalk so repaired; the tax bills, when such work is not done by a contractor, shall be issued to the city and the city shall have the same power to collect such tax bills as other owners of tax bills. 
(Code 1967, § 26-62)
Sec. 26-67. - Notice of intent to construct sidewalk. 
(a)	Contents. Whenever a petition is filed with the council asking for the construction of a sidewalk on any street or highway in the city, or whenever the council on its own motion directs, without any such petition, the city clerk shall make out notices notifying the owners of all property liable for the cost of any such sidewalk or any part thereof, to be and appear at the next regular meeting of the council, and show cause if they have, why such sidewalk should not be constructed. 
(b)	Service. Such notices shall be served by the city engineer at least five (5) days before the meeting of the council at which they are summoned to appear, by delivering a copy of such notice to each property owner whose property will be liable for a part of the cost of such work, or by leaving a copy thereof at his residence with some member of his family over fifteen (15) years of age; or if such property owner is not a resident of the city then by serving the notice in the same manner on his agent; if such property be owned by a nonresident of the city who has no agent therein or none can be found by the city engineer then service shall be accomplished by placing a copy of said notice on the property to be charged with the cost of construction of such sidewalk. 
(c)	Return of service. The city engineer shall file with the city clerk a return of such notice showing how and when and upon whom such notice was served. 
(Code 1967, § 26-63)
Sec. 26-68. - Council to hear objections to construction; authority after hearing; right of owner. 
(a)	At the next regular meeting of the council after the service of the notices as is provided in section 26-67, the council shall hear the objections, if any, to the construction of such walks. 
(b)	If the council deems the sidewalks a necessity it shall by ordinance provide for the construction thereof; provided however, the owner of any lot or tract of land along which any sidewalk is ordered to be constructed shall have the right to construct his own walk, if it is done within thirty (30) days after the passage of such ordinance; and provided further, such property owner shall give the city clerk notice in writing five (5) days after the passage of such ordinance that he will build his own walk within said thirty (30) days, and furnish satisfactory evidence to the city clerk that he will so do, and if such notice is given and the same is approved by the city clerk within said five (5) days, the city clerk shall not advertise for bids for such work. 
(Code 1967, § 26-64)
Sec. 26-69. - Assessment, collection of cost of construction. 
(a)	Report required. Upon the completion of any sidewalk, the city engineer shall make a report therefor in writing to the city council of the total cost thereof, including the grading and filling opposite each lot of land and the exact amount chargeable against each tract of land liable for the cost thereof. 
(b)	Special tax levy. The report shall be examined by the city council and, if found to be correct, the council shall by ordinance levy a special tax against each lot and tract of land described in the report for the respective amounts stated therein. Corner lot shall be charged with the cost of extending the sidewalk to the curbline of the intersecting street. 
(c)	Issuance of special tax bills. Special tax bills shall be issued by the city clerk in favor of the contractor for the doing of said work and the tax bills shall be a lien upon the property against which they are issued for the amount stated in such tax bills, and shall be assignable and collectible in all respects as provided by law; but the city shall not in any event be liable for the cost of such work or any part thereof other than by the issue of such special tax bills. Such tax bills shall bear interest from thirty (30) days after the date of issue and if not paid within thirty (30) days after the date thereof, they shall bear interest at the rate of eight (8) percent after thirty (30) days from such date. 
(Code 1967, § 26-66)
Sec. 26-70. - Procedure when no bid is received. 
(a)	Generally. Whenever the city shall advertise for bids for the construction of any sidewalk in the city as herein provided, and no bids are received for such work, the city may proceed to construct such sidewalk at its own expense. In all such cases, the council shall, either by ordinance or by order entered of record, authorize the city engineer to have such work done. The city engineer shall keep an accurate account of the amount expended for labor and material, including grading and filling opposite each lot or tract of land, and present the same to the council for assessment. 
(b)	Collection of costs. Each lot or piece of ground abutting on the sidewalk constructed shall be liable for the cost thereof, as reported to the council by the city engineer. There may be as many assessments included in one ordinance as there are lots or pieces of ground reported as having received resulting benefits from the construction or reconstruction of any such sidewalk. 
(c)	Tax bills for cash. The city clerk shall issue tax bills payable to the city, against each lot or piece of ground for the amount for which it is liable. All such tax bills shall be assignable, a lien on the lot or piece of ground described therein until paid, and shall be collectible in any action brought by the city in its own name and for its own use; but where any such tax bill has been assigned, the city shall not in any event be liable for any cost that may accrue in such action, nor will the city be liable for any such tax bill after the same is so assigned. The council may provide by ordinance for a rate of interest on every such tax bill, not exceeding ten (10) percent per annum, from thirty (30) days after the date of issue of same until paid; but if not paid within six (6) months after the date of issue, then it may bear interest from its date at the rate of fifteen (15) percent per annum until paid. 
(Code 1967, § 26-67)
Sec. 26-71. - Standard sidewalk plans adopted, incorporated by reference. 
    Standards for the construction of sidewalks in the city shall be those standards filed in the office of the city engineer, and such standards are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the standards according to which all sidewalks shall hereafter be constructed in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 26-68)
Sec. 26-72. - Thickness, width, proportions of aggregate and cement prescribed. 
    In the absence of a special permit from the city council permitting a deviation from the provisions of this article, all sidewalks hereafter constructed in the city shall be four (4) inches thick and four (4) feet wide, and the proportions of aggregate and cement therefor shall be in accordance with the standards specifications of the state highway department. 
(Code 1967, § 26-69)
Sec. 26-73. - Specifications for construction. 
    All sidewalks hereafter constructed in the city shall be constructed in accordance with the following specifications: 
(1)	Excavation. The space where the sidewalk is to be laid shall be excavated to a depth of four (4) inches below the finished surface of the sidewalk, and the subgrade shall be trimmed and thoroughly tamped to a plane parallel with the surface of the completed walk. Whenever in the opinion of the city engineer subdrainage is needed, then the subgrade shall be trimmed to an extra depth of two (2) inches in the center where a three-inch porous drain tile shall be placed longitudinally under the walk. This extra two (2) inch excavation shall then be filled with cinders and thoroughly tamped. 
(2)	Forms. Forms composed of wood or steel strips shall be set accurately to line and grade; the outside form shall be set at an elevation above the curbline of one-half inch to the foot of distance between the face of the curb and the outer edge of the walk. The walk shall have a transverse slope toward the street of one-fourth inch to the foot in width. 
(3)	Cement. The cement used must be the best quality Port-land cement of a standard brand and such as will pass the test specified by the National Cement Users Association. 
(4)	Stone. Stone shall be crushed Joplin flint or hard lime-stone, so broken that the greatest dimensions shall not exceed one and one-half (11/2) inches. It shall be hard and free from shale, clay and dirt, but may contain limestone dust to the amount of four (4) percent of the total amount of the rock. Clean Booneville or Sedalia gravel or its equivalent may be used subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(5)	Concrete. The concrete shall be composed of cement, sand and flint, or crushed limestone in the proportions prescribed by the state highway department, unless in the opinion of the city engineer deviation therefrom is advisable. 
(6)	Mixing. If the concrete is mixed by hand, the cement and aggregate shall be mixed and the water added on a tight platform large enough to provide space for the partial mixing of two (2) batches of not more than one cubic yard each. The sand and cement shall be spread in thin layers and mixed dry until uniform in color. This mixture shall be spread upon a layer of stone, or the stone shoveled upon it, before adding the water, or it may be made into a mortar before spreading it with stone. In the former method the material shall be turned at least three (3) times in addition to the mixing of the sand and cement already mentioned, the water being added on the first turning, and in addition to the shoveling from the platform to place, or into the vehicle for transportation. In the latter method, that is, if the sand and cement are first made into a mortar the mass of mortar and stone shall be turned at least twice. Whatever method is employed, the number of turnings shall be sufficient to produce a resulting loose concrete of uniform color and appearance with the stone thoroughly incorporated into the mortar and the consistency uniform throughout. 
    If the concrete is mixed in a machine mixer, a machine shall be selected into which the materials, including the water, can be precisely and regularly proportioned, and which will produce a concrete of uniform consistency and color, with the stones and water thoroughly mixed and incorporated with the mortar. 
(7)	Laying concrete. The concrete shall be deposited in forms, set, staged and well and accurately braced to line and grade, and shall be thoroughly tamped to a depth of three-quarter inch below the finished surface of the walk. A top dressing of cement mortar mixed in the proportion of one part of cement to two (2) parts of clean, sharp, coarse sand shall be placed on the concrete within thirty (30) minutes after the latter is put in place. 
(8)	Driveways. Whenever driveways are necessary they shall be constructed as shown on the plans on the same grade as the sidewalks, and shall have a concrete base as above specified, four and one-half (41/2) inches thick, and a top dressing as above specified one inch thick, and may be finished with a float or trowel; if however a trowel finish is used, longitudinal corrigations one-half inch deep and six (6) inches apart shall be made the whole width of the driveway. 
(Code 1967, § 26-70)
Sec. 26-74. - Sidewalks to conform to specifications. 
(a)	All sidewalks hereafter constructed in the city shall conform to the specifications given in section 26-73, and any sidewalk hereafter constructed in said city which shall not conform to the above specifications shall be subject to be condemned and removed by the city council. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a sidewalk in the city on any street or highway therein in any other manner than that described in such specifications. 
(c)	All sidewalks hereafter constructed within the city shall be subject to the inspection of the street commissioner and/or city engineer and if either officer is of the opinion that any person is not constructing sidewalks in accordance with the specifications herein described, he shall notify such person; and if such person shall fail or refuse to comply with the directions of the street commissioner and/or city engineer in the construction of any such walk, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 26-71)
Sec. 26-75. - Replacement of unfit sidewalks. 
    The city council shall have full power and authority to condemn and destroy and sidewalk deemed unfit for use, and replace the same with a new one of the same or different material. When any sidewalk is condemned by the council it shall be the duty of the street commissioner at once to remove such sidewalk. 
(Code 1967, § 26-72)
Secs. 26-75-26-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION OF CURBING 

Sec. 26-86. - Authority of city council. 
    Whenever the city council deems it advisable for the streets to be improved, that curbing be constructed along the line of the roadways of the streets and alleys within the city, they shall cause specifications therefor to be made by the city engineer to be filed and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 26-83)
Sec. 26-87. - Regulation of material, manner of construction. 
    The city council shall by ordinance provide for curbing to be constructed of such material and in such manner as may by the council be directed. 
(Code 1967, § 26-84)
Sec. 26-88. - Letting contracts for work. 
(a)	Advertisement for bids. The contract for work provided for in this article shall be let to the lowest and best bidder therefor, upon advertisement published in the city. 
(b)	Estimate prerequisite to contract. Before the council shall make any contract for any of said improvements, an estimate of the cost thereof shall be made by the city engineer, which estimate shall be filed with the city clerk, and no contract shall be let for any of said work for a price exceeding such estimate. 
(c)	Readvertisement. Where the bids for such work are above the estimate or no bids are presented, or where the bids are for any reason rejected, or where the contractor to whom the contract is awarded fails to enter into a written contract for the performance of said contract, or to execute a bond as required by ordinance, within the time specified therefor the council may readvertise for bids. 
(Code 1967, § 26-85)
Sec. 26-89. - Authority of city engineer. 
    All work done under the provisions of this article shall be done under the supervision of the city engineer and no work shall be accepted by the council until it has been approved by the written report of the city engineer. 
(Code 1967, § 26-86)
Sec. 26-90. - Guarantee of permanence of work. 
    The council shall have the power to require any contractor doing work to guarantee that an improvement will last for a specified term of years, and during such term will be kept in repair, and to require the contractor to give the city approved bonds for the faithful performance of any obligation. 
(Code 1967, § 26-87)
Sec. 26-91. - Charging cost of construction, repair. 
(a)	Construction. The cost of constructing curbing shall be charged against the lots and tracts of lands fronting or abutting on the improvement in proportion to the fronting or abutting feet, except that corner lots shall be charged with the cost of extending the curbing to the curblines of intersecting streets and curbing and extending the curbing back to the street line at intersecting streets and alleys. 
(b)	Repair. The cost of repairing curbing shall be charged against the particular lot or tract of land fronting or abutting the part repaired. 
(Code 1967, § 26-88)
Sec. 26-92. - Apportionment of cost, issuance of tax bills therefor. 
(a)	Upon the completion of any improvement hereunder in accordance with the contract for same, the city engineer shall compute the whole cost thereof and apportion the cost among the tracts of land chargeable therewith, charging each tract of land with its proportionate part of the costs as herein provided, and shall make a written report to the council that the improvement has been completed in accordance with the contract for same, which report shall also contain a description of each tract of land chargeable with a part of the cost of the improvement and the amount with which it is chargeable. 
(b)	If the council accepts the work and approves said report, which acceptance and approval may be by motion duly adopted, then the city clerk shall issue and deliver to the contractor who did the work special tax bills in payment for the work in accordance with the city engineer's report, which tax bills shall be signed by the city clerk under the corporate seal of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 26-89)
Sec. 26-93. - Special tax bills-Issuance, effect. 
    The charges made against lands for all of such improvements shall be known as special assessments or taxes for improvements, and shall be charged and assessed by issuing special tax bills against the lands chargeable with the cost of the improvements; each special tax bill shall be a special lien on the land against which it is issued. 
(Code 1967, § 26-90)
Sec. 26-94. - Same-Contents. 
    Each special tax bill issued hereunder shall contain a brief statement of the facts authorizing its issue, the amount for which it is issued, a description of the land against which it is issued, the rate of interest which it bears, and when it begins to bear interest, shall state that it is a special lien against the land described, and shall give the time the lien continues. It need not give the name of the owner of the land against which it is issued. 
(Code 1967, § 26-91)
Sec. 26-95. - Same-Interest rate. 
    Special tax bills issued hereunder shall bear interest after thirty (30) days from the date of issue at the rate of eight (8) percent per annum unless the council by ordinance shall fix a different rate of interest, but no rate fixed by the city shall exceed eight (8) percent per annum. 
(Code 1967, § 26-92)
Sec. 26-96. - Same-Lien. 
    Every tax bill shall be a lien against the land described therein for five (5) years after its date, unless sooner paid, except tax bills payable in installments as herein specified, the time of which shall not expire until one year after the date of the maturity of the last installment. 
(Code 1967, § 26-93)
Secs. 26-97-26-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXCAVATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- License tax for ditching and excavating contractors, § 28-24(25).

Sec. 26-106. - Definition. 
    Whenever in this article the phrase "public way" is used the same shall be held to include any and all streets, avenues, alleys, parkways or sidewalks. 
(Code 1967, § 26-104)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-107. - Permit, bond requirements, permit fee. 
(a)	No person whether licensed or not, shall, unless officially authorized to do so, make an excavation within the right-of-way limits of any public way without first obtaining a permit in writing from the building official. Any person other than a licensee who desires a permit to make an excavation in public ways in the city will be required to post a cash bond in the amount determined by the building official. 
(b)	Whenever any department of the city, or any corporation having authority under its franchise to do so, shall make any excavation in any public way in the city, such corporation and the head of such city department shall first obtain a written permit as provided in subsection (a), except that no bond will be required of such city department. 
(c)	Any person required to obtain a permit under subsection (a) to make an excavation within the right-of-way limits of any public way if the adjacent surface be asphalt, macadam, asphalt or oil seal, or rock, shall pay to the city a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for such permit. The person making the excavation shall be responsible for all labor, material and equipment necessary to make the excavation and for backfilling same, except the city shall furnish the equipment and labor necessary for compacting the backfill in accordance with the provisions of section 26-109. 
(Code 1967, § 26-105)
Sec. 26-108. - Barricades and danger signals to be erected and placed. 
    Any person who has made an excavation in any of the public ways of the city shall cause such excavation to be barricaded in such manner as to adequately protect traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, and shall cause such excavations, barricades, excavated materials, tools, supplies or equipment at such excavated sites to be lighted with proper and suitable danger signals in such manner that all traffic may be amply and duly warned of the existence of such excavations, barricades, materials, tools, supplies or equipment. 
(Code 1967, § 26-106)
Sec. 26-109. - Excavation to be backfilled, compacted, inspected. 
(a)	At the completion of any work requiring an excavation in public ways such excavation shall be immediately backfilled by filling the excavation or opening in approximately six-inch lifts with suitable backfilling material. Each lift shall be well-tamped or compacted with either hand or mechanical tampers and sufficient water shall be added to each lift uniformly to assure thorough settlement and density thereof. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the building official to inspect the backfill upon completion of same. If the excavation has been made by any person required to obtain a permit under section 26-107(a), and if conditions are found to be satisfactory, the person responsible for the excavation shall be relieved from further liability and maintenance in connection therewith. 
(Code 1967, § 26-107)
Sec. 26-110. - Sanitary sewer connections to be inspected prior to backfilling. 
    Every sanitary sewer connection made within any public way in the city shall be inspected by the building official before any part of the excavation is backfilled, and no person shall backfill any excavation containing any sanitary sewer connection without the prior approval of the building official. 
(Code 1967, § 26-108)
Sec. 26-111. - Maintenance of backfill. 
    After an excavation has been backfilled in any public way as herein provided, if the excavation has been made by any person as outlined in section 26-107(b), the person responsible for the excavation shall maintain the backfill for a period of ninety (90) days and make certain the backfill surface remains at approximately the same grade as the adjacent surface and at such level that it will not be hazardous or detrimental to persons or vehicles passing thereover. If in the opinion of the building official, the person responsible for the excavation fails to maintain said backfill at the proper grade or level, the city shall restore the backfill to the required grade or level and charge the costs incurred to the person responsible for the excavation in accordance with provisions set forth herein. 
(Code 1967, § 26-109)
Sec. 26-112. - Inspection; approval of backfill. 
    At the expiration of ninety (90) days from the initial backfilling of an excavation, if the excavation has been made by any person as outlined in section 26-107(b), the building official shall inspect the same and if conditions are found to be satisfactory the person responsible for the excavation shall be relieved from further liability in connection therewith, except for the cost of any items of work done by the city but necessitated through negligence or failure on the part of the person responsible for the excavation and the cost of resurfacing as herein provided. 
(Code 1967, § 26-110)
Sec. 26-113. - Effect of disapproval of backfill. 
    In the event that upon final inspection as provided in section 26-112 the building official shall determine that the excavation has not been properly backfilled or that conditions are not satisfactory, he shall so advise the person responsible for the excavation and if thereafter such person fails to take reasonably expeditious measures to make the necessary corrections, the city will perform the required work and charge the cost incurred together with the cost of surfacing the excavation as herein provided to the person responsible for the excavation. 
(Code 1967, § 26-111)
Sec. 26-114. - Duty in event of removal of certain existing compacted base. 
    In the event of the removal of certain existing compacted base, such as concrete, rolled stone, macadam or brick, the same shall be replaced with concrete six (6) inches thick before resurfacing. 
(Code 1967, § 26-112)
Sec. 26-115. - Resurfacing after approval of backfill; procedure. 
(a)	Upon acceptance of the backfill by the building official, if the excavation has been made by any person required to obtain a permit under section 26-107(a), the city shall proceed to resurface the area excavated with the same type and with as good quality surface as the adjacent surface. 
(b)	Upon acceptance of the backfill by the building official if the excavation has been made by any person required to obtain a permit under section 26-107(b), the person responsible for the excavation shall immediately proceed to resurface as the adjacent surface, which resurfacing shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city engineer. Any cost incurred by the city by reason of negligence or improper or unfinished work by the person responsible for the excavation or by reason of any noncompliance with this article shall be paid for by the person responsible for the excavation. 
(Code 1967, § 26-113)
Chapter 27 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or providing regulations for the same saved from repeal, § 1-5(9); buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 26; utilities, Ch. 30; zoning, Ch. 32.
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate subdivisions, RSMo 89.410.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 27-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as "The Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Marshall, Missouri." 
(Code 1967, § 27-1)
Sec. 27-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to set forth rules and regulations for the subdivision of real property so that each subdivision shall be properly coordinated with existing streets, utilities, public facilities and plans for developing these entities. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. To protect the public, among other purposes, such provisions are intended to provide for permanently wholesome community environment, adequate municipal services, safe streets and comprehensive sound development of the city, both as to its present and future requirements. 
(Code 1967, § 27-2)
Sec. 27-3. - Subdivision and development board created. 
    There is hereby created a subdivision and development advisory board, hereafter referred to in this chapter as board, which will consist of four (4) members, three (3) of whom shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council, to serve at the pleasure of the city council. The mayor shall be the fourth member and shall serve as the chairman of the board. 
(Code 1967, §§ 27-3, 27-4)
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-311 et seq. 
Sec. 27-4. - Performance bond for installation of streets, sidewalks, street pavement, curbs, curb and gutter and drain and storm sewer facilities. 
(a)	The proper installation of streets, sidewalks, street pavement, curbs, curb and gutter and storm sewer facilities located in dedicated rights-of-way or easements in new subdivisions shall be complete and accepted by the city, or guaranteed by the furnishing by the subdivider or his agent of surety for the proper installation of streets, etc. If a surety bond, letter of credit or credit or demand note acceptable to the city to guarantee the installation of streets, etc., if a surety bond, letter of credit or demand note is to be issued, it shall be in favor of the city, and no building permit shall be issued for any lot or tract in a subdivision which abuts a street for which satisfactory surety has not been furnished. Construction plans for such installation must be approved by the city before construction begins. The subdivider shall not be permitted to cancel the surety bond, letter of credit or demand note without the written permission of the city. The amount of surety bond, letter of credit or demand note shall be for a term of not less than one (1) year nor more than two (2) years; however, upon completion by the subdivider and acceptance by the city of the improvements before the expiration date of the bond, letter of credit or demand note, it will be released by the city. 
(b)	If, within a sixty (60) day period before the date of expiration of the surety bond, such required installations do not meet the city's specifications, the subdivider and the bonding company will be notified by the city that the improvements do not meet the city's specifications and failure to bring said installations up to required standards before the expiration date of the bond will result in the bond's being forfeited to the city, and so much of the bond as may be necessary to bring the streets up to specifications may be expended by the city and any excess of the bond shall be returned to the subdivider or his bondsman according to the agreements therein contained. 
(Code 1967, § 27-5; Ord. No. 6059, § 1, 2-4-85)
Secs. 27-5-27-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATS 

Sec. 27-16. - Preliminary plat-Contents. 
    A preliminary plat must be filed with the subdivision and development advisory board. The plat shall be drawn to a scale of one hundred (100) feet to one inch, or larger, and shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)	The proposed name of the subdivision, which must not be so similar to that of an existing subdivision as to cause confusion, and the names of adjacent subdivisions; 
(2)	The names of the owner or licensed engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and design; 
(3)	The location of boundary lines and their relation to established lines and fractional section lines; 
(4)	The location and width of existing and proposed streets, sidewalks, roads, lots, alleys, building lines, park and other features, and similar facts regarding property immediately adjacent thereto; also the location and size of existing sewers and water mains. If there are no adjacent subdivisions, a map made on a smaller scale may be required by the board showing the outline and ownership of adjacent properties, location and distance of the nearest subdivision and how the streets, alleys or highways in the subdivision offered for record may connect with those in the nearest subdivisions; 
(5)	A survey showing physical features of the property, including locations of watercourses, ravines, bridges, culverts, present structures, size of adjacent drainage areas in acres and other features pertinent to the subdivision. The outline of wooded areas or the location of important individual trees may be required. On extensive or broken tracts, the board may require contours at intervals of two (2) or five (5) feet. All grades shown shall be referred to U.S.G.A. data. The approximate acreage of the property is to be indicated; 
(6)	Approximate grades and gradients of streets, including existing streets within the proposed development, and outside streets tangent or adjacent thereto; 
(7)	A designation of the proposed uses of land within the subdivision, including the type of residential use, location of business or industrial sites, and sites for churches, schools, parks or other special uses; 
(8)	North point, scale and date.
(Code 1967, § 27-15)
Sec. 27-17. - Same-Approval. 
    As soon as practicable and not later than forty-five (45) days after its receipt of the preliminary plat, the board shall, after having given due consideration to the preliminary plat, advise the person filing the plat of its approval or disapproval of the plat; and if the same be disapproved, shall advise the person filing the plat of the reasons for its disapproval. The approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute acceptance of the subdivision, but merely an authorization to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. No construction work shall be done on the subdivision before the final plat is accepted, except with the written approval of the board and the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 27-16)
Sec. 27-18. - Stage construction. 
    The developer may, after receiving approval of the preliminary plat, petition the subdivision and development advisory board to proceed with the subdivision stages. The area may be divided into sections and after approval by the board and the city council, the installation of the improvements required in section 27-54 may be constructed. Ordinarily, the minimum length of a street to be improved shall be three hundred (300) feet unless permission is granted by the board for a lesser amount. 
(Code 1967, § 27-17; Ord. No. 7342, § 1, 8-6-01)
Sec. 27-19. - Filing fee. 
    The subdivider shall file his proposed plat of subdivision in the office of the mayor for consideration by the subdivision and development advisory board, and shall upon such filing pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Code 1967, § 27-18)
Sec. 27-20. - Final plat-Contents. 
    After the preliminary plat has been approved by the subdivision and development advisory board, a final plat in the form of a record plat shall be prepared and submitted to the board for approval by that body and the city council. This plat shall be drawn on tracing cloth of standard sheet size in India ink, and shall be to a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch unless otherwise directed by the board, and shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)	The name of the subdivision and adjacent subdivisions, the names of streets, to conform wherever possible to existing street names, and numbers of lots and blocks, in accordance with a systematic arrangement. In case of branching streets, the lines of departure shall be indicated; 
(2)	An accurate boundary survey of the property, with bearings and distances, referenced to section corners, and showing, in dotted lines, the lines of all adjacent lands and the lines of adjacent streets and alleys, with their widths and names; 
(3)	Location of lots, streets, sidewalks, public highways, alleys, parks and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the length of radii and of arcs of all curves and with all other information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground. Dimensions shall be shown from all angle points and points of curve to lot lines; 
(4)	The location of building lines on front and side streets and the location of utility easements; 
(5)	Profiles of grades for streets, if required by the council or by the subdivision and development advisory board; 
(6)	Certification of dedication of all streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other land intended for public use, signed by the owner or owners and by all other parties who have a mortgage or lien interest in the property; 
(7)	An affidavit of ownership showing fee simple title and encumbrances and liens;
(8)	Certification by a registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor to the effect that the plan represents a survey made by him, and that all the necessary survey monuments are correctly shown thereon; 
(9)	Certificates of approval on the tracing to be filled out by the subdivision and development advisory board. 
(10)	North point, scale and date.
(Code 1967, § 27-19)
Sec. 27-21. - Same-Figures, letters to be plain, distinct, etc. 
    All figures and letters shown on the final plat must be plain, distinct and of sufficient size to be easily read, and must be of sufficient density to make a lasting and permanent record. 
(Code 1967, § 27-20)
Sec. 27-22. - Same-Key map required. 
    When more than one sheet is submitted as a final plat, a key map showing the entire subdivision at smaller scale, with block numbers and street names, shall be shown on one of the sheets or on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(Code 1967, § 27-21)
Sec. 27-23. - Action on final plat; notice to subdivider. 
    The subdivision and development advisory board shall within forty-five (45) days after receipt of the final plat, determine its recommendation as to whether the plat shall be approved, approved with modifications, or disapproved, and shall within the forty-five (45) day period give notice to the subdivider of its determination. If approved, the board shall so note on the face of the plat and shall thereupon forward the plat to the city council, notifying the subdivider of its action. If approved with modification, or if disapproved, the board shall attach to the original plat a statement of the reasons for the action and shall forthwith return the original of the plat to the subdivider, retaining one copy thereof for its records. 
(Code 1967, § 27-22)
Sec. 27-24. - Appeal from disapproval of plat. 
    If the final plat is returned to the subdivider as provided in section 27-23, the subdivider may appeal the decision of the subdivision and development advisory board to the city council, and the decision of a majority of the members of the council present and voting at the meeting to which the appeal is made shall be final. 
(Code 1967, § 27-23)
Sec. 27-25. - Plat approval necessary for furnishing of utilities. 
    Permission shall not be granted for the connection of utilities to the various city utility systems, nor shall the city owned utility systems be extended to serve a subdivision until the plat for the subdivision has been approved by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 27-24)
Sec. 27-26. - Plat disapproval if utilities cannot be furnished within reasonable time. 
    The city council may refuse to approve a plat unless it is evident that proper water and sewer facilities can be supplied within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1967, § 27-25)
Sec. 27-27. - Recording of plat. 
    No building permit shall be issued providing for the improvement of any lot in the subdivision until there has been filed with the building division of the department of public works a copy of the plat of the subdivision bearing the approval of the subdivision and development advisory board and the city council, certified to by the recorder of deeds of the county that the plat has been recorded in his office and that the copy is a true and correct copy of the plat so recorded. 
(Code 1967, § 27-26)
Sec. 27-28. - Variation in application of regulations. 
    The subdivision and development advisory board may recommend a variation of the application of the regulations of this chapter in harmony with their general purpose and intent and in accordance with the rules herein contained in cases where there are particular difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any such regulations relating to the subdividing of land, and may recommend to the city council that it approve the plat of subdivision in spite of failure to strictly comply with the letter of any of the regulations, stating the reasons for its recommendations. 
(Code 1967, § 27-27)
Sec. 27-29. - Advice, cooperation furnished. 
    Advice and cooperation in the preparation of plats shall be freely given by the department of public works and the departments of light and water of the city, and by the subdivision and development advisory board. It is suggested that each subdivider of land confer with these departments before preparing the preliminary plat in order to become more thoroughly familiar with subdivision requirements and the zoning ordinances affecting the territory in which the proposed subdivision lies. 
(Code 1967, § 27-28)
Sec. 27-30. - Restricting changes in lot sizes in new subdivisions. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot in any new subdivision to sell or offer for sale any such lots in the subdivision the size of which has been reduced by amendments or changes and it shall likewise be unlawful for the platters of any new subdivision to change or amend the width or location of any streets as shown on the plats accepted by the city council without prior approval by the city council after a public hearing on the matter is duly held. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to change or amend the proposed uses or restrictions concerning any new subdivision as submitted under section 27-16(7) without prior approval by the city council after a public hearing on the matter is duly held. 
(Code 1967, § 27-29)
Secs. 27-31-27-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN 

Sec. 27-41. - Permanent monuments. 
    The engineer shall place sufficient permanent monuments along the boundaries of the property so that another engineer may retrace his work with accuracy. Iron pins not less than three (3) feet long and three-quarter inch in diameter shall be placed at block corners, angle points on the streets and the beginning and end of curves on streets. 
(Code 1967, § 27-39)
Sec. 27-42. - Street arrangement. 
    Unless otherwise approved by the council, provision must be made for the extension of main thoroughfares as shown on the major street plan of the city planning commission; secondary streets must provide free circulation within the subdivision. Off-center street intersections will not be approved except in cases where land use will not justify same or in other unusual cases. 
(Code 1967, § 27-40)
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 27-43. - System of streets. 
    The system of streets designed for the subdivision, except in unusual cases where land use will not justify the same or in other unusual cases, shall connect with streets already dedicated in adjacent subdivisions; and where no adjacent connections are platted, the system of streets shall in general be the reasonable projections of streets in nearest subdivided tracts, and shall be continued to the boundaries of the tract subdivided so that other subdivisions may connect therewith. 
(Code 1967, § 27-41)
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 27-44. - Arrangement of large parcels within subdivision. 
    In case a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than normal building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to permit the opening of future streets and logical resubdivisions. 
(Code 1967, § 27-42)
Sec. 27-45. - Dead-end streets, courts and places. 
    Except where land use will justify the same or in other unusual cases, no dead-end streets will be approved unless the dead-end streets are provided to connect with future streets in adjacent land, but courts or places may be permitted where the contour of the land makes it difficult to plat with connecting streets. The courts or places shall provide proper access to all lots and shall generally not exceed four hundred (400) feet in length, and a turnaround shall be provided at the closed end with an outside curb radius of at least forty (40) feet. 
(Code 1967, § 27-43)
Sec. 27-46. - Street widths. 
    All streets shall be at least fifty (50) feet in width, but a greater width may be required by the city council upon the recommendation of the subdivision and development advisory board. 
(Code 1967, § 27-44)
Sec. 27-47. - Alleys or loading courts. 
    Except in unusual cases, alleys or loading courts must be provided in business blocks. Alleys are optional in residential districts, but may be required where alleys of adjoining subdivisions would be closed or shut off from egress by the failure to provide alleys in the new subdivision. Alleys shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. In case of intersecting alleys, a cutoff of at least five (5) feet shall be required to be measured from the point of intersection of the alley lines the resultant connecting lot line to be at least five (5) feet in length. 
(Code 1967, § 27-45)
Sec. 27-48. - Block lengths; pedestrian ways. 
    In general, intersecting streets which served to determine block lengths shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross traffic adequately and to meet existing streets or customary subdivision practice in the neighborhood. Where no existing plats control, the blocks may not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length, except that a greater length may be permitted by the city council upon the recommendation of the subdivision and development advisory board. In blocks longer than five hundred (500) feet, pedestrian ways through the block may be required near the center of the block. The pedestrian ways shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet. 
(Code 1967, § 27-46)
Sec. 27-49. - Residential lot sizes. 
    The size of lots in residential districts shall be adequate for the proposed structure, and shall conform to the minimum sizes established in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 27-47; Ord. No. 6979, § 1, 9-3-96)
Sec. 27-50. - Lot lines. 
    All lots shall have the side lines as nearly as practicable at right angles to the street on which the lot faces. Lots with double frontage are undesirable and shall be avoided wherever possible. 
(Code 1967, § 27-48)
Sec. 27-51. - Building lines. 
    Building lines shall be shown on all lots and shall provide at least the setback required by similar existing areas in the city. If, however, suitable provision is made in connection with the plat or the restrictions pertaining to the plat, building lines may thereafter be varied without the consent of the council, provided the variation does not reduce the setback more than five (5) feet, nor to less than the setback required in similar existing areas in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 27-49)
Sec. 27-52. - Utility easements. 
    Easements of not less than eight (8) feet shall be provided on each side of rear or side lines, where necessary, for public utilities. If necessary for the extension of main water or sewer lines, or similar utilities, easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots. Easements where practicable shall connect with established easements in adjoining property. The indication of easements on a plat does not necessarily constitute a dedication of such easements to public use, but the easements as shown shall not thereafter be changed without the consent of the council. Adequate drainage courses for storm water shall be provided for by easement. 
(Code 1967, § 27-50)
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 30. 
Sec. 27-53. - Parks, school sites, playgrounds. 
    Suitable sites for parks, schools, playgrounds and any other public requirements should be carefully considered and indicated on the preliminary plat so that it can be determined which of the sites should be indicated on the final plat, and when and in what manner such areas will be acquired by the city. Attention is called to the advantages on a large tract of dedicating a reasonable percent of the property for such use. 
(Code 1967, § 27-51)
Cross reference- Parks, recreation and city property, Ch. 19. 
Sec. 27-54. - Subdivider to provide certain improvements. 
    Prior to the granting of final approval by the city council, the subdivider shall provide for the installation of the following improvements: 
(1)	Sidewalks, walks and parkways. Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed on at least one side of all platted streets and shall be so constructed as to comply with sections 26-71-26-74. A minimum of thirteen (13) feet of the width of each street shall be reserved for walks and parkways except that in streets of a greater width than fifty (50) feet, the board, with the approval of the city council, may require a wider area to be reserved for sidewalks, walks and parkways. Areas reserved for sidewalks, walks and parkways shall be of equal width on each side of the street so that the center line of the roadway shall in all events be the center line of the street. 
(2)	Roadway surfaces. All roadways shall be surfaced in accordance with the minimum specifications then existing for the construction of other streets in the city. 
(3)	Sanitary sewer system. A sanitary sewer system shall be planned and designed in accordance with the standards of the bureau of public health engineering of the state and the subdivision and development advisory board, and with the provision of necessary sewer easement, the construction of the same to be dependent upon the availability of city sanitary sewer facilities at reasonable cost. 
(4)	Cost, supervision. The subdivider shall, prior to the granting of approval by the city council, agree to be responsible for the cost of all improvements herein mentioned. All improvements shall be constructed under the supervision and subject to the inspection and approval of the city engineer. 
(Code 1967, § 27-52)
Chapter 28 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; finance and purchasing, § 2-331 et seq.
State Law reference- Taxation by third class cities, RSMo 94.010 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Levy of taxes, authorized; purposes. 
    For the support of the city government, the payment of the outstanding debt, and the advancement, interest and improvement of the city and the welfare of its inhabitants, taxes shall be levied upon all property, real and personal, subject to taxation for state, county and city purposes. 
(Ord. No. 6057, § 23, 2-4-85)
Sec. 28-2. - Fixing tax rate; limitations. 
    It shall be the duty of the mayor and city council, no later than the first meeting of the council in August in each year, to establish by ordinance the rate of taxes to be levied, assessed and collected on the assessed valuation of real estate and personal property within the city subject to taxation for city purposes. Such rate shall not exceed the limits as shall be established by ordinance from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 6057, § 23, 2-4-85)
Sec. 28-3. - Penalty for failure to pay tax at time and place required. 
    If any taxpayer shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay to the county collector his taxes at the time and place required by the statement thereof sent to said taxpayer, it shall be the duty of the county collector after the first day of January next ensuing, to collect, and account for as other taxes, an additional tax in the maximum amount permitted under the Revised Statutes of Missouri as penalty. 
(Ord. No. 6057, § 23, 2-4-85)
Secs. 28-4-28-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- License for sale of nonintoxicating beer, § 4-26 et seq.; licenses for sale of intoxicating liquor, § 4-61 et seq.; license for electrical work, §7-56et seq.; licenses for plumbing work, § 7-96 et seq.; business license on massage establishments, § 16-26 et seq.; license for peddlers and solicitors, § 20-16 et seq.; license for photographers, § 21-16 et seq.; license for junkyards, junk dealers, itinerant junk dealers, 24-36 et seq.
State Law reference- Authority to impose license taxes on certain businesses, RSMo. 94.110; imposition of tax on businesses limited, RSMo 71.610.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-11. - License required for designated occupations. 
    No person without first having obtained a license therefor, shall, in the city, engage in or carry on any business, profession, occupation, trade or calling for which a license fee is provided in section 28-24. 
(Code 1967, § 18-1)
Sec. 28-12. - Businesses, occupations, agencies, tables and contrivances defined. 
    For the purposes of this article certain businesses, occupations, agencies, tables and contrivances are hereby defined as follows: 
    Contractor means a person or company who specializes in a skilled trade and sells either his labor or material (or both) at a predetermined price (either hourly, unit or lump sum) and controls the enterprise for profit. 
    Loan service means any firm, company or corporation, not licensed as banker or broker, which is engaged in lending money or discounting notes or other obligations to pay money. 
    Loan service and/or payday loan means any firm, company or corporation, not licensed as a bank, which is engaged in lending money or discounting notes or other obligations to pay money. 
    Merchant means any person who shall deal in the selling of goods, wares and merchandise, either by retail or wholesale, at any stand, store or place occupied for that purpose. 
    Photographer means any person engaged in the business of taking photographs either in a studio or upon the streets, whether the photographer be a resident or nonresident of the city. 
    Rummage sale means a sale of small personal property for the purpose of clearing out the attic, garage of basement, etc., which does not last more than four (4) periods per year, each period not to exceed seven (7) days. 
    Solicitor means any person who shall go from place to place within the city and takes orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, for future delivery, either by himself or by some other person. 
    Transient merchant means a small retail dealer who carries his merchandise with him, traveling from place to place and from house to house, exposing his goods for sale and selling them. 
(Code 1967, § 18-2; Ord. No. 7731, §§ 1-8, 2-5-07)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 28-13. - Payment of license tax prior to licensing. 
(a)	Required. Any person who desires to procure a license for any purposes mentioned in this article, shall, before applying to the city clerk therefor, pay to the county collector of revenue in and for the city any and all delinquent city taxes, including penalties and interest. 
(b)	Duty of clerk. It shall be the duty of the clerk to inform all applicants for licenses under the provisions of this article of the amount of tax to be paid for any specified purpose, and to issue a receipt to all persons so applying for money so paid by such applicants, which receipt shall state amount of money so received, the license purposes for which it was paid, and the time for which such license is to be issued. 
(Code 1967, § 18-3; Ord. No. 6047, § 8, 12-17-84)
Sec. 28-14. - Duty of city clerk to issue licenses, restrictions. 
    It shall be duty of the city clerk to issue licenses to any and all persons applying therefor and producing the receipt for the correct amount of money specified therefor, for the time and purpose for which license is to be issued provided, that where, by the provisions of this article it shall be necessary for the applicant for any license to any thing other than pay the clerk the correct amount and take his receipt, as aforesaid, such applicant shall produce and furnish to the clerk satisfactory evidence that such provisions have been complied with and that all things necessary or required to be done have been done, before the city clerk shall issue such license; provided further, that the city clerk shall not issue any license provided for herein without first having satisfied himself that the applicant is not delinquent in the payment of any other tax, or the ash, trash and garbage collection and disposal fee. 
(Code 1967, § 18-5; Ord. No. 6047, § 9, 12-17-84)
Sec. 28-15. - Assignment, transfer of license. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be assigned or transferred. 
(Code 1967, § 18-6)
Sec. 28-16. - Refunds of license fee. 
    No money paid for any license issued under the provisions of this article shall be refunded by the city, or by any officer thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 18-7; Ord. No. 6047, § 10, 12-17-84)
Sec. 28-17. - Expiration of licenses; late fees; penalty for failure to obtain. 
    Expiration of licenses; late fees; penalty for failure to obtain. 
(a)	All licenses issued under this article will expire on March 1st following date of issue. 
(b)	All licenses required to be purchased under this article will be subject to a penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) per month when purchased on or after April 1st. 
(c)	The city will institute the necessary legal action to collect licenses required by this chapter and not purchased by April 1st of each year. 
(Code 1967, § 18-8; Ord. No. 7820, § 1, 6-16-08; Ord. No. 7922, § 1, 2-1-10)
Sec. 28-18. - Form, contents of license. 
(a)	All licenses authorized by this article shall be signed by the mayor and city clerk, and the clerk shall affix thereto the corporate seal of the city. Such license shall show in what place or at what location in the city the business licensed thereby is to be carried on, giving the street number or such other identification of such place, provided such business be of such nature that its location can be given. 
(b)	Such license shall be in substantially the following form:
STATE OF MISSOURI     )  No.:____________      ) ss.CITY OF MARSHALL CITY OF MARSHALL     )  OCCUPATIONALLICENSE 
Name of Owner or Manager: 
Name of Business: 
Address of Business: 
having paid to the City Clerk of the City of Marshall, the sum of $_____ of being the license levied upon his license as ____________________, and having otherwise complied with the provisions of the Ordinances of said City in this behalf, is hereby authorized and empowered to do business within the City of Marshall until the first day of March, 20____________. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this license is issued and we hereunto set our hands and affix the corporate seal of the City of Marshall, at the City Clerk's Office in said City, this ____________ day of ____________/____________/____________ 20____________. 
_____
Mayor
_____
City Clerk
(Code 1967, § 18-9; Ord. No. 6047, § 11, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 7731, § 9, 2-5-07)
Sec. 28-19. - Change of location of business. 
    In case of a change of location after the issuing of a license the holder of the license may, upon presentation of a certificate of occupancy, have the new location of his business endorsed on the license by the city clerk; and continue to carry on his business in the new location as specified under the license. 
(Code 1967, § 18-10; Ord. No. 7019, § 1, 2-18-97)
Sec. 28-19.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7731, § 10, adopted Feb. 5, 2007, repealed former § 28-19.5 in its entirety which pertained to approval required for licensing, change of location of certain businesses and derived from the Code of 1967 and Ord. No. 5773, § 1, adopted Feb. 1, 1982. 
Sec. 28-20. - Licensed business to be operated only on licensed premises. 
    No person to whom a license is issued may carry on the business named therein at any other location than the one named in or endorsed on the license. 
(Code 1967, § 18-12)
Sec. 28-21. - Authority of licensee to engage in more than one business. 
(a)	Any person taking out a merchant's license may be allowed to manufacture goods belonging to his line of trade without additional license. Any person taking out a merchant's license or shop license for any particular trade herein mentioned may be allowed to keep for sale any other line of goods or wares in the same store or shop without obtaining more than one license; provided, he shall pay a tax upon the line or trade which is assessed at the greatest amount. 
(b)	Any person operating a related business at one or more locations, when the name of the owner and the name of the business is advertised to be the same at all locations, will be allowed to operate at all locations on the same license. 
(c)	Any person operating related businesses at one or more locations, who uses different business names for each location, will be required to take out a separate license for each location, unless: 
(i)	The related businesses have the same street address as the licensee and,
(ii)	The related businesses report all sales tax transactions under the licensee's Missouri Sales Tax Number. 
(d)	Any person operating unrelated businesses at one or more locations will be required to take out a license for each business location, unless: 
(i)	The unrelated businesses have the same street address as the licensee and,
(ii)	The unrelated businesses report all sales tax transactions under the licensee's Missouri Sales Tax Number. 
(e)	A "business location" is defined as being a store, shop or building, when the business is operated in an enclosed structure, under one roof with access to the entire inside premises through a common door. When the business is not operated in an enclosed structure, a "business location" is defined as being a continuous single area used by one operator for the conduct of a specific type of business. 
(Code 1967, § 18-13; Ord. No. 7227, §§ 1, 2, 11-1-99)
Sec. 28-22. - Unlawful to engage in business, etc., without license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in any business, occupation, employment or profession for which a license is required, without such license, or for gain or profit, to keep, operate or use any apparatus, device or contrivance named in section 28-12. 
(Code 1967, § 18-14)
Sec. 28-23. - Rummage sales exempt from licenses. 
    Rummage sales shall be exempt from licenses. Any person holding a rummage sale which lasts beyond four (4) periods per year, each period not to exceed seven (7) days, shall be declared to be a merchant and shall buy an appropriate license and locate his business in a properly zoned area. 
(Code 1967, § 18-16)
Sec. 28-24. - Schedule of license fees. 
    There shall be levied and collected on every license issued in pursuance of this Code, to be paid before the delivery of the license, the following amounts, the same to be paid annually, except where otherwise indicated, to wit: 
A 
(1)	AIRPORT OPERATION .....$50.00 
(2)	ASPHALT AND PAVING .....50.00 
(3)	AUTO DEALER .....50.00 
(4)	AUTO REPAIR .....50.00 
B 
(5)	BANK .....250.00 
(6)	BAIL BOND .....50.00 
(7)	BOWLING ALLEY .....50.00 
C 
(8)	CAR WASH .....50.00 
(9)	CARNIVAL/CIRCUS .....200.00 
(10)	CLEANING SERVICE .....50.00 
(11)	COMPUTER SERVICE .....50.00 
(12)	CONCRETE PLANT .....50.00 
(13)	CONTRACT SERVICE .....50.00 
(14)	CONTRACTOR .....50.00 
(15)	CONTRACTOR-HVAC .....50.00 
D 
(16)	DRY CLEANING .....50.00 
E 
(17)	ELECTRICIAN-CLASS I-(per electrician) .....50.00 
(18)	ELECTRICIAN-CLASS II-(per electrician) .....10.00 
(19)	EXTERMINATOR .....50.00 
F 
(20)	FINANCIAL SERVICE .....50.00 
(21)	FOOD VENDOR .....50.00 
G 
(22)	GROCERY STORE .....50.00 
I 
(23)	IN HOME OCCUPATION .....50.00 
(24)	INSTRUCTIONAL .....50.00 
(25)	INSURANCE AGENT-(per agent) .....50.00 
L 
(26)	LAUNDRY SERVICE .....50.00 
(27)	LAWN CARE .....50.00 
(28)	LOAN SERVICE .....150.00 
M 
(29)	MERCHANT .....50.00 
(30)	MOTEL/HOTEL .....50.00 
N 
(31)	NEWSPAPER .....100.00 
P 
(31.5)	PAWNBROKER .....250.00 
(32)	PAYDAY LOAN .....250.00 
(33)	PET GROOMING .....50.00 
(34)	PHOTOGRAPHER .....50.00 
(35)	PLUMBER-MASTER-(per plumber) .....50.00 
(36)	PLUMBER-JOURNEYMAN-(per plumber) .....10.00 
R 
(37)	REAL ESTATE .....50.00 
(38)	RESTAURANT .....50.00 
(39)	ROCK QUARRY .....50.00 
S 
(40)	SALON .....50.00 
(41)	SALVAGE YARD/DEALER .....50.00 
(42)	SERVICE STATION .....50.00 
(43)	SOLICITOR .....50.00 
(44)	STORAGE RENTAL .....50.00 
T 
(45)	TANNING SALON .....50.00 
(46)	TAXI CAB .....50.00 
(47)	THEATRE .....50.00 
(48)	TITLE INSURANCE .....50.00 
(49)	TOWING SERVICE .....50.00 
(50)	TRANSIENT MERCHANT .....50.00 
(51)	TRAVEL AGENCY .....50.00 
(52)	TREE TRIMMER .....50.00 
V 
(53)	VENDING MACHINE .....50.00 
(Code 1967, § 18-15, 30.6; Ord. No. 5722, § 1, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 7731, § 11, 2-5-07; Ord. No. 7905, § 1, 10-5-09; Ord. No. 7922, § 2, 2-1-10; Ord. No. 8136, § 2, 10-7-13) 
Secs. 28-25-28-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TELEPHONE SERVICE 

Sec. 28-56. - Imposition of license tax. 
(a)	The tax rate on telephonic services provided within the City of Marshall shall be three and one-tenth (3.1) percent, the revenue-neutral tax rate established by the Missouri Department of Revenue as of April 10, 2006, to be collected in lieu of the current tax of five (5) percent. This rate shall be in effect from and after July 1, 2006. 
(b)	The city administrator and the city clerk are hereby authorized and directed to promulgate and publish by filing in the office of the city clerk, and by publication in the Marshall Democrat News, on or before April 30, 2006, the revenue-neutral tax rate of three and one-tenth (3.1) percent established by the Missouri Department of Revenue, to be applicable to and in lieu of the current tax of five (5) percent previously imposed by the City of Marshall. In the event the Director of Revenue determines that a different rate is appropriate for the City of Marshall, as directed by Section 92.086.06 of HB 209, the rate imposed shall be as finally determined by the Director of Revenue. 
(Code 1967, § 18-184; Ord. No. 7685, §§ 1, 2, 4-17-06)
Sec. 28-57. - Statement of gross receipts; due date, investigation of accuracy. 
    It shall be the duty of every person engaged in the business described in section 28-56 to file with the city clerk, on the fifteenth day of May, August and November each year, a true statement, tinder oath, of the gross receipts from such business for the quarter annual period (three (3) calendar months), preceding the filing of such statements, and ending respectively at midnight on March thirty-first, June thirtieth, September thirtieth, and December thirty-first of each year. The city clerk or his duly appointed agents, shall be, and is, hereby authorizes to investigate the correctness and accuracy of the statement or statements herein required, and for that purpose shall have access, at all reasonable times, to the books, documents, papers and records of any person making such statement, in order to ascertain the accuracy thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 18-185; Ord. No. 6676, § 29, 2-1-93)
Sec. 28-58. - Payment of license tax. 
    Every person engaged in the business described in section 28-56 shall pay to the county collector on the twentieth day of May, August, November and February of each year, an amount equal to five (5) percent of the gross receipts from the business conducted by such person during the quarter annual period ending prior to such date, ending at midnight on march thirty-first, June thirtieth, September thirtieth and December thirty-first, of each year. 
(Code 1967, § 18-86; Ord. No. 6676, § 30, 2-1-93)
Sec. 28-59. - Payment not in lieu of other taxes lawfully imposed. 
    The license tax required in this division to be paid shall be in lieu of any other occupation taxes required of any person engaged in the business described in section 28-56, but nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to exempt any such person from the payment to the city of the tax which the city levies upon the real or personal property belonging to any such person, nor the tax required of merchants or manufacturers for the sale, rental, leasing or otherwise furnishing of telephones or telephonic service, nor shall the tax required exempt any such person from the payment of any other tax which may be lawfully required, other than a license tax on the business described in section 28-56. 
(Code 1967, § 18-187)
Sec. 28-60. - Penalty for failure to pay tax when due. 
    Any person conducting or operating any business in the city described in section 28-56, who shall fail to file a report as required by section 28-57, or who shall wilfully fail or refuse to pay the license tax when due, as provided by this division, shall for such failure for the first thirty (30) days or any part thereof, pay in addition to the tax a penalty of ten (10) percent of the gross tax due and unpaid, and for such refusal for each succeeding thirty (30) days or any part thereof, shall pay as a penalty for such refusal three (3) percent of such sum due as aforesaid, so long as such tax shall remain unpaid. 
(Code 1967, § 18-188)
Sec. 28-61. - Evidence of workers' compensation insurance prior to license issuance. 
    No license required under the provisions of this section shall be issued by the city clerk to any person until such person produces a copy of a certificate of insurance for workers' compensation coverage if the applicant for the license is required to cover his liability under Chapter 287, RSMo. It is further made a violation of this ordinance to provide fraudulent information to the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 6716, § 1, 8-16-93)
Secs. 28-62-28-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CIGARETTE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Cigarette tax, RSMo. Ch. 149.

Sec. 28-66. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings herein indicated: 
    Cigarette means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco irrespective of size or shape and whether or not such tobacco is flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, the wrapper or cover of which is made of paper or any other substance or material except tobacco. 
    Occupational license tax means the tax imposed by the city under this article upon the business and for the privilege of selling cigarettes at retail in the city. 
    Package means a quantity of cigarettes wrapped and sealed in paper, tinfoil or otherwise by the manufacturer of cigarettes prior to being placed in cartons and shipment from the manufacturer. 
    Retail dealer means any person other than a wholesale dealer, jobber or manufacturer engaged in the business of selling cigarettes, by personal handling or through a vending machine, to the ultimate consumer or agent. 
    Sale means any transfer of title or possession or both, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a consideration or by agreement therefor. 
    Vending machine means a mechanical device used for the sale and dispensing of cigarettes and automatically operated by the purchaser through the deposit of coins, slugs or tokens. 
    Wholesale dealer means any person who shall sell, distribute, deliver, convey or give away cigarettes to retail dealers or other persons in the city for the purpose of resale only. 
(Code 1967, § 8-1; Ord. No. 6982, § 1, 9-16-96)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.2. 
Sec. 28-67. - Licensing; registration fees. 
    Every wholesale dealer, jobber, retail dealer, manufacturer or other person engaged in selling cigarettes or offering, delivering or displaying the same for sale within the city, shall procure a license therefor for each place of business that he desires to have for the sale or distribution of cigarettes, and at the time such license is issued shall pay to the city the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each such place of business. 
(Code 1967, § 8-2; Ord. No. 7037, § 1, 4-21-97; Ord. No. 7905, § 2, 10-5-09)
Sec. 28-68. - Evidence of payment of tax. 
(a)	Required. The tax provided by section 28-67 shall be paid by wholesale dealers on a calendar month basis. At the end of each month, each wholesale dealer shall provide to the city administrator a cigarette sales recapitulation sheet showing the total wholesale sales of cigarettes within the city for that month. Payment of the tax provided in this article, based upon said report, shall be made on or before the fifteenth day of the following month. 
(b)	Collection before delivery. Before delivery of any package of cigarettes for sale within the city, it shall be the obligation of the wholesale dealer to collect from the retail dealer a tax at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) per thousand for each and all cigarettes sold within the city. 
(c)	Failure to collect tax. In the event the wholesale dealer fails to collect the tax assessed herein from the retail dealer, it shall be the obligation of the wholesale dealer to pay said tax. 
(Code 1967, § 8-3; Ord. No. 6047, § 6, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 6982, § 2, 9-16-96)
Sec. 28-69. - Disbursement of revenue. 
    The revenue accruing to the city from the permits and occupations licenses relating to the retail sale of cigarettes shall be paid into the general fund. 
(Code 1967, § 8-4; Ord. No. 6676, § 31, 2-1-93)
Sec. 28-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6982, § 3, adopted Sept. 16, 1996, repealed former section 28-70 in its entirety which pertained to the sale of cigarettes without city stamps or impressions and derived from the Code of 1967, § 8-5. 
Sec. 28-71. - Vending machines. 
(a)	Licensing. Every person who, in the capacity of owner, lessee, tenant or in any other capacity shall operate or cause to be operated, directly or indirectly, a vending machine for selling and dispensing cigarettes to the public shall obtain from the collector a license. The license, in whatever form prescribed by the mayor, shall be affixed on a conspicuous part of the vending machine. 
(b)	Unlawful sales. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell and dispense through a vending machine any cigarettes upon which the tax has not been paid. It shall be unlawful for any person, through a vending machine or otherwise, to remove the container of cigarettes, in whole or in part, or mutilate same, before the tax thereon has been paid. 
(Code 1967, § 8-6; Ord. No. 6982, § 4, 9-16-96)
Sec. 28-72. - Application for, issuance of licenses. 
    Every application for a cigarette license shall be made upon a form prescribed, prepared and furnished by the county collector, and shall set forth such information as he shall require. Upon approval of the application, the collector shall grant and issue to the applicant a cigarette license as herein provided. 
(Code 1967, § 8-7; Ord. No. 6047, § 6, 12-17-84)
Sec. 28-73. - Assignability of licenses. 
    Cigarette licenses shall not be assignable, and shall be valid only for the persons in whose names issued, and for the transaction of business in the places designated therein. 
(Code 1967, § 8-8)
Sec. 28-74. - Display of licenses. 
    Cigarette licenses shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the places for which issued. 
(Code 1967, § 8-9)
Sec. 28-75. - When due and payable. 
    All cigarette licenses issued by the city shall be due and payable on March first of each year hereafter, unless sooner suspended, surrendered or revoked for cause by the county collector. 
(Code 1967, § 8-10; Ord. No. 6676, § 32, 2-1-93)
Sec. 28-76. - Issuance of duplicate licenses. 
    Whenever any license issued under the provisions of this article is defaced, destroyed or lost, the county collector shall issue a duplicate license for the defaced, destroyed or lost license upon the payment of a fee of fifty cents ($0.50). 
(Code 1967, § 8-11; Ord. No. 6047, § 6, 12-17-84)
Sec. 28-77. - Suspension, revocation of licenses. 
(a)	Hearing required. Whenever the mayor finds that the holder of a cigarette license has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this article, or any rules or regulations prescribed or promulgated under this article, the mayor shall notify the city council of such violation of the article or regulations, and shall submit to the council evidence of same and a full report thereof, and the city council shall thereafter afford the person alleged to have violated the article or regulations, a hearing at such time and place as the city council may designate. 
(b)	Authority of council. The city council may thereafter, for good cause shown, suspend or revoke the cigarette license of the offender whenever it finds that the provisions of the article, or the rules and regulations prescribed or promulgated under this article have not been complied with. 
(c)	Effect. When the city council suspends or revokes a cigarette license, the mayor shall notify the holder of the license immediately, and the holder shall promptly surrender all license cards or tokens to the mayor on request. 
(Code 1967, § 8-12)
Secs. 28-78, 28-79. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6982, § 5, adopted Sept. 16, 1996, repealed former sections 28-78, 28-79 in their entirety. Former sections 28-78 and 28-79 respectively pertained to unstamped cigarettes and the affixing of stamps and derived from the Code of 1967, §§ 8-13, 8-14. 
Sec. 28-80. - Inspection of books, records, stock. 
    The mayor or his duly authorized representatives are hereby authorized to examine books, records, invoices, papers, stock of cigarettes in and upon any premises where the same are placed, stored or sold, and equipment of any such wholesale dealer or jobber pertaining to the sale and delivery of cigarettes taxable under this article. To verify the accuracy of the occupation tax imposed and addressed by this article, each such person is hereby directed and required to give the mayor, or his duly authorized representatives the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations as are herein provided for and required. 
(Code 1967, § 8-15)
Sec. 28-81. - Rules and regulations. 
    In addition to the other powers herein granted the mayor, he is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to: 
(1)	The method and means to be used in accounting of retail sales of cigarettes;
(2)	The method and means of reporting cigarette sales and evidence of the payment of the tax; 
(3)	The delegation of his powers to a deputy or employee or employees of his office;
(4)	Any other matter or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article, subject at all times to the approval of the council. 
(Code 1967, § 8-16; Ord. No. 6047, § 7, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 6982, § 6, 9-16-96)
Sec. 28-82. - Verification, recording of license sales. 
    The county collector shall, within five (5) days after the first day of each month, furnish to the city clerk a verified statement of all license sales, or in lieu thereof, duplicate copies of cigarette license sales for the purpose of verification and recording. 
(Code 1967, § 8-17; Ord. No. 6047, § 6, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 6982, § 7, 9-16-96)
Sec. 28-83. - Tax refunds. 
    Whenever any cigarettes, upon which the tax assessed in this article has been paid, have been sold and shipped by a wholesale dealer, jobber or retail dealer into another city or state for sale or use there, or have become unfit for use and consumption or are unsaleable, or have been destroyed, such wholesale dealer, jobber or retail dealer shall be entitled to a refund of the actual amount of tax paid by him on such cigarettes. If the mayor is satisfied that any wholesale dealer, jobber or retail dealer is entitled to a refund, he shall submit evidence thereof to the city council for approval of the refund. 
(Code 1967, § 8-18; Ord. No. 6982, § 8, 9-16-96)
Sec. 28-84. - Confiscation. 
(a)	Seizure. Whenever the mayor or any of his duly authorized representatives shall discover any cigarettes subject to tax provided by this article, and upon which the occupation tax has not been paid as herein required, the mayor, or his representative, are hereby authorized and empowered forthwith to seize and take possession of such cigarettes, together with any vending machine or other automatic mechanical device for selling and dispensing cigarettes, or receptacle in which they are held for sale, and the same shall thereupon be deemed to be forfeited to the city. 
(b)	Sale. The mayor may, within a reasonable time thereafter, by public notice at least five (5) days before the day of sale, sell such forfeited cigarettes at a place designated by him, and from the proceeds of such sale shall collect the tax thereon, together with a penalty of fifty (50) percent thereof and the costs incurred in such proceedings. The mayor shall pay the balance, if any, to the person in whose possession such forfeited cigarettes were found; provided however, that such seizure and sale shall not be deemed to relieve any person from fine or imprisonment provided herein for violation of any provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 8-19; Ord. No. 6982, § 9, 9-16-96)
Sec. 28-85. - Power to administer oaths, subpoena witnesses and records. 
    The mayor or his employees or agents duly designated by him shall have power to administer oaths and take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceedings in the exercise of their powers and duties under this article. The mayor shall have power to subpoena and required the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents to secure information pertinent to the performance of his duties hereunder and the enforcement of this article and to examine them in relation thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 8-20)
Secs. 28-86-28-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TOURISM COMMISSION AND TOURISM TAX 

Sec. 28-101. - Commission established; membership. 
(a)	There is hereby established the Marshall Tourism Commission.
(b)	the commission shall consist of five (5) members, each of whom shall reside in the city and who shall not be members of the city government. At least (1) one of the members shall be a representative of the hotel/motel industry. 
(c)	Prior to April 1, 2005, the mayor shall appoint two members to serve a three-year term, two members to serve a two-year term and one member to serve a one-year term. Thereafter, the mayor shall, before the first day of June of each year, appoint members of the tourism commission who shall hold office for a term of three (3) years and until their successors are appointed. 
(d)	The members of the tourism commission shall receive no compensation for the performance of their duties. 
(e)	All vacancies on the tourism commission shall be reported to the city clerk and, thereafter, the mayor shall appoint a qualified citizen to fill such vacancy. 
(f)	The tourism commission shall be governed by the following rules and regulations below.
(Ord. No. 7613, §§ 1-6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-102. - Definitions. 
    As used in these rules and regulations, the following terms mean: 
    Commission. The Marshall Tourism Commission. 
    Governing body. The Council of the City of Marshall, Missouri. 
    Hotel and Motel. Any structure or building under one management, which contains rooms furnished for the accommodation or lodging of guests, with or without meals being so provided, and kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public as a place where sleeping accommodations are sought for pay or compensation to transient guests or permanent guests and having more than five (5) bedrooms furnished for the accommodations of such guests. 
    Permanent guest. A person who contracts in advance for a room in a hotel and motel for a period of more than thirty-one (31) consecutive days and who actually remains a guest of the hotel and motel by the physical occupation of such room for more than thirty-one (31) consecutive days is considered a permanent guest and the rental or lease receipt from the letting of the room are not subject to the tourism tax. A permanent guest is not considered synonymous with a permanent room (i.e., the rent or lease of accommodations on a permanent basis to a person for use by its employees is subject to the tax). 
    Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership or other entity. 
    Regulations. These rules and regulations of the Marshall Tourism Commission. 
    Sleeping room. A room containing one or more bed(s) intended as a place for sleeping accommodations for pay or compensation. 
    Taxpayer. A person, whether an individual, corporation, partnership or other entity, who is the owner of any hotel and motel located in Marshall, Missouri. 
    Tourism tax or tax. The tourism tax authorized by RSMo. § 94.834 2000 (2004 Supp.), as approved by the voters of Marshall, Missouri on August 3, 2004, and effective on April 1, 2005. 
    Transient guest. A person who occupies a sleeping room or rooms in a hotel and motel for thirty-one (31) days or less during any calendar quarter. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-103. - Permits required. 
(a)	The commission shall require all taxpayers to procure a permit, at no cost, before operating or allowing others to operate any hotel and motel in Marshall, Missouri. Said permit shall be prominently displayed at each place of business and the permit is valid until revoked by the Commission or surrendered by the taxpayer to whom issued when it ceases doing business. The commission shall issue the permit within thirty (30) business days following the receipt of a properly completed application. Any person applying for a permit or reinstatement of a revoked permit who owes the city tourism tax or personal property or real estate tax must pay the amount due plus interest and penalties before the commission may issue the applicant a permit or reinstate a revoked permit. 
(b)	All taxpayers beginning business subsequent to April 1, 2005, who are required to collect the tourism tax, shall secure a permit prior to commencing business. 
(c)	The permit may, after ten (10) days' notice, be revoked by the commission in the event the taxpayer shall be in default for a period of sixty (60) days in the reporting of or payment of any tax, penalty or interest owed or assessed under these regulations. 
(d)	No taxpayer shall conduct business unless such person is the holder of a valid permit. After all appeals have been exhausted, the commission may notify the city police chief that the permit of such person has been revoked. The city may enforce the provisions of this section and may prohibit such taxpayer from conducting business within the city. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-104. - Administrative penalty for failure to obtain permit. 
    Any taxpayer operating any hotel and motel without a valid permit shall be assessed a penalty in the amount of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first day and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day thereafter, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), in addition to any other penalties as prescribed in this article. This penalty provision shall not become effective until May 1, 2005 for any business in operation as of April 1, 2005, and shall not apply to persons opening a business in Marshall, Missouri for the first time during the first thirty (30) days following the first day of operation. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-105. - Collection of tax. 
    A taxpayer shall collect the tax from the transient guests and each such transient guest shall pay the amount of the tax due to the taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-106. - Statement of tax 
(a)	For each sleeping room occupied and rented by transient guests of any hotel and motel located in Marshall, Missouri, there shall be a tax of five (5) percent per room per night. 
(b)	It shall be a violation of this article for any taxpayer to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax, or any part thereof, imposed by this article and required to be collected by the taxpayer, will be assumed or absorbed by the taxpayer. 
(c)	The tax imposed by this article must be separately stated or combined with state sales tax on any bill, invoice or other document that is used by such taxpayer to collect for items or services from such transient guests and must be added to the total taxable amount. 
(d)	Every taxpayer receiving payment for sales or services subject to these regulations shall be responsible for the collection of the tourism tax and its inability to collect any or the entire applicable amount does not relieve it of the obligation to pay all applicable taxes to the commission. 
(e)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an unlawful ordinance violation. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-107. - Purchaser to pay tax; refusal, an unlawful ordinance violation: 
    It shall be the duty of every transient guest to pay the amount of the Tourism tax due to the taxpayer providing lodging covered by this article. Any person who shall willfully and intentionally refuse to pay such tax shall be guilty of an unlawful ordinance violation. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-108. - Bond may be required. 
    When, in the judgment of the commission, it is necessary, in order to secure the collection of any tax, penalties or interest due, or to become due, under this article, the commission may require any taxpayer to file a bond with the commission in such form and amount as it may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-109. - Reporting and remittance of taxes; schedule. 
(a)	Every taxpayer shall make a written return to the Saline County Collector showing taxable sales and the amount of taxes levied for the preceding quarter and shall remit to the Saline County Collector, with the return, the taxes levied. 
(b)	Written returns, and the taxes to be remitted therewith, are to be filed with the Saline County Collector within thirty (30) days following the end of each quarter. For purposes of these Regulations, the four quarters of each year end on March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31. 
(c)	The Saline County Collector shall remit to the City of Marshall the amounts so collected, together with copies of the returns. Pursuant to RSMo. § 70.220, the City of Marshall may enter into an agreement with the Saline County Collector to compensate the collector for tourism tax collection services. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-110. - Penalties. 
    Any taxpayer who fails to timely file a written return, knowingly files an incorrect return or fails to timely remit taxes due shall, in addition to other penalties provided by these regulations, be liable to a penalty equal to one (1) percent of the taxes due. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-111. - Interest on delinquent taxes. 
    All delinquent taxes, whether delinquent as a result of untimely reporting, failure to report, incorrect reporting or failure to pay taxes due, shall bear interest at a rate of two (2) percent per month from and after the date of delinquency until paid. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-112. - Duties and authority of the commission. 
    The commission, acting through the officers and employees of the City of Marshall, Missouri, is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and is hereby authorized and empowered to: 
(1)	Collect and receive the tax, interest and penalties imposed by this article;
(2)	Keep an accurate account of all payments received and refunds made by it;
(3)	Recommend the adoption, promulgation and amendment of rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article; 
(4)	Adopt, prepare and make available to all taxpayers the applications, returns and forms necessary to comply with this article; 
(5)	Examine the books, papers, state sales tax returns and records of any person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made, to ascertain the tax imposed by these article; and 
(6)	Recommend the expenditure of funds from the tax proceeds for the sole purpose of promoting tourism for the economic and cultural benefit to the citizens of Marshall. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-113. - Refunds. 
    Should it appear that any person has paid, during any one period, more than the amount of the tax to which the commission is entitled under the provision of these regulations, a refund or credit of the amount so overpaid shall be made, provided a proper claim for refund or credit of such overpayment of tax is filed by the person within three (3) years from the date when the return for the taxable period was due. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-114. - Assessments. 
(a)	If the commission determines that any taxpayer has a liability for which it has filed no return, has filed an incorrect return or has failed to pay the full amount of taxes due, the commission shall make an assessment showing the amount of tax due, together with penalty and interest that may be accrued thereon. In cases where no return is timely filed, the amount of such assessment shall be computed by multiplying the tax rate by the taxpayer's maximum number of rooms, then multiplying the product by seventy (70) percent. 
(b)	If the taxpayer does not pay the assessment within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of written notice of the assessment or, within said time, file with the commission a written notice of appeal to the commission, such assessment may be recovered under the provisions of this article. 
(c)	Except in the case of a fraudulent return, or neglect or refusal to make a return, every notice of additional amount proposed to be assessed hereunder shall be mailed to the taxpayer within three (3) years after the return was filed or was required to be filed. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-115. - Confidential information. 
(a)	It is unlawful to publish or disseminate any information that appears on applications, forms and returns or is obtained as a result of any return investigation, hearing or verification required or authorized by these Regulations and same shall be confidential, except for official tax administration purposes. The city may enter into formal tax information exchange agreements with the Internal Revenue Service and revenue agencies at the state level to enhance the collection and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Any person otherwise willfully divulging such information shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of an unlawful ordinance violation. In addition to the above penalties, any officer or employee of the city or commission who willfully violates the provisions of this section relative to the disclosure of confidential information shall be immediately dismissed from the service of the commission or the city. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-116. - Right to audit. 
(a)	The commission, or any agent, attorney or certified public accountant employed by the city on behalf of the commission, shall have the right, at all reasonable times during regular business hours, to audit or examine the books and records of a person who has applied for a permit or a taxpayer who possesses a current permit. The purpose of an audit is to determine the rightfulness and accuracy of any statements made by the applicant or taxpayer on an application or return and to verify amounts remitted. Reported sales receipts will be compared to figures obtained by business books and records, by federal and state income tax returns, state sales tax returns, or by other records, invoices, bills or receipts which show sales subject to the tax and sales which are exempt. 
(b)	No permit shall be issued to any applicant so long as the applicant refuses to permit such audit or examination. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-117. - Administrative review. 
    Final decisions of the commission may be appealed within thirty (30) days after receiving notice of same by filing with the commission a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds therefor. An appeal to the commission stays all enforcement of the determination from which the appeal is being taken. Final decisions of the commission may be appealed as provided in Chapter 536 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-118. - Returns retention. 
    The commission shall keep tourism tax returns on file in its custody for a period of four (4) years after the tourism tax becomes due. At the end of four years, the commission may destroy the returns and any supporting documents, but no return shall be destroyed until the tax has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-119. - Liens. 
(a)	In any case in which any assessment of tax, interest or penalty imposed under these Regulations has been made and has become final, the city may file for record in the Saline County Recorder's Office, a notice of lien specifying the amount of the tax, interest or penalty due and the name of the person liable for the same. From the time of filing, any such notice shall, for purpose of collecting the tax, interest or penalty, have the force and effect of the lien of a judgment in favor of the city against the real estate or any interest in real estate owned by the taxpayer named in such notice of lien for the amount specified in such notice. The City shall, within a reasonable time after filing the lien, notify the taxpayer by first class mail, postage prepaid. 
(b)	The lien shall be continuing and shall attach to real property or interest in real property acquired in any manner by the taxpayer after the filing of the notice of lien. Unless sooner released or discharged, the lien shall expire ten (10) years after the notice of lien was filed, unless within such ten-year period, the notice of lien has been re-filed by the city with the recorder. Unless sooner released or discharged, a timely re-filed lien shall be treated as if filed on the date of filing of the original lien and shall expire ten (10) years after the re-filing. 
(c)	If any lien or liens have been erroneously or improvidently filed, the taxpayer, or any other person affected by the lien, may notify the commission. The taxpayer or other affected person shall provide the reasons why the filing of the lien is erroneous or improvident as to such person (including the affected person's name or other identification similar to the taxpayers) and a list of creditors with current addresses who are affected. Upon receipt of this list, reasons and verification of the erroneous or improvident filing, the city shall release the lien as to the taxpayer or the affected person, as necessary, and notify all creditors stating that the lien or liens filed were erroneously or improvidently attached. The city shall take whatever steps are necessary to ensure that the lien is expunged. 
(d)	The lien imposed under subsection 28-119(a) may be wholly or partly released by filing for record in the office of the county recorder a release thereof executed by the city upon payment of the tax, interest and penalties or upon receipt of security sufficient to secure payment thereof, or by final judgment holding such lien to have been erroneously or improvidently imposed. 
(e)	The city may release any part of the property subject to the lien by filing with the county recorder a copy of the original lien document and an affidavit containing a legal description of the property stating that the property is to be released from the lien. The release of any specific property shall not affect in any manner other property subject to lien. 
(f)	The city is authorized to collect an additional penalty from each taxpayer equal to the cost of filing a notice of lien or release with respect to such taxpayer; the actual cost incurred by the city in auditing the taxpayer's account, and the costs of collecting taxes due, including reasonable attorney's fees and court costs. 
(g)	The commission shall establish and maintain records for all liens filed under this section. It shall also maintain records of all certificates or releases of lien. Such records established and maintained by the commission shall not be the official record and are not conclusive evidence of any liability of any taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-120. - Sale of business. 
(a)	If any taxpayer required to remit a tax levied hereunder or its successors shall sell their business or stock of goods or shall quit the business, such person shall make a final return under oath within fifteen (15) days after the date of selling or quitting business. 
(b)	Except as provided in this section, all successors, if any, shall be required to withhold sufficient amounts of the purchase money to cover any such taxes, interest or penalties due and unpaid until such time as the former owner or predecessor, whether immediate or not, shall provide a receipt from the Collector showing that the taxes have been paid, or a certificate stating that no taxes are due. If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods shall fail to withhold the purchase money, as above provided, the purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes, interest and penalties accrued and unpaid on account of the operation of the business by the former owner and person. 
(c)	The commission shall, notwithstanding the provisions of section 32.057 RSMo., upon written request, furnish within fifteen (15) business days from the receipt of such request by certified mail, return receipt requested, to any owner, successor, secured creditor, purchaser or, in the case of a proposed purchaser, if joined in writing by the owner, a statement showing the amount of taxes, interest or penalties due and owing or a certificate showing that no taxes, interest or penalties are due under this act, including the date of the last payment for such taxes, interest or penalties as shown by the records of the commission. The person obtaining this certificate may rely upon such for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days. 
(d)	A secured creditor who shall enforce a lien against a business or stock of goods of a business subject to these provisions shall be entitled to obtain from the commission a statement of tax due and the status of tax payments. If the commission does not respond within fifteen (15) business days from the date of receipt of such request by the secured creditor seeking to enforce its lien, it shall be conclusively presumed that all such taxes have been paid as to the secured creditor or any successor of the secured creditor, whether such successor be immediate or not. Nothing in this section shall eliminate the liability to pay such tax. Any purchaser who acquires the business or stock of goods as a result of the enforcement action by a creditor, including the creditor, shall be exempt from the liability set forth in subsection 28-120(b), whether such purchaser be immediate or subsequent thereto. 
(e)	Any such creditor who shall enforce a lien against the business or stock of goods subject to the provisions of this section shall be entitled to be paid the principal sums due, all accrued interest thereto under the laws of the state of Missouri or the United States of America. Any balance then remaining, up to the amount of the tax, interest and penalties then due, shall be remitted to the collector as provided by this section. Nothing in this section shall affect the priority of any lien filed by the city against the former owner or predecessor. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Sec. 28-121. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)	Any taxpayer who fails to timely or properly report or pay taxes required by this artcle shall, in addition to any other penalties or interest owed thereon, be liable for payment of any and all reasonable attorney's fees and costs incurred by the city in establishing or collecting taxes owed by the taxpayer to the commission. 
(b)	In addition to any other remedy available to the city, the city may enforce any assessment against a taxpayer, once said assessment becomes final and unappealable, by seeking and obtaining a civil judgment against the taxpayer in the amount of taxes, penalties, interest, attorney's fees and costs owed. 
(c)	Mailing of written notices or requests, when mailed by certified, first class mail, return receipt requested, shall be prima facie evidence of the date of such mailing, that the party to whom it is addressed received the correspondence and that the party received the correspondence on the date evidenced on the return receipt. 
(Ord. No. 7613, § 6, 3-21-05)
Chapter 29 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as but not limited to: Prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones saved from repeal, § 1-5(12); transportation of solid waste, § 14-18; vehicles transporting or emitting noxious material, § 15-3; motor vehicle nuisances, § 17-21 et seq.; offenses generally, Ch. 18; placing handbills on vehicles prohibited, § 18-5; operation of motor vehicles in city parks, § 19-6 et seq.; police, Ch. 22; junkyards, junk dealers, itinerant junk dealers, § 24-26 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 26; license tax for automobile accessory dealers, § 28-24(4); license tax for automobile agencies and dealers, § 28-24(5); license tax for auto wrecking shops, § 28-24(6); license tax for motorcycles, § 28-24(56); recreational vehicle sewerage dump stations, § 30-103; vehicles for hire, Ch. 31.
State Law reference- Motor vehicles, watercraft and aviation, RSMo Ch. 300 et seq.; municipal regulation of traffic, RSMo 304.120.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 29-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
    Abandoned property shall mean any unattended motor vehicle, trailer, all-terrain vehicle, out-board motor or vessel removed or subject to removal from public or private property as provided herein, whether or not operational. 
    Alley or alleyway shall mean any street with a roadway of less than twenty (20) feet in width. 
    All-terrain vehicle shall mean any motorized vehicle manufactured and used exclusively for off-highway use which is fifty (50) inches or less in width, with an unladen dry weight of six hundred (600) pounds or less, traveling on three (3), four (4) or more low pressure tires, with a seat designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control; but such definition shall not include any all-terrain vehicle which has been modified to pass a vehicle safety inspection and is classified and licensed as a motor vehicle. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle shall mean a vehicle publicly owned and operated as an ambulance, or a vehicle publicly owned and operated by the state highway patrol, police or fire department, sheriff or constable or deputy sheriff, traffic officer or any privately owned vehicle operated as an ambulance when responding to emergency calls. 
    Bus shall mean any vehicle or motorcar designed and used for the purpose of carrying more than seven (7) persons. 
    Business district shall mean the territory contiguous to and including a highway when within any six hundred (600) feet along the highway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the highway. 
    Central business or traffic district shall mean all streets and portions of streets within the area described by city ordinance as such. 
    Commercial vehicle shall mean every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Controlled-access highway shall mean every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway. 
    Crosswalk shall mean: 
(1)	That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
(2)	Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Curb shall mean the lateral boundaries of that portion of a street designated for the use of vehicles, whether marked with curbstones or not. 
    Curb loading zone shall mean a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
    Driver shall mean every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Freight curb loading zone shall mean a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers. 
    Highway shall mean every way or place open for vehicular travel by the public and regardless of whether it has been legally established by constituted authority or used for the statutory period of time as a public highway. 
    Improved street or highway shall mean a street or highway which has been paved with gravel, macadam, concrete, brick or asphalt, or improved in any manner by adding material or substance so as to present a surface other than the original earth surface. 
    Intersection shall mean: 
(1)	The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
(2)	Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
    Junk vehicle, a vehicle which is incapable of operation or use upon the highways and has no resale value except as a source of parts or scrap, and shall not be titled or registered, and a vehicle which is derelict, junk, scrapped, disassembled or harmful to the public health as defined under the terms of the most recent edition of the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code enacted by the City; but not including a vehicle which is completely enclosed within a locked building or locked fenced area and not visible from adjacent public or private property, and not including any vehicle upon the property of a business licensed as salvage, swap, junk dealer, towing or storage facility so long as the business is operated in compliance with its business license and the property is in compliance with applicable zoning ordinances. 
    Laned roadway shall mean a roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    Live load shall mean the weight of the cargo of a commercial vehicle, in addition to that of the chassis and body of the vehicle. 
    Motor bus shall mean a motor vehicle designed or regularly used for carrying more than eight (8) passengers. 
    Motor vehicle shall mean any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively upon tracks, except farm tractors. 
    Motorcycle shall mean every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Official traffic-control devices shall mean all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    One-way street shall mean street where vehicles are required to move in one direction only. 
    Operator shall mean any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Owner shall mean any person, firm, corporation or association, who holds the legal title to a vehicle or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this law. 
    Park or parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
    Passenger curb loading zone shall mean a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
    Pedestrian shall mean any person afoot; 
    Pneumatic tires shall mean tires of rubber or other substance and fabric, inflated with air. 
    Police officer shall mean every officer of the municipal police or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Private road or driveway shall mean every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Residence district shall mean the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
    Right-of-way shall mean the right of one (1) vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other. 
    Roadway shall mean that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Safety zone shall mean the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    Salvage vehicle, shall mean a motor vehicle, semitrailer or house trailer which, by reason of condition or circumstance, has been declared salvage, either by its owner, or by a person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity exercising the right of security interest in it, or by an insurance company as a result of settlement of a claim for loss due to damage or theft; or a vehicle, ownership of which is evidenced by a salvage title; or abandoned property titled as provided in this chapter; 
    School zone shall mean a space in any street lawfully designated by ordinance for the safety of persons going to and returning from public, private or parochial schools. 
    Service car shall mean a motor vehicle other than a motor bus, offered for or engaged in carrying passengers for hire over a designated route for a fixed fare and over the route of which the passenger has no control. 
    Sidewalk shall mean that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians. 
    Solid tires shall mean tires of rubber or other resilient material, other than pneumatic tires. 
    Stand or standing shall mean the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
    State highway shall mean a highway maintained by this state as a part of the state highway system. 
    Stop, when required, shall mean complete cessation from movement. 
    Stop or stopping, when prohibited, shall mean any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
    Street or highway shall mean every way or place open for vehicular travel by the public and regardless of whether it has been legally established by constituted authority or used for the statutory period of time as a public highway, and including private property generally open to the public for vehicular travel, parking and/or access. 
    Taxicab shall mean a motor vehicle other than a motor bus or service car offered for or engaged in carrying passengers for hire. 
    Through highway shall mean every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
    Towing company shall mean any person or entity which tows, removes or stores abandoned property. 
    Tractor shall mean any motor vehicle designed primarily for agricultural use or used as a traveling power plant or for drawing other vehicles or farm or road-building implements and having no provision for carrying loads independently. 
    Traffic shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel. 
    Traffic-control signal shall mean any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed. 
    Trailer shall mean any vehicle without motive power designed for carrying passengers or property on its own structure for being drawn by any vehicle, except those running exclusively on tracks, including a semitrailer or vehicle of the trailer type, so designed and used in connection with any vehicle that a considerable part of its own weight rests upon and is carried by the towing vehicle. 
    Truck shall mean any vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semi-trailer, or any combination thereof, propelled or drawn by mechanical power and designed or used in the transportation of property upon the highways. 
    Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Wrecker or tow truck shall mean, any emergency commercial vehicle equipped, designed and used to assist or render aid and transport or tow disabled or wrecked vehicles from a highway, road, street or highway rights-of-way to a point of storage or repair, including towing a replacement vehicle to replace a disabled or wrecked vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 6338, § 1, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 7027, § 4, 3-3-97; Ord. No. 7076, § 1, 10-20-97; Ord. No. 7339, § 1, 7-16-01) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.010, 304.044. 
Sec. 29-2. - Applicability of chapter to public employees. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.095. 
Sec. 29-3. - Applicability of chapter to persons riding bicycles or animals, propelling pushcarts. 
    Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1967, § 28-4)
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, Ch. 6. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.085. 
Sec. 29-4. - Obedience to police and fire department officials. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; police, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.080. 
Sec. 29-5. - Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets. 
    In cases where an equally direct and convenient alternate route is provided, an ordinance may describe and signs may be erected giving notice thereof, that no persons shall operate any commercial vehicle upon streets or parts of streets so described except those commercial vehicles making deliveries thereon. 
(Code 1967, § 28-25)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.550. 
Sec. 29-6. - Use of toy vehicles. 
(a)	No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(b)	No person shall roller skate, ride a skateboard, coaster, toy vehicle or other device in a reckless manner on any public sidewalk, No person shall ride a skateboard, coaster, toy vehicle or roller skate on a sidewalk without exercising due care for the safety of other persons using the sidewalk. 
(c)	No person shall roller skate, ride a skateboard, coaster, toy vehicle or other device upon the sidewalks or streets within the business district, said district to include the square and the streets and sidewalks within one block of the square. 
(d)	No skateboard ramp shall be erected or maintained on any city street or sidewalk within the limits of the city. 
(e)	This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by this chapter or other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 6468, § 1, 5-7-90)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.090. 
Sec. 29-7. - Play streets. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(b)	Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.185, 300.190. 
Sec. 29-8. - Clinging to vehicle. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, skateboard, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1967, § 6-21; Ord. No. 6468, § 2, 5-7-90)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.350. 
Sec. 29-9. - Riding on parts of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon any portion of a motor vehicle not designed or intended for the use of passengers when such vehicle is in motion; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1967, § 28-59)
Sec. 29-10. - Opening vehicle door. 
    No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.340. 
Sec. 29-11. - Boarding, alighting from moving vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
Sec. 29-12. - Loads which might become dislodged to be secured. 
    Every motor vehicle operating upon the streets of the city and carrying goods or material or farm products which may reasonably be expected to become dislodged and fall from such vehicle as a result of wind pressure or air pressure or by the movement of such vehicle, shall have a protective cover or be sufficiently secured so that no portion of such goods or material can become dislodged and fall from such vehicle while being transported or carried. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.010. 
Sec. 29-13. - Tampering with motor vehicles. 
(a)	No person shall drive, operate, use or tamper with a motor vehicle or trailer without the permission of the owner thereof. 
(b)	No person shall, without the permission of the owner or person in charge thereof, climb upon or into, or swing upon any motor vehicle or trailer whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the horn or other sound-producing device thereon, or attempt to manipulate any of the levers, starting device, brakes or machinery thereof, or set the machinery in motion. 
(c)	The provisions of this section shall apply to any person employed by the owner of such motor vehicle as a chauffeur or registered operator if the said motor vehicle is driven or operated, used or tampered with without the owner's knowledge or expressed consent, or in violation of his instruction. 
(d)	No person shall knowingly ride in a motor vehicle which has been stolen or is being operated without the consent of the owner thereof. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 560.175. 
Sec. 29-14. - Interfering with driver's view or control. 
    It shall be unlawful for any passenger in any vehicle to ride in such a position as to interfere with the operator's view and ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the operator's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
Sec. 29-15. - Placing injurious substances in street. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place on or upon any street of the city any tacks, nails, wires, scrap metal, glass, crockery, sharp stones or other substances injurious to the feet of persons or animals or to the tires or wheels of vehicles. 
(b)	Any person who has purposely, accidentally or by reason of an accident, dropped from his person or any vehicle, any tacks, nails, wires, scrap metal, glass, crockery, sharp stones or other substances injurious to the feet of persons or animals, or to the tires or wheels of vehicles, including motor vehicles, upon any street shall immediately make all reasonable efforts to clear said street of the substances. 
(Code 1967, § 26-12)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.160. 
Secs. 29-16-29-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 29-26. - Police administration. 
    There is established in the police department a traffic division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.015. 
Sec. 29-27. - Duty of traffic division. 
    The traffic division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department shall enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the division by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.020. 
Sec. 29-28. - City traffic engineer. 
(a)	The office of city traffic engineer is established. The city engineer or other designated city official shall serve as city traffic engineer in addition to any other functions, and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this chapter. 
(b)	The city traffic engineer shall determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures, conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions, plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of the city, and cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the city. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; officers and employees generally, § 2-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.060. 
Sec. 29-29. - Traffic commission. 
(a)	There is established a traffic commission to serve without compensation, consisting of the city traffic engineer, the chief of police or in his discretion as his representative the chief of the traffic division, the chairman of the city council traffic committee, and one representative each from the city engineer's office and the city attorney's office and such number of other city officers and representatives of unofficial bodies as may be determined and appointed by the mayor. The chairman of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor and may be removed by him. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the traffic commission, and to this end it shall have the authority within the limits of the funds at its disposal, to coordinate traffic activities, to supervise the preparation and publication of traffic reports, to receive complaints having to do with traffic matters and to recommend to the city council and to the city traffic engineer, the chief of the traffic division, and other city officials ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-311 et seq. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.070. 
Sec. 29-30. - Enforcement of traffic laws. 
    It shall be the duty of the officers of the police, or such officers as are assigned by the city traffic engineer, to enforce the provisions of this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 28-3)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.075. 
Sec. 29-31. - Directing of traffic by police and fire department officials. 
(a)	Officers of the police, or such officers as are assigned by the city traffic engineer, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, however, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(b)	Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; police, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.075. 
Sec. 29-32. - Forms and records of traffic citations and arrests. 
(a)	The city shall provide books containing uniform traffic tickets as prescribed by Supreme Court Rule No. 37.46. Such books shall include serially numbered sets of citations in quadruplicate in the form prescribed by supreme court rule. 
(b)	Such books shall be issued to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent, a record shall be maintained of every book so issued and a written receipt shall be required for every book. The judge or judges hearing municipal ordinance violation cases may require that a copy of such record and receipts be filed with the court. 
(c)	The chief of police shall be responsible for the issuance of such books to individual members of the police department. The chief of police shall require a written receipt for every book so issued and shall maintain a record of every such book and each set of citations contained therein. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.575. 
Sec. 29-33. - When tickets are to be issued. 
    Except when authorized or directed under state law to immediately take a person before the municipal judge for the violation of any traffic laws, a police officer who halts a person for such violation other than for the purpose of giving him a warning or warning notice and does not take such person into custody under arrest, shall issue to him a uniform traffic ticket which shall be proceeded upon in accordance with Supreme Court Rule No. 37. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.580. 
Sec. 29-34. - Issuance of tickets for nonmoving violations; action on failure of violator to appear. 
(a)	Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or state law, the police officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a uniform traffic ticket for the driver to answer to the charge against him within five (5) days during the hours and at a place specified in the traffic ticket. 
(b)	If a violator of the provisions of this chapter relative to stopping, standing or parking under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a uniform traffic ticket affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five (5) days, the traffic violations bureau shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic ticket was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that in the event such letter is disregarded for a period of five (5) days a warrant of arrest will be issued. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.585, 300.590. 
Sec. 29-35. - Payment of fines. 
(a)	Any person charged with an offense under this chapter for which payment of a fine may be made to the traffic violations bureau shall have the option of paying such fine within the time specified in the notice of arrest at the traffic violations bureau upon entering a plea of guilty and upon waiving appearance in court; or may have the option of depositing required lawful bail, and upon a plea of not guilty shall be entitled to a trial as authorized by law. 
(b)	The payment of a fine to the traffic violations bureau shall be deemed an acknowledgment of conviction of the alleged offense, and the bureau, upon accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator acknowledging payment thereof. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.555. 
Sec. 29-36. - Records of traffic violations. 
(a)	The police department or the traffic division thereof shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Said record shall accumulate during at least a five (5) year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five (5) year period. 
(b)	All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(c)	All such records and reports shall be public records.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.025. 
Sec. 29-37. - Traffic accident studies. 
    Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.035. 
Sec. 29-38. - Traffic accident reports. 
    The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of the traffic accident reports. Accident reports records referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.040. 
Sec. 29-39. - Driver files to be maintained. 
    The police department or the traffic division thereof shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.045. 
Sec. 29-40. - Traffic division to submit annual traffic safety report. 
    The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the mayor. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in the city as follows: 
(1)	The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
(2)	The number of traffic accidents investigated, and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; 
(3)	The plans and recommendations of the division or future traffic safety activities.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.050. 
Sec. 29-41. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
    The city traffic engineer, by and with the approval of the city council is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.065. 
Sec. 29-42. - Designation, maintenance of crosswalks. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.195. 
Sec. 29-43. - Establishment of safety zones. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.195. 
Sec. 29-44. - Marking of traffic lanes; observance. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.200. 
Sec. 29-45. - Closing of streets. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer is authorized, with the approval of the mayor, to close any street, highway or public place and withdraw the same from public use temporarily and during such period as public work thereon or other public emergency or expediency shall make such action necessary. At each end of the portion withdrawn from public use, the city traffic engineer shall place a placard or sign having the following words printed thereon in letters three (3) inches high: "Street Closed. This street is closed to public use." 
(b)	No person shall use or attempt to use any street, highway or public place withdrawn from public use in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. 
Sec. 29-46. - Impoundment of vehicles. 
(a)	Members of the police are authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the police, or otherwise maintained by the city under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(1)	When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
(2)	When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide its custody or removal; 
(3)	When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic. 
(b)	Whenever a police officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this section and he knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. 
(c)	Whenever a police officer removes a vehicle from a street pursuant to this section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as hereinbefore provided, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three (3) days, then and in that event the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of such removal by mail to the state department whose duty it is to register motor vehicles, and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such removal and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.595. 
Sec. 29-47. - Reimbursement of cost for alcohol and drug-related offenses. 
(a)	Upon a plea of guilty, finding of guilt or conviction for violation of the provisions of sections 29-73 and 29-74, the court may, in addition to imposition of any penalties provided by law, order the person to reimburse law enforcement authorities for the costs associated with such arrest. 
(b)	Such costs shall include the reasonable cost of making the arrest, including the cost of any chemical tests to determine the alcohol or drug content of the person's blood, and the cost of processing, charging, booking and holding such person in custody. 
(c)	Law enforcement authorities may establish a schedule of such costs for submission to the court; however, the court may order the costs reduced if it determines that the schedule of costs is excessive given the circumstances of the case or for good cause shown. 
(d)	These fees shall be calculated as additional costs by the municipal court and shall be collected by the court in the same manner as other costs and fees are collected and remitted to the city treasurer. 
(e)	In the event said offenses are filed in the Circuit Court of Saline County as a violation of municipal ordinance or state law, the chief of police shall submit the information described in this section to the court for reimbursement as the court may order. 
(Ord. No. 6683, § 1, 3-1-93)
Sec. 29-48. - Operator's financial responsibility. 
(a)	Proof of financial responsibility shall be carried in all motor vehicles registered in the State of Missouri and operated in the City of Marshall. The operator of such motor vehicle shall exhibit said proof on the demand of any peace officer who lawfully stops the operator while that officer is engaged in the performance of the duties of his office. 
(b)	As used in this section proof of financial responsibility means proof of the ability to respond in damages for liability, on account of accidents occurring subsequent to the effective date of said proof, arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle. Said proof shall exhibit the extent of financial responsibility in dollar amounts not less that those required by Chapter 303, RSMo. 
(c)	The following items shall constitute proof of financial responsibility:
(1)	An insurance identification card furnished by an insurer issuing a liability policy insuring the motor vehicle subject to the peace officer's lawful stop. The insurance identification card shall include all of the following information: 
a.	The name and address of the insurer;
b.	The name and address of the named insured;
c.	The policy number;
d.	The effective dates of the policy, including month, day and year;
e.	A description of the insured motor vehicle, including year and make or at least five (5) digits of the vehicle identification number or the word "fleet" if the insurance policy covers five (5) or more vehicles; 
f.	The statement "This card must be carried in the insured motor vehicle for production upon demand" prominently displayed on the card. 
A motor vehicle liability insurance policy, a motor vehicle liability insurance binder, or a receipt which contains the policy information required in this subsection shall be satisfactory evidence of insurance in lieu of an insurance identification card. 
(2)	An insurance identification card furnished by the Missouri Director of Revenue to any self-insurer for each motor vehicle so insured, as provided for in Section 303.024.4 and 303.220, RSMo. Such an insurance identification card shall include all of the following information: 
a.	The name and address of the self-insurer;
b.	The word "self-insured";
c.	The statement "This card must be carried in the self-insured motor vehicle for production upon demand" prominently displayed on the card. 
(3)	A certificate furnished by the Missouri Treasurer, as provided in Section 303.240, RSMo., establishing that the owner and/or operator of the motor vehicle subject to the peace officer's lawful stop has deposited with the Missouri Treasurer cash or marketable securities in an amount sufficient under said statute to satisfy an execution on a judgment issued against such person making the deposit for damages resulting from the ownership, maintenance, use or operation of said motor vehicle after such deposit was made. 
(4)	Evidence of surety bond filed with the Missouri Director of Revenue as provided by Section 303.230, RSMo. 
(5)	Any operator subject to a lawful stop who fails to exhibit proof of financial responsibility upon the demand of the attendant peace officer shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 6976, § 1, 8-19-96)
Secs. 29-49-29-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Court, Ch. 10.
State Law reference- Traffic violations bureau generally, Supreme Court Rule No. 37.50.

Sec. 29-56. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a traffic violations bureau, as provided for in the state rules of practice and procedure in municipal and traffic courts. 
Sec. 29-57. - Clerks designated. 
    The clerk of the municipal court, and any assistant clerk serving under him, are hereby designated as violations clerks of the traffic violations bureau. 
Sec. 29-58. - General duties. 
    The following duties are hereby imposed upon the traffic violations bureau in reference to traffic offenses: 
(1)	It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts, and represent in court such violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty, waive court appearance and give power of attorney. 
(2)	It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail from the persons who must or wish to be heard in court, enter the time of their appearance on the court docket and notify the arresting officer and witnesses if any to be present. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.560. 
Sec. 29-59. - Records and reports. 
    The traffic violations bureau shall keep records and submit to the judges hearing violations of municipal ordinances summarized monthly reports of all notices issued and arrests made for violations of the traffic laws and ordinances in the city and of all the fines collected by the traffic violations bureau or the court, and of the final disposition or present status of every case of violation of the provisions of said laws and ordinances. Such records shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the totals of each. Such records shall be public records. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.565. 
Sec. 29-60. - Additional duties. 
    The traffic violations bureau shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed by the traffic ordinances of the city or as may be required by any laws of this state. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.570. 
Secs. 29-61-29-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 29-71. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street of the city unless such person has a valid license. 
(Code 1967, §§ 28-4, 28-41; Ord. No. 6676, § 33, 2-1-93)
State Law reference- Drivers' and chauffeurs' licenses, RSMo 302.010 et seq. 
Sec. 29-72. - Vehicles to be driven carefully. 
    Every person operating a motor vehicle on any street or highway shall drive in a careful and prudent manner so as not to endanger the property of another or the life or limb of any person and shall exercise the highest degree of care. 
(Code 1967, §§ 28-42, 28-43)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.010. 
Sec. 29-73. - Driving while under the influence of intoxicant or drug. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle while such person is in an intoxicated or drugged condition. 
(Code 1967, § 28-44)
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 4. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 577.010. 
Sec. 29-74. - Prima facie driving while intoxicated. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle within the city limits when the person has ten-hundredths of one percent or more by weight of alcohol in his blood. As used in this section, percent by weight of alcohol in the blood shall be based upon grams of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of blood and may be shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath, saliva or urine. For the purposes of determining the alcoholic content of a person's blood under this section, the test shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of RSMo 577.020, 577.030, 577.050. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 4. 
Sec. 29-75. - Operation of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)	The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions stated in this section. 
(b)	The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(1)	Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter;
(2)	Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)	Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property;
(4)	Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.
(c)	The exemptions granted in this section to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(d)	The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.100. 
Sec. 29-76. - Vehicles to be driven on right half of roadway. 
    Upon all public roads or highways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)	When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
(2)	When placing a vehicle in position for and when such vehicle is lawfully making a left turn; 
(3)	When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair; 
(4)	Upon a roadway designated by markings or signs for one-way traffic.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.015. 
Sec. 29-77. - Hand and mechanical signals. 
(a)	No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of or turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after the giving of an appropriate signal in the following manner: 
(1)	Any driver when stopping, or when checking the speed of his vehicle, if the movement of other vehicles may reasonably be affected by such checking of speed, shall extend his arm at an angle below horizontal so that the same may be seen in the rear of his vehicle. 
(2)	Any driver intending to turn his vehicle to the right shall extend his arm at an angle above horizontal so that the same may be seen in front of and in the rear of his vehicle, and shall slow down and approach the intersecting highway as near as practicable to the right side of the highway along which he is proceeding before turning. 
(3)	Any driver intending to turn his vehicle to the left shall extend his arm in a horizontal position so that the same may be seen in the rear of his vehicle, and shall slow down and approach the intersecting highway so that the left side of his vehicle shall be as near as practicable to the center line of the highway along which he is proceeding before turning. 
(b)	The signals required by this section shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal light or signal device in good mechanical condition of a type approved by the state highway patrol; provided, however that when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle, then such signals shall be given by such light or device. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.019. 
Sec. 29-78. - Driving while view or control is obstructed. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the same when the vehicle is so loaded, or when there is in the front seat of such vehicle such number of persons as to obstruct the view of the operator to the front or sides, or to interfere with the operator's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
Sec. 29-79. - Vehicles obstructing intersections, crosswalks. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.290. 
Sec. 29-80. - Driving through safety zone. 
    No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.365. 
Sec. 29-81. - Driving onto or from controlled-access roadways. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.355. 
Sec. 29-82. - Driving vehicle on sidewalk. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1967, § 26-27)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.330. 
Sec. 29-83. - Riding on motorcycles. 
    A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.345. 
Sec. 29-84. - Limitations on backing. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.335. 
Sec. 29-85. - Following fire apparatus. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow closer than three hundred (300) feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive any vehicle within the block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 10, 12-3-84)
Editor's note- At the discretion of the editor, § 10 of Ord. No. 6044, adopted Dec. 3, 1984, has been treated as amendatory of § 29-85. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.300. 
Sec. 29-86. - Crossing fire hose. 
    A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire official in command of said operation. 
(Ord. No. 6044, § 7, 12-3-84)
Editor's note- Section 7 of Ord. No. 6044, adopted Dec. 3, 1984, has been treated by the editors as amendatory of § 29-86. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.305. 
Secs. 29-87-29-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish reasonable speed regulations, RSMo 304.120.

Sec. 29-96. - City-wide speed limit prescribed; presumption of violation. 
(a)	No motor vehicle shall be operated or moved upon the public streets or alleys of the city at a speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour, unless a different speed limit is otherwise lawfully posted, in which case it shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of the posted limit. 
(b)	Any speed of a vehicle in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour, except where otherwise posted, which shall never be conclusive nor have the effect of shifting the burden of proof, shall be considered prima facie evidence of driving at a rate of speed which is not reasonable, careful, prudent and lawful. 
(Code 1967, §§ 28-19, 28-45, 28-46)
Sec. 29-97. - Speed limit in alleys. 
    The maximum speed limit in all alleys within the corporate limits of the city shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(Code 1967, § 28-47)
Sec. 29-98. - Speed limits in critical zones of hazard. 
    At such points of hazard which the city council shall have declared to be critical zones of hazard, a speed of fifteen (15) miles per hour shall apply as a maximum driving speed. 
(Code 1967, § 28-48)
Sec. 29-99. - Establishing fifteen (15) miles per hour speed zones. 
    No fifteen (15) miles per hour speed zones shall be placed on any state or federal marked highways except where approval has been granted by the proper officials of the Missouri State Highway Department. 
(Code 1967, § 28-49)
Sec. 29-100. - Placement of signs. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized and directed to place appropriate signs marking the maximum speed limits established in this division unless such appropriate signs have been provided by the highway department of this state. 
Sec. 29-101. - Manner of operation at intersections, curves, hills, other hazardous areas. 
    The driver of every vehicle shall drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and proceeding around a curve or right angle turn, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, when emerging from any alley upon a sidewalk or roadway, and when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway and street conditions. 
(Code 1967, § 28-51)
Sec. 29-102. - Driving through school zones, pedestrian crossings. 
(a)	When school or pedestrian crossing stop signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to the reasonably observant driver, every driver of a vehicle shall come to a complete stop and then proceed at fifteen (15) miles per hour for one block or such farther distance if a hazard is apparent, before resuming the posted speed. 
(b)	Where school zone signs, markings or devices are posted or marked, every person driving a vehicle shall slow down, observing all regulations relating to pedestrian traffic. 
(c)	Noncompliance and disregard of the provisions of this section shall be deemed careless and reckless driving and a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1967, § 28-55)
Sec. 29-103. - Drag racing. 
(a)	No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the city so as to engage in the act of drag racing. 
(b)	For the purpose of this section, the term "drag racing" means the act of two (2) or more individuals competing or racing on any street, highway or other place open to the public in the city in a situation in which one of the motor vehicles is beside or to the rear of a motor vehicle operated by a competing driver and the one driver attempts to prevent the competing driver from passing or overtaking him. 
Sec. 29-104. - Excessive acceleration. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the city at a rate of acceleration greater than is reasonably necessary to safely enter the existing flow of traffic or obtain the maximum speed limit. Tire friction marks or squealing of tires shall be evidence of such excessive acceleration. 
Sec. 29-105. - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
    The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.210. 
Sec. 29-106. - Regulation of slow speed. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. Police officers may enforce the provisions of this section by directions to drivers, and in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and refusal to comply with directions of an officer in accordance herewith, the continued slow operation by a driver shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 28-50)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.011. 
Sec. 29-107. - Slowing, stopping vehicle. 
    No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal to the driver of any other vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(Code 1967, § 28-54)
Secs. 29-108-29-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 29-116. - Placement, maintenance of stop signs at through streets. 
    Whenever any through street is established by the city council, it shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to place and maintain a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two (2) through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of said streets as may be determined by the city traffic engineer upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. 
(Code 1967, § 28-21)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.260. 
Sec. 29-117. - Other intersections where stop or yield required. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required, or whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection as prescribed in section 29-120 in which event he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.265. 
Sec. 29-118. - Position for stopping at stop intersections. 
    Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of such intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering such intersection. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.270. 
Sec. 29-119. - Driver to yield right-of-way at stop intersections. 
    Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop and, after having stopped, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on said highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.275, 304.351. 
Sec. 29-120. - Vehicle entering yield intersection. 
    The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection; provided, however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield right-of-way. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.280. 
Sec. 29-121. - Duty of driver upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle. 
(a)	Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)	This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.105. 
Sec. 29-122. - Vehicles emerging from alley, building, private road or driveway. 
    The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid a collision and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.285. 
Sec. 29-123. - Vehicles intending to make left turn into alley, private road or driveway. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to make a left turn into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction when the making of such left turn would create a traffic hazard. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.351. 
Sec. 29-124. - Certain buses and trucks to stop at railroad crossing, when. 
    Every motor vehicle transporting passengers, for hire, every school bus, and every motor vehicle transporting high explosives, or poisonous or compressed inflammable gases, and every motor vehicle used for the transportation of inflammable or corrosive liquids in bulk, whether loaded or empty, shall upon approaching any railroad grade crossing be brought to a full stop within fifty (50) feet, but not less than ten (10) feet, from the nearest rail of such railroad grade crossing, and shall not proceed until due caution has been taken to ascertain that the course is clear; provided that such full stop shall not be required at a streetcar crossing within a business or residence district, nor at a railroad grade crossing protected by a watchman or traffic officer on duty or by a traffic control "stop and go" signal (not railroad flashing signal) giving positive indication to approaching vehicles to proceed. 
Cross reference- Railroads, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.030. 
Sec. 29-125. - Stop required at railroad grade crossing, when. 
(a)	Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this subsection, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
(1)	A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device, which has been installed pursuant to order of the public service commission under RSMo 387.640, gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train; or 
(2)	A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train. 
(b)	No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed unless he can do so safely. 
Cross reference- Railroads, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.035. 
Secs. 29-126-29-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OVERTAKING AND PASSING 

Sec. 29-130. - Drivers to sound signaling device before passing. 
    Any operator or driver overtaking and desiring to pass a vehicle shall sound his horn before starting to pass. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.016. 
Sec. 29-131. - Position of vehicle when passing. 
    Except where overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.016. 
Sec. 29-132. - Duty of driver of overtaken vehicle. 
    Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.016. 
Sec. 29-133. - Limitations on passing on the left. 
    No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)	When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve of the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction. 
(2)	When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred (100) feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel or when approaching within one hundred (100) feet of or at any intersection. 
(Code 1967, § 28-52)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.016. 
Sec. 29-134. - When passing on the right is permitted. 
(a)	The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)	When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
(2)	Upon a city street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of vehicles in each direction; 
(3)	Upon a one-way street.
(b)	The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under the foregoing conditions when such movement may be made in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the paved or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(c)	The provisions of this subsection shall not relieve the driver of a slow-moving vehicle from the duty to drive as closely as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.016. 
Sec. 29-135. - Passing vehicle at crosswalk. 
    Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.375. 
Sec. 29-136. - Following too closely. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonably safe and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.017. 
Sec. 29-137. - School buses. 
    The driver of a vehicle upon a highway upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any schoolchildren and whose driver has in the manner prescribed by law given the signal to stop, shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by its driver to proceed; provided, however, that the driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or overtaking a school bus which is on a different roadway, which is proceeding in the opposite direction on a highway containing four (4) or more lanes of traffic, or which is stopped in a loading zone constituting a part of, or adjacent to, a limited or controlled-access highway at a point where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
(Code 1967, § 28-56)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.050. 
Sec. 29-138. - Designation of "no passing" zones. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized and empowered to designate from time to time those streets or portions of streets in the city where overtaking and passing or driving to the left in the opposite lane or lanes of travel is especially hazardous, and by appropriate signs or markings to designate the same as "no passing" zones; whereupon it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to operate the vehicle upon or along such streets or portions of streets in disobedience to the directions of such sign or signs. 
(Code 1967, § 28-22)
Secs. 29-139-29-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 

Sec. 29-146. - Procedure for turning at intersections. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)	For right turns, both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)	At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)	At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(Code 1967, § 28-57)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.215. 
Sec. 29-147. - Turning on curve or crest of grade. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not turn such vehicle around so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, or at any place upon a roadway where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction along the roadway within a distance of three hundred (300) feet, or where the same may create a traffic hazard. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.341. 
Sec. 29-148. - U-turns generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction at any intersection controlled by a traffic signal or police officer or upon any street in a business district; nor shall such turn be made at any place unless the movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.235, 304.341. 
Sec. 29-149. - Placement of signs prohibiting or restricting turns. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Code 1967, §§ 28-23, 28-24)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.225. 
Sec. 29-150. - Placement of turning markers. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.220. 
Sec. 29-151. - Obedience to turning markers. 
    When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.220. 
Sec. 29-152. - Obedience to no-turn signs. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn, left turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.230. 
Secs. 29-153-29-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 

Sec. 29-161. - Placement, maintenance of signs. 
    Whenever this Code or any other city ordinance designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1967, § 28-20)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.240. 
Sec. 29-162. - Movement of vehicular traffic generally. 
    Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described and designated by this Code or any other city ordinance, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1967, § 28-20)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.245. 
Sec. 29-163. - Restriction of direction of vehicle traffic during certain periods. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The city traffic engineer may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the roadway. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance with this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.250. 
DIVISION 7. - ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 6338, § 2, adopted June 20, 1988, amended this Code with provisions designated for inclusion as Div. 6 to Art. III of this chapter. At the discretion of the editor, such provisions have been codified as Div. 7 to Art. III, inasmuch as other provisions were previously codified as Div. 6.

Sec. 29-164. - Operation on city streets prohibited; exceptions. 
    No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle upon the streets and highways of this city except as follows: 
(1)	All-terrain vehicles owned and operated by governmental entity for official use;
(2)	All-terrain vehicles operated for agricultural purposes or industrial on-premises purposes between the official sunrise and sunset on the day of operation. 
(Ord. No. 6338, § 2, 6-20-88)
Sec. 29-165. - Operation in streams, rivers restricted. 
    No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle within any stream or river in this city, except that off-road vehicles may be operated within waterways which flow within the boundaries of land which an off-road vehicle operator owns or has permission to be upon. 
(Ord. No. 6338, § 2, 6-20-88)
Sec. 29-166. - License required for operation on streets; bicycle safety flag. 
    A person operating an all-terrain vehicle on a street or highway pursuant to an exception covered in this division shall have a valid operator's or chauffeur's license but shall not be required to have passed an examination for the operation of a motorcycle, and the vehicle shall be operated at speeds of less than thirty (30) miles per hour. When operated on a street or highway, an all-terrain vehicle shall have a bicycle safety flag, which extends not less than seven (7) feet above the ground, attached to the rear of the vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of not less than thirty (30) square inches and shall be dayglow in color. 
(Ord. No. 6338, § 2, 6-20-88)
Sec. 29-167. - Operating requirements. 
    No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle: 
(1)	In any careless way so as to endanger the person or property of another;
(2)	While under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance; or
(3)	Without a securely fastened safety helmet on the head of an individual who operates an all-terrain vehicle or who is being towed or otherwise propelled by an all-terrain vehicle, unless the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 6338, § 2, 6-20-88)
Sec. 29-168. - Carrying passengers restricted. 
    No operator of an all-terrain vehicle shall carry a passenger, except for agricultural purposes. 
(Ord. No. 6338, § 2, 6-20-88)
Secs. 29-169-29-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic-control devices, RSMo 300.130 et seq.

Sec. 29-176. - Standards and specifications generally. 
(a)	All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state highway commission or resolution adopted by the city council. 
(b)	All signs or signals required by this chapter for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. 
(c)	All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.135. 
Sec. 29-177. - Placement, maintenance. 
    The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under the provisions of this chapter to make effective such provisions and he may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the provisions of this chapter or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1967, § 28-16)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.130. 
Sec. 29-178. - Obedience by drivers. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 28-17)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.140. 
Sec. 29-179. - When required for enforcement of chapter. 
    No provision of this chapter for which official traffic-control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic-control devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or in place. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.145. 
Sec. 29-180. - Presumption of validity. 
(a)	Whenever official traffic-control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(b)	Any official traffic-control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.150. 
Sec. 29-181. - Traffic-control signal legend. 
    Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and said lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)	Green indication: 
a.	Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.	Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
c.	Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in this article, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)	Steady yellow indication: 
a.	Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection. 
b.	Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in this article, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway. 
(3)	Steady red indication: 
a.	Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until a green indication is shown. 
b.	Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in this article pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway. 
(4)	In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made but, in the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.155. 
Sec. 29-182. - Pedestrian-control signals. 
    Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)	Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)	Wait or Don't Walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is showing. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.160. 
Sec. 29-183. - Flashing signals. 
    Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)	Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)	Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.165. 
Sec. 29-184. - Lane direction control signals. 
    When lane direction control signals are placed over the individual lanes of a street or highway, vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a green signal is shown, but shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a red signal is shown. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.170. 
Sec. 29-185. - Display of unauthorized traffic-control devices. 
    No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.175. 
Sec. 29-186. - Interference with traffic-control devices. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.180. 
Secs. 29-187-29-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning regulation of vehicle parking and storage, § 32-111 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 29-196. - Scope of article. 
    The provisions of this article prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this article or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.520. 
Sec. 29-197. - Provisions of article not exclusive. 
    The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.525. 
Sec. 29-198. - Notice required generally. 
(a)	Whenever by this Code or any other ordinance of the city any parking time limit is imposed on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(b)	Whenever by this Code or any other ordinance of the city parking is prohibited at designated places and/or on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to erect appropriate signs or markings by painting the curb adjacent to the designated place yellow, thereby giving notice of the prohibited parking zones and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs or markings are in place at the time of the alleged offense. 
(Ord. No. 5613, § 28-90, 9-2-80; Ord. No. 7460, § 1, 5-19-03)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.545. 
Sec. 29-199. - Prohibited parking zones generally. 
    When signs or markings are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets described by this Code or other ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 28-26; Ord. No. 7460, § 1, 5-19-03])
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.530. 
Sec. 29-200. - Restricted stopping, standing and parking zones generally. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours specified by ordinance of any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district or upon any of the streets described by this Code or other city ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 28-27, 28-89)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.535, 300.540. 
Sec. 29-201. - Parking to be parallel; exceptions. 
    All motor vehicles shall be parked as near to the right-hand side of the street as is practicable; and every automobile shall be parked parallel to the right-hand side of the roadway facing in the directional movement of traffic, except where angle parking is permitted, and except in those places where the grade of the street or roadway has been so widened that a vehicle may be parked at an angle without any portion of such vehicle extending into the main traveled portion of said street or roadway. 
(Code 1967, § 28-73)
State Law reference- Manner of parking, RSMo 300.415. 
Sec. 29-202. - Parking in limited parking spaces. 
    When lines are drawn describing limited parking spaces, said vehicles shall be parked so that the entire vehicle is within such a parking space. When no such lines exist, the vehicle shall be parked so that the side thereof nearest the curb is at an angle therewith of no less than forty (40) degrees nor more than fifty-five (55) degrees. 
(Code 1967, § 28-75; Ord. No. 5613, § 2, 9-2-80)
Sec. 29-203. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.445. 
Sec. 29-204. - Starting vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked. 
    No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Code 1967, § 28-53)
Sec. 29-205. - Prohibited stopping, standing and parking areas enumerated. 
(a)	Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
(1)	On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
(2)	On a sidewalk;
(3)	Within an intersection;
(4)	On a crosswalk;
(5)	Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the traffic division indicates a different length by signs or markings; 
(6)	Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(7)	Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
(8)	On any railroad tracks;
(9)	At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
(b)	No person shall stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers: 
(1)	In front of a public or private driveway;
(2)	Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
(3)	Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(4)	Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(5)	Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance; when properly signposted; 
(6)	At any place where official signs or markings prohibit standing.
(c)	No person shall park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged 
    in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers: 
(1)	Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(2)	At any place where official signs or markings prohibit parking.
(d)	No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 17, 12-21-54; Ord. No. 7460, § 1, 5-19-03)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.440. 
Sec. 29-206. - Unlicensed vehicles. 
    No unlicensed vehicle shall be permitted to park on the streets of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 28-72)
Sec. 29-207. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs or place markings indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)	When official signs are erected or markings placed indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property, as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. No. 7460, § 1, 5-19-03)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.460. 
Sec. 29-208. - Manner of parking within alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.450. 
Sec. 29-209. - Standing, parking along divided highways. 
    In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway. no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.475. 
Sec. 29-210. - Standing or parking on one-way street. 
    The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs or place curb markings upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles and, when such signs or markings are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left-handed side in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Ord. No. 7460, § 1, 5-19-03)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.470. 
Sec. 29-211. - Parking on narrow streets. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs or place curb markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
(b)	When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Ord. No. 7460, § 1, 5-19-03)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.465. 
Sec. 29-212. - Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs or markings placed not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)	When official signs are erected or markings placed at hazardous or congested places as authorized in this section, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. No. 7460, § 1, 5-19-03)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.480. 
Sec. 29-213. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)	Displaying such vehicle for sale;
(2)	Displaying advertising;
(3)	Repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.455. 
Sec. 29-214. - Designation, marking of angle parking streets. 
    The city traffic engineer shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets. 
(Code 1967, § 28-28)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.420. 
Sec. 29-215. - Unsuitable places for angle parking. 
    Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.420. 
Sec. 29-216. - Obedience to angle parking signs. 
    On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city traffic engineer for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1967, § 28-28)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.425. 
Sec. 29-217. - Permits for loading or unloading vehicles with rear to curb. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any permittee under this section or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any permit issued pursuant to this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.430. 
Sec. 29-218. - Designation of curb loading zones. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(b)	The city traffic engineer shall not designate or sign any curb loading zone upon special request of any person unless such person makes application for a permit for such zone and for two (2) signs to indicate the ends of each such zone. the city traffic engineer upon granting a permit and issuing such signs shall collect from the applicant and deposit in the city treasury a service fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per year or fraction thereof and may by general regulations impose conditions upon the use of such signs and for reimbursement of the city for the value thereof in the event of their loss or damage and their return in the event of misuse or upon expiration of permit. Every such permit shall expire at the end of one year. 
(Code 1967, § 28-30)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.485, 300.490. 
Sec. 29-219. - Use of curb loading zones. 
(a)	Passenger. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes. 
(b)	Freight. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect, and then only for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.495, 300.500. 
Sec. 29-220. - Parking limitations for certain vehicles, trucks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any passenger motor vehicle, motor truck or trailer, having a capacity of more than one-ton parked upon any public street in a residential area zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3. Nothing in this section shall prohibit reasonable and necessary parking while loading or unloading any such vehicle or in carrying on the business of its owner or operator. 
(Code 1967, § 28-74; Ord. No. 7194, § 1, 7-6-99)
Sec. 29-221. - Establishment, designation of public carrier stops and stands. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1967, § 28-30)
Cross reference- Vehicles for hire, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.505. 
Sec. 29-222. - Stopping, standing and parking of buses. 
(a)	The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein. 
(b)	The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)	The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18) inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
Cross reference- Vehicles for hire, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.510. 
Sec. 29-223. - Stopping, standing and parking of taxicabs. 
    The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
Cross reference- Vehicles for hire, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300,510. 
Sec. 29-224. - Use of bus stops and taxicab stands. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
Cross reference- Vehicles for hire, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.515. 
Sec. 29-225. - Unattended motor vehicle. 
    No person shall leave a motor vehicle unattended on the highway without first stopping the motor and cutting off the electric current and, when parked upon a perceptible grade, without turning the wheels of such vehicle to the curb or side of the roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.150. 
Sec. 29-226. - Designation of parking spaces for the handicapped. 
(a)	The city council is hereby authorized and empowered to designate from time to time portions of streets which shall be reserved for parking spaces for physically handicapped persons or used for the transporting of a handicapped person. Such streets or portions of streets shall be designated by a sign or signs conforming to the standards for delineating handicapped parking as set forth in the manual on uniform traffic control devices. 
(b)	The schedule of parking spaces for the handicapped provided in subsection (a), as the same is or may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set forth at length. 
(c)	Any governmental, institutional or commercial facility may designate reserved parking spaces for physically handicapped persons upon private property designated for public use. Each such space shall be designated by a sign or signs conforming to the standards for delineating handicapped parking as set forth in the manual on uniform traffic control devices, or other proper signs which designate a specific area for handicapped parking. 
(d)	The clerk of the municipal court shall provide applications for physically handicapped persons requesting parking identification cards or stickers, and upon receipt of the completed application and accompanying letter from the applicant's physician shall issue the handicapped parking identification card or sticker. Persons applying in person and who are obviously physically handicapped shall not be required to submit a letter from their physician. Disabled persons living both within and outside the city may be issued the handicapped parking identification card or sticker. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on public or private property in a space reserved and marked as reserved for handicapped parking unless the person shall meet one of the following requirements: 
(1)	A State of Missouri or other state handicapped license plates; or
(2)	A veteran's administration handicapped license plate; or
(3)	A municipally issued handicapped identification card displayed on the driver's side of the windshield or a handicapped parking sticker from another legitimate source; or 
(4)	If the driver of the vehicle is obviously physically handicapped.
(f)	Any person who shall park a vehicle without a permit as required by subsection (e) shall be in violation of this section and shall be subject to prosecution and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(g)	Physically handicapped as employed herein shall include any person who has sustained an amputation or permanent material disability of either or both legs, or who has been otherwise permanently disabled in any manner rendering it difficult and burdensome for him to walk. This also includes people who have permanent heart or respiratory problems, blindness and other medical problems as well as disabilities that confine persons to a wheelchair or require the use of a walker or crutches. No stickers shall be issued for temporary disabilities. 
(Ord. No. 5627, § 1, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 5872, § 1, 5-16-83)
Sec. 29-227. - Parking time limits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any motor vehicle, trailer, truck, boat, recreational vehicle, motorcycle, tractor or any other vehicle parked upon any street or within two (2) blocks of the same point on any street for a continuous period of more than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Ord. No. 5859, § 1, 2-7-83)
Sec. 29-228. - Persons prima facie responsible for violations. 
    If any vehicle is found upon any street in violation of any provision of this article regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 7027, §§ 1, 2, 3-3-97)
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7027, § 2, adopted March 3, 1997, repealed former section 29-228 in its entirety and renumbered former section 29-229 as section 29-228. Repealed former section 29-228 pertained to the towing and impoundment of motor vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 5859, § 1, adopted Feb. 7, 1983, and Ord. No. 6853, § 1, adopted March 6, 1995. 
Sec. 29-229. - Towing. 
(1)	Any law enforcement officer within the jurisdiction of the City may authorize a towing company to remove to a place of safety: 
(a)	Any abandoned property on the right-of-way of any state highway left unattended for more than forty-eight (48) hours; provided that commercial motor vehicles not hauling waste designated as hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103(a) may only be removed under this subdivision to a place of safety until the owner or owner's representative has had a reasonable opportunity to contact a towing company of choice; 
(b)	Any unattended abandoned property illegally left standing upon any highway or bridge if the abandoned property is left in a position or under such circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic where there is no reasonable indication that the person in control of the property is arranging for its immediate control or removal; 
(c)	Any abandoned property which has been abandoned under Section 577.080, RSMo.;
(d)	Any abandoned property which has been reported as stolen or taken without consent of the owner; 
(e)	Any abandoned property for which the person operating such property is arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is required to take the person into custody and where such person refuses or is unable to arrange for the property's timely removal; 
(f)	Any abandoned property which due to any other state law or local ordinance is subject to towing because of the owner's outstanding traffic or parking violations; 
(g)	Any abandoned property left unattended in violation of a state law or local ordinance where signs have been posted giving notice of the law or where the violation causes a safety hazard; 
(h)	Any vehicle which is or may be evidence in any criminal case;
(i)	Any vehicle which is or may be subject to forfeiture; or
(j)	Any junk vehicle.
(2)	Neither the law enforcement officer, the City, nor anyone having custody of abandoned property under his direction shall be liable for any damage to such abandoned property occasioned by a removal authorized by this chapter, other than damages occasioned by negligence or by willful or wanton acts or omissions. 
(3)	The owner of abandoned property removed as provided in this Chapter shall be responsible for payment of all reasonable charges for towing and storage of such abandoned property. In addition to the tow bill, the City shall charge not more than ten dollars ($10.00) per day for the storage of vehicles. 
(4)	Upon the towing of any abandoned property under this chapter, the law enforcement agency that authorized such towing shall make an inquiry with the national crime information center and any statewide Missouri law enforcement computer system to determine if the abandoned property has been reported as stolen and shall enter the information pertaining to the towed property into the statewide law enforcement computer system. The law enforcement agency shall submit a crime inquiry and inspection report to the Director of Revenue, on any abandoned property, if the abandoned property is not claimed within ten (10) working days. The crime inquiry and inspection report shall include the following: 
(a)	The year, model, make and identification number of the property, and the owner and lienholders, if known; 
(b)	A description of any damage to the property noted by the officer authorizing the tow;
(c)	The license plate or registration number and the state of issuance, if available;
(d)	The storage location of the towed property;
(e)	The name, telephone number and address of the towing company;
(f)	The date, place and reason for the towing of the abandoned property;
(g)	The date of the inquiry of the national crime information center, any statewide Missouri law enforcement computer system and any other similar system which has titling and registration information to determine if the abandoned property had been stolen; 
(h)	The signature and printed name of the officer and the towing operator; and
(i)	Any additional information required by the Director of Revenue.
(5)	One (1) copy of the crime inquiry and inspection report shall remain with the agency which authorized the tow. One (1) copy shall be provided to and retained by the storage facility and one (1) copy shall be retained by the towing facility in an accessible format in the business records for a period of three (3) years from the date of the tow or removal. 
(6)	The owner of such abandoned property, or the holder of a valid security interest of record, may reclaim it from the towing company upon proof of ownership or valid security interest of record and payment of all reasonable charges for the towing and storage of the abandoned property. 
(7)	Any person who removes abandoned property, or a vehicle towed, pursuant to Subsection (1)(h), (i) or (j) of this section, at the direction of a law enforcement officer as provided in this chapter, shall have a lien for all reasonable charges for the towing and storage of the abandoned property until possession of the abandoned property is voluntarily relinquished to the owner of the abandoned property or to the holder of a valid security interest of record. Any personal property within the abandoned property need not be released to the owner thereof until the reasonable or agreed charges for such recovery, transportation or safekeeping have been paid or satisfactory arrangements for payment have been made, except that any medication prescribed by a physician shall be released to the owner thereof upon request. The company holding or storing the abandoned property shall either release the personal property to the owner of the abandoned property or allow the owner to inspect the property and provide an itemized receipt for the contents. The company holding or storing the property shall be strictly liable for the condition and safe return of the personal property. Such lien shall be enforced in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 7027, § 5, 3-3-97; Ord. No. 7339, § 2, 7-16-01)
Sec. 29-230. - Title to towed vehicles. 
(1)	The City or any towing company coming into possession of abandoned property, and who claims a lien for recovering, towing or storing abandoned property, shall give notice to the title owner and to all persons claiming a lien thereon, as disclosed by the records of the Department of Revenue or of a corresponding agency in any other state. The towing company shall notify the owner and any lienholder, within ten (10) business days of the date of mailing indicated on the notice sent by the Department of Revenue, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain the following: 
(a)	The name, address and telephone number of the storage facility;
(b)	The date, reason and place from which the abandoned property was removed;
(c)	A statement that the amount of the accrued towing, storage and administrative costs are the responsibility of the owner, and that the storage and/or administrative costs will continue to accrue as a legal liability of the owner until the abandoned property is redeemed; 
(d)	A statement that the City or storage firm claims a possessory lien for all such charges;
(e)	A statement that the owner or holder of a valid security interest of record may retake possession of the abandoned property at any time during business hours by proving ownership or rights to a secured interest, and paying all towing and storage charges; 
(f)	A statement that, should the owner consider that the towing or removal was improper or not legally justified, the owner has a right to request a hearing as set forth in RSMo. §304.156, to contest the propriety of such towing or removal; 
(g)	A statement that, if the abandoned property remains unclaimed for thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the notice, title to the abandoned property will be transferred to the City, person or firm in possession of the abandoned property, free of all prior liens; and 
(h)	A statement that any charges in excess of the value of the abandoned property at the time of such transfer shall remain a liability of the owner. 
(2)	In the event that the records of the Department of Revenue fail to disclose the name of the owner and any lienholder of record, the City or the towing company shall attempt to locate documents or other evidence of ownership on or within the abandoned property itself. The City or towing company must certify that a physical search of the abandoned property disclosed that no ownership documents were found and a good faith effort had been made. For purposes of this section, good faith effort means that the following checks have been performed by the City or towing company to establish the prior state of registration and title: 
(a)	Check of the abandoned property for any type of license plate, license plate record, temporary permit, inspection sticker, decal or other evidence which may indicate a state of possible registration and title; 
(b)	Check the law enforcement report for a license plate number or registration number if the abandoned property was towed at the request of a law enforcement agency; 
(c)	Check the tow ticket/report of the tow truck operator to see if a license plate was on the abandoned property at the beginning of the tow, if a private tow; and 
(d)	If there is no address of the owner on the impound report, check the law enforcement report to see if an out-of-state address is indicated on the driver license information. 
(3)	If no ownership information is discovered, the Director of Revenue shall be notified in writing and title obtained in accordance with Subsection (4) of this section. 
(4)	Thirty (30) days after the notification form has been mailed to the abandoned property owner and holder of a security agreement and the property is unredeemed and no satisfactory arrangement has been made with the lienholder in possession for continued storage, and the owner or holder of a security agreement has not requested a hearing as provided in Subsection (1) of this section, the City or other lienholder in possession may apply to the Director of Revenue for a certificate. The application for title shall be accompanied by: 
(a)	An affidavit from the lienholder in possession that he has been in possession of the abandoned property for at least thirty (30) days and the owner of the abandoned property or holder of a security agreement has not made arrangements for payment of towing and storage charges; 
(b)	An affidavit that the lienholder in possession has not been notified of any application for hearing as provided in this section; 
(c)	A copy of the abandoned property report or crime inquiry and inspection report;
(d)	A copy of the 30-day notice given by certified mail to any owner and person holding a valid security interest and a copy of the certified mail receipt indicating that the owner and lienholder of record was sent a notice as required in this section; and 
(e)	A copy of the envelope or mailing container showing the address and postal markings indicating that the notice was "not forwardable" or "address unknown". 
(5)	If the notice to the owner and holder of a security agreement has been returned and marked "not forwardable" or "addressee unknown", the lienholder in possession shall comply with Subsection (2) of this section. 
(6)	If the City has physical possession of the abandoned property, and has complied with the notice provisions hereof, it may sell the abandoned property and issue a bill of sale signed by the City Clerk or Deputy and sealed with the official City seal. Such bill of sale shall contain the make and model of the abandoned property, the complete abandoned property identification number and the odometer reading of the abandoned property, if available, and shall be lawful proof of ownership for any person. 
(Ord. No. 7027, § 6, 3-3-97; Ord. No. 7339, § 3, 7-16-01)
Sec. 29-231. - Towed vehicles on private property. 
(a)	If a person abandons property as defined herein, on any real property owned by another without the consent of the owner or person in possession of the property, at the request of the person in possession of the real property, any law enforcement officer of the city may authorize a towing company to remove such abandoned property from the property in the following circumstances: 
(1)	The abandoned property is left unattended for more than forty-eight (48) hours; or
(2)	In the judgment of a law enforcement officer, the abandoned property constitutes a safety hazard or unreasonably interferes with the use of the real property by the person in possession. 
(b)	Neither the law enforcement officer nor anyone having custody of abandoned property under his direction shall be liable for any damage to such abandoned property occasioned by a removal authorized by this section other than damages occasioned by negligence or by willful or wanton acts or omissions. 
(c)	The person or agency causing removal of any abandoned property hereunder shall, if the person or agency knows the registered owner or lienholder, within five (5) working days, give notice in writing to the registered owner and any lienholder of the fact of the removal, the grounds for the removal, and indicate the place to which the property has been removed. If the abandoned property is stored in any storage facility, a copy of the notice shall be given to the operator of the facility. The notice provided for in this section shall include the amount of mileage if available shown on the abandoned property at the time of removal. 
(Ord. No. 7027, § 7, 3-3-97)
Secs. 29-232-29-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING CONTROL 

Sec. 29-236. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
    Limited parking zone shall mean and include any street upon which parking time is limited. 
    Operator shall mean and include every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or in actual control of a vehicle. 
    Park or parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals, or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle. 
    Parking space shall mean any space within a limited parking zone and which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street. 
    Street shall mean any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path or other public place located in the city and established for the use of vehicles. 
    Vehicle shall mean any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 5613, § 28-87, 9-2-80)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 29-237. - Parking control department. 
(a)	Creation, personnel. There is hereby created a subdivision of the police department to be known as the parking control department to be composed of the necessary personnel to handle the duties of the department, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(b)	Responsibility of parking control officer. The parking control officer shall be responsible for the issuance of all parking tickets as provided by this division, the collection of such sums of money as may become due from the issuance of such tickets and the accounting therefor, and shall aid in the prosecution for the violation thereof, and perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 5613, § 28-86, 9-2-80; Ord. No. 5734, § 1, 9-21-81)
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 29-238. - Designation of parking spaces. 
    The mayor is hereby directed and authorized to cause the markings and designations of existing parking spaces to be maintained, and to mark off individual parking spaces in such additional limited parking zones as may be hereafter established by ordinance, by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or the surface of the street. At each space so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that such vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated. 
(Ord. No. 5613, § 28-88, 9-2-80)
Sec. 29-239. - Collection and use of funds. 
    It shall be the duty of the parking control officer to make regular collections of the fines imposed under this division and to deliver the money so collected to the finance director. It shall be the duty of the city collector to count the money and place it in the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 5613, § 28-91, 9-2-80; Ord. No. 6676, § 34, 2-1-93)
Sec. 29-240. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this division, or who shall counsel, aid or abet any such violation or failure to comply shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-10; provided however, that no prosecution shall be had for any violation of ordinances adopted under section 29-200 if the offender shall within twenty-four (24) hours after such violation pay to the city either by depositing the sum of two dollars ($2.00) in such receptables in such manner as may be afforded by the city, or by paying such sum at the city office building to any person designated by the city; or if the offender shall at any time prior to the issuance of a warrant for the arrest of said offender pay to any person designated by the city the sum of three dollars ($3.00); and provided further, that no prosecution shall be had for any violation if such person shall prior to 8:00 a.m. of the Saturday next succeeding the issue of a warrant for the arrest of the offender pay the sum of five dollars ($5.00) at the city office building to such person so designated by the city for each violation of this warrant. 
(Ord. No. 5613, § 28-92, 9-2-80)
Sec. 29-241. - Issuance of complaint for violations. 
    Whenever it appears that five (5) days have transpired since the violation of any section of this division a complaint will be filed and a warrant issued for the arrest of the offender. 
(Ord. No. 5613, § 28-93, 9-2-80)
Sec. 29-242. - Reservation of powers. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed as prohibiting the city from providing for bus stops, taxicab stands and other matters of similar nature, including the loading or unloading of trucks, vans and other commercial vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 5613, § 28-94, 9-2-80)
Secs. 29-243-29-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY PARKING LOT 

Sec. 29-251. - Establishment, location. 
    There is hereby established special parking areas known as city parking lots, the location of which shall be as designated by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 5613, § 28-110, 9-2-80; Ord. No. 6676, § 35, 2-1-93)
Secs. 29-252-29-255. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6676, § 36, adopted Feb. 1, 1993, amended this Code by repealing § 29-252, pertaining to division into areas, § 29-253 pertaining to use of free parking area, § 29-254, pertaining to use of parking area number two and § 29-255, pertaining to the manner of parking regulated and penalty for violation, as derived from Ord. No. 5613, adopted Sept. 2, 1980. 
Sec. 29-256. - Parking time limit established. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name, or operated or controlled by him, to be parked upon the parking lot owned or controlled by the city for a continuous period of more than twelve (12) hours. 
(b)	Each twelve (12) hour period during which a vehicle is so caused, allowed, permitted or suffered to remain on such a parking lot shall be deemed a separate violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 5613, § 28-115, 9-2-80)
Sec. 29-257. - Impoundment of vehicle violating parking time limit. 
    Upon its coming to his attention that a vehicle has remained upon any city parking lot for a period of more than twelve (12) hours, the chief of police may, at his discretion, or shall, at the direction of the mayor, cause such vehicle to be removed from such parking lot and shall cause the same to be stored at some reasonably secure place, and shall not release such vehicle to any person except after the payment to him, for the use of the city, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each day or fraction of a day from the time of such removal to the date of such payment. 
(Ord. No. 5613, § 28-116, 9-2-80; Ord. No. 6676, § 37, 2-1-93)
Secs. 29-258-29-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES 

Sec. 29-266. - Designated. 
    The following streets in the city are declared to be emergency snow routes: 
(1)	North-south streets: 
BentonArrow to BoydBentonSouth Lake Drive to CollegeBrunswickCollege to SlaterEllsworthCollege to ArrowEnglishBoyd to SlaterJeffersonWashington to EastwoodLafayetteWashington to PorterLincolnMorrow to Mo. Route 240MiamiNorth Lake Drive to Mo. Route 240OdellSouth City Limit to North City LimitSalt PondMorrow to Marion 
(2)	East-west streets: 
ArrowU.S. 65 Bypass to OdellBoydMiami to LafayetteCollegeWestport to OdellCourtSalt Pond to LafayetteEastwoodLafayette to East City LimitGordonLincoln to StonehavenHighMiami to EnglishMarionSalt Pond to OdellMorganEnglish to OdellMorrowU.S. 65 Bypass to LincolnNorthEnglish to BellSlaterEnglish to OdellSlaterCommercial to LincolnYerbyEllsworth to LincolnVestU.S. 65 Bypass to Lincoln 
(Code 1967, § 28-76; Ord. No. 8078, § 1, 11-19-12)
Sec. 29-267. - Areas. 
    For the purpose of this division, the emergency snow routes designated in section 29-266 are divided into two areas. Area I shall comprise the area bounded by Marion and Salt Pond, Odell and Marion, Odell and Morgan, and Morgan and Salt Pond. All other snow routes shall be declared to be in Area II. 
(Code 1967, § 28-76; Ord. No. 8078, § 1, 11-19-12)
Sec. 29-268. - Declaration of emergency; regulations. 
    After declaration of an emergency as so declared by the street commissioner by radio news announcements declaring such emergency and within the time set in such declaration of an emergency, no motor vehicle shall be allowed to be parked on those streets designated as Area I between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and on those streets designated as Area II between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. The "no parking" restrictions shall remain in full force and effect until a declaration is made by the street commissioner declaring the emergency to be at an end. 
(Code 1967, § 28-76; Ord. No. 8078, § 1, 11-19-12)
Sec. 29-269. - Notification; violations. 
    Within a period of two (2) hours after the first radio news announcement declaring a snow emergency to exist, every effort will be made through the cooperation of the street commissioner and the city police department to notify the owner or owners of illegally parked vehicles that their vehicles are so illegally parked; but after such two-hour period, any illegally parked vehicle shall be automatically towed from the area where it is so parked on order of the street commissioner; a record filed in the police department as to the location of said towed vehicle; and the owner or owners may recover said vehicles by payment of the towing charges. The owner or owners of such illegally parked vehicles may also be subject to a fine as provided under the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 28-76; Ord. No. 8078, § 1, 11-19-12)
Sec. 29-270. - Posting of signs. 
    Signs shall be placed at strategic locations on each of the emergency snow routes designated in section 29-266 indicating that the street is an emergency snow route. 
(Code 1967, § 28-76; Ord. No. 8078, § 1, 11-19-12)
Sec. 29-271. - Snow removal; obstruction of sight distance. 
(1)	No person shall place, cause to be placed or permit to be placed any snow or ice upon any street, road or sidewalk within the city. 
(2)	No person shall place, cause to be placed or permit to be placed any snow or ice upon any public or private property adjacent to or separate from the property from which the snow is removed without the express written consent of the owner of the adjacent or separate property. 
(3)	No person shall place, cause to be placed or permit to be placed any snow or ice which obstructs or impedes the sight distance triangle described in section 26-38(e). The owners, tenants and occupants of the property from which snow or ice is removed, as well as any person who caused the snow or ice to be removed, shall be responsible for compliance with the terms of this section. This section shall not apply to those areas within Area I as designated in section 29-267. 
(Ord. No. 8078, § 2, 11-19-12)
Secs. 29-272-29-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 

Sec. 29-281. - Permit required for certain funerals, processions and parades. 
    No funeral, procession or parade containing two hundred (200) or more persons or fifty (50) or more vehicles except the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of this state and the forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the city traffic engineer and such other regulations as are set forth in this chapter which may apply. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.325. 
Sec. 29-282. - Funeral procession to be identifiable. 
    A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the police department. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.320. 
Sec. 29-283. - Operation of vehicles in procession. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.315. 
Sec. 29-284. - Driving through processions. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated; provided, however, that this section shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.310. 
Secs. 29-285-29-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 29-291. - Obedience to traffic-control devices. 
    Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as prescribed in sections 29-181 and 29-182, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.370. 
Sec. 29-292. - Right-of-way at crosswalks. 
(a)	When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(b)	The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply under the conditions stated in section 29-296. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.375. 
Sec. 29-293. - Leaving curb suddenly or entering path of vehicle. 
    No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield the right-of-way. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.375. 
Sec. 29-294. - Use of right half of crosswalks. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.380. 
Sec. 29-295. - Crossing at right angles. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a crosswalk. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.385. 
Sec. 29-296. - When pedestrians to yield right-of-way. 
(a)	Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)	Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)	The foregoing rules in this section have no application under the conditions stated in section 29-297 when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain designated places. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.390. 
Sec. 29-297. - Prohibited crossing places. 
(a)	Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. 
(b)	No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any business district.
(c)	No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any street designated by the provisions of this Code. 
(d)	No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.395. 
Sec. 29-298. - Manner of walking along roadway. 
(a)	Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)	Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.405. 
Sec. 29-299. - Obedience to bridge and railroad signals. 
(a)	No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation signal indication has been given. 
(b)	No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while such gate is closed or is being opened or closed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.400. 
Sec. 29-300. - Visually handicapped. 
    The driver of a vehicle approaching a totally or partially blind pedestrian who is carrying a cane predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip, or using a guide dog shall take all necessary precautions to avoid injury to such blind pedestrian, and any driver who fails to take such precautions shall be liable in damages for any injury caused such pedestrian; provided that a totally or partially blind pedestrian not carrying such a cane or using a guide dog in any of the places, accommodations or conveyances listed in RSMo 209.150 shall have all of the rights and privileges conferred by law upon other persons. 
(Code 1967, § 28-5)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.080. 
Sec. 29-301. - Duty of drivers. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise the highest degree of care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.410. 
Secs. 29-302-29-315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BICYCLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 29-316. - Applicability of provisions. 
    These regulations in this article shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. 
(Code 1967, § 6-1)
Sec. 29-317. - Applicability of traffic laws. 
    Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of this city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1967, §§ 6-14, 28-4)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.188. 
Sec. 29-318. - Traffic-control devices, signs; applicability. 
(a)	Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)	Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where the person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event the person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1967, § 6-15)
Sec. 29-319. - Operator to ride on permanent seat. 
    A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent or regular seat attached thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 6-16)
Sec. 29-320. - Limitation on number of riders. 
    No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Code 1967, § 6-17)
Sec. 29-321. - Riding on roadways, bicycle paths. 
(a)	Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)	Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(c)	Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use the path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Code 1967, § 6-18)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.190. 
Sec. 29-322. - Speed limits. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code 1967, § 6-19)
Sec. 29-323. - Emerging from alley, driveway. 
    The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Code 1967, § 6-20)
Sec. 29-324. - Carrying articles while operating bicycle. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(Code 1967, § 6-22)
Sec. 29-325. - Parking regulations. 
(a)	No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or in a rack to support the bicycle, the rack to be located by the chief of police in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian and other traffic. 
(b)	No bicycle shall at any time be parked upon the sidewalk.
(Code 1967, § 6-23)
Sec. 29-326. - Riding on square prohibited. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle upon the sidewalks or streets within the business district, the district to include the square and the streets within one block that lead into the square. 
(Code 1967, § 6-24)
Sec. 29-327. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)	No person sixteen (16) years of age or older shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in any district. 
(b)	Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1967, §§ 6-25, 26-27)
Sec. 29-328. - Brakes required. 
    Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake or brakes which will enable its driver to stop the bicycle within twenty-five (25) feet from a speed of ten (10) miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Code 1967, § 6-28)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.183. 
Sec. 29-329. - Lights and reflectors. 
    Every bicycle when in use on a street or highway during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)	A front-facing lamp on the front or carried by the rider which shall emit a white light visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway at five hundred (500) feet; 
(2)	A rear-facing red reflector, at least two (2) square inches in reflective surface area, on the rear which shall be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver under the lower beams of vehicle headlights at six hundred (600) feet; 
(3)	Essentially colorless or amber reflectors on both the front and rear surfaces of all pedals. Each pedal reflector shall be recessed below the plane of the pedal or reflector housing. Each reflector shall be at least ninety one-hundredths square inches in projected effective reflex area, and must be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at two hundred (200) feet; and 
(4)	A side-facing essentially colorless or amber reflector visible on each side of the wheel mounted on the wheel spokes of the front wheel within three (3) inches of the inside of the wheel rim and a side-facing essentially colorless or red reflector mounted on the wheel spokes of the rear wheel within three (3) inches of the inside of the wheel rim, or continuous retroreflective material on each side of both tires which shall be at least three-sixteenths of an inch wide. All such reflectors or retroreflective tire sidewalls shall be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at three hundred (300) feet. 
(Code 1967, § 6-26)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.185. 
Sec. 29-330. - Signal device required; siren, whistle, prohibited. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle. 
(Code 1967, § 6-27)
Sec. 29-331. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6676, § 38, adopted Feb. 1, 1993, amended this Code by repealing § 29-331, pertaining to dealers keeping records and availability to police, as derived from § 6-29 of the 1967 Code. 
Sec. 29-332. - Rental agencies, condition of bicycles. 
    A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is licensed and license plate is attached thereto as provided herein, and the bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 6-30)
Secs. 29-333, 29-334. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 29-335. - Required. 
    No person who resides within this city shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, unless the bicycle has been licensed as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 6-2; Ord. No. 6676, § 39, 2-1-93)
Sec. 29-336. - Application. 
    Application for a bicycle license shall be made upon a form provided by the city and shall be made to the chief of police. 
(Code 1967, § 6-3; Ord. No. 6676, § 40, 2-1-93)
Sec. 29-337. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6676, § 41, adopted Feb. 1, 1993, amended this Code by repealing § 29-337, pertaining to bicycle license issuance; fee and duration, as derived from § 6-4 of the 1967 Code. 
Sec. 29-338. - Ownership, possession prerequisites to license. 
    The chief of police shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he knows or has reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession of the bicycle. 
(Code 1967, § 6-5)
Sec. 29-339. - Inspection. 
    The chief of police, or an officer assigned this responsibility shall inspect each bicycle before licensing the same and shall refuse a license for any bicycle which he determines is in unsafe mechanical condition. 
(Code 1967, § 6-12)
Sec. 29-340. - Records of licenses. 
    The chief of police shall keep a record of the number of each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued, and the numbers on the frame of the bicycle for which issued. 
(Code 1967, § 6-6; Ord. No. 6676, § 42, 2-1-93)
Sec. 29-341. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6676, § 43, adopted Feb. 1, 1993, amended this Code by repealing § 29-341, pertaining to renewal of bicycle licenses, as derived from § 6-7 of the 1967 Code. 
Sec. 29-342. - Suspension. 
    Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by suspension of his bicycle license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(Code 1967, § 6-8)
Sec. 29-343. - License plate-Issuance with licenses. 
    The chief of police upon issuing a bicycle license shall also issue a license sticker bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle and the name of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 6-9; Ord. No. 6676, § 44, 2-1-93)
Sec. 29-344. - Same-Manner of attachment. 
    The chief of police shall cause the license sticker provided for in section 29-343 to be firmly attached to the bicycle for which issued. 
(Code 1967, § 6-10; Ord. No. 6676, § 45, 2-1-93)
Sec. 29-345. - Same-Removal from bicycle. 
    No person shall remove a license sticker from a bicycle except upon a transfer of ownership or in the event the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street in this city. 
(Code 1967, § 6-11; Ord. No. 6676, § 47, 2-1-93)
Sec. 29-346. - Transfer of ownership. 
    Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle the licensee shall remove the license sticker and shall surrender the same to the chief of police. 
(Code 1967, § 6-13; Ord. No. 6676, § 48, 2-1-93)
Secs. 29-347-29-355. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - EQUIPMENT[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Vehicle equipment regulations, RSMo Ch. 307.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 29-356. - License plates. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle registered in this state on the streets of the city unless there is an unexpired state license number plate on the front and rear of such vehicle, which plates shall be entirely unobscured and so fastened as not to swing. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 301.260. 
Sec. 29-357. - Brakes. 
    All motor vehicles, except motorcycles, shall be provided at all times with two (2) sets of adequate brakes, kept in good working order, and motorcycles shall be provided with one set of adequate brakes kept in good working order. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.170. 
Sec. 29-358. - Mufflers required. 
    The motors of all motor vehicles shall be fitted with properly attached mufflers of such capacity or construction as to quiet the maximum possible exhaust noise as completely as is done in modern gas engine passenger motor vehicles. 
(Code 1967, § 28-58)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.170. 
Sec. 29-359. - Muffler cutouts prohibited. 
    Muffler cutouts shall not be used and no vehicle shall be driven in such a manner or condition that excessive and unnecessary noises shall be made by its machinery, motor, signaling device or other parts, or by any improperly loaded cargo. Any cutout or opening in the exhaust pipe between the motor and the muffler or any motor vehicle shall be completely closed and disconnected from its operating lever, and shall be so arranged that it cannot automatically open, or be opened or operated while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1967, § 28-58)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.170. 
Sec. 29-360. - Signaling devices. 
    Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a horn, directed forward, or a whistle in good working order, capable of emitting a sound adequate in quantity and volume to give warning of the approach of such vehicle to other users of the street and to pedestrians. Such signaling device shall be used for warning purposes only and shall not be used for making any unnecessary noise and no other sound-producing signaling device shall be used at any time; provided, however, that emergency vehicles of the fire department and underwriters salvage corps and vehicles being used by police officers in the discharge of their duty may use either a siren or bell; all other authorized emergency vehicles may use a bell or a horn only. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.170. 
Sec. 29-361. - Mirrors. 
    All motor vehicles which are so constructed or loaded that the operator cannot see the road behind such vehicle by looking back or around the side of such vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror so adjusted as to reveal the road behind and be visible from the operator's seat. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.170. 
Sec. 29-362. - Projections on vehicles. 
    All vehicles carrying poles or other objects, which project more than five (5) feet from the rear or front of such vehicle shall, at any time from a half-hour after sunset to a half-hour before sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on any street or highway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet ahead, carry a red light at or near the rear end of the pole or other object so projecting. At other times a red flag or cloth, not less than sixteen (16) inches square, shall be displayed at the end of such projection. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.170. 
Sec. 29-363. - Towlines. 
    When one vehicle is being towed by another they shall be coupled by a line so that the two (2) vehicles will be separated by not more than fifteen (15) feet and there shall be displayed on the towline a white cloth or paper so that the same will be clearly visible to other users of the street. In addition, both vehicles shall, at any time from a half-hour after sunset to a half-hour before sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on any street or highway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet ahead, display lighted head lamps and rear lamps in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.170. 
Sec. 29-364. - Mud flaps. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon any street in the city a truck or truck-tractor trailer, without rear fenders, which is not equipped with mud flaps for the rear wheels. If mud flaps are used, they shall: 
(1)	Be wide enough to cover the full tread width of the tire or tires being protected;
(2)	Be so installed that they extend from the underside of the vehicle body in a vertical plane behind the rear wheels to within eight (8) inches of the ground; 
(3)	Be constructed of a rigid material or a flexible material which is of a sufficiently rigid character to provide adequate protection when the vehicle is in motion. 
(b)	No provisions of this section shall apply to a motor vehicle in transit and in process of delivery equipped with temporary mud flaps. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.015. 
Sec. 29-365. - Wheels, tires. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to drive or convey upon any street in the city, any vehicle having on its wheels any clamps, ridges, extensions, projections, bars, bolts, rods, curves, gutters or other contrivances that will injure or damage such street or any part thereof. Any person who violates the provisions of this subsection shall be liable for the amount of damage such vehicle causes to any street, bridge, culvert, sewer or other public property and any such vehicle shall be subject to a lien for the full amount of such damage. 
(b)	No person shall operate or move within the city any vehicle having wheels or tires which carry onto or deposit in any street or other public place any mud, dirt, sticky substance, refuse or foreign matter. 
(Code 1967, § 26-26)
State Law reference- Restriction on use of metal tired vehicles, RSMo 304.250. 
Sec. 29-366. - Width, height, length and weight restrictions; permits; damage to property. 
(a)	Width. No vehicle operated upon any street in the city shall have a width, including load, in excess of ninety-six (96) inches, except clearance lights, rearview mirrors or other accessories required or permitted by federal or state law. 
(b)	Height. No vehicle operated upon any street in the city shall have a height, including load, in excess of thirteen and one-half (131/2) feet. 
(c)	Length. No single motor vehicle operated upon any street in the city shall have a length, including load, in excess of forty (40) feet; nor shall any combination or truck-tractor and semitrailer operated upon any street in the city have a length, including load, in excess of fifty-five (55) feet, except that such a combination specially designed to transport motor vehicles may itself have a length, including load, of sixty (60) feet; provided, however, that the restrictions in this subsection shall not apply to vehicles temporarily towing for repair purposes automobiles that have become disabled upon any street provided that not more than one automobile is being towed. 
(d)	Weight. Except where otherwise provided in this division, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or convey upon any street in the city any engine, tractor, truck, wagon or vehicle of any kind, except a tractor and semitrailer, operated by means of steam, gasoline, electricity or horsepower which, together with its load, weighs more than twenty-four thousand (24,000) pounds, or a tractor and semitrailer which, together with its load, weighs more than thirty-eight thousand (38,000) pounds, or any vehicle so equipped or loaded that the weight on any one axle shall exceed sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds, or any vehicle so equipped or loaded that the weight on any one wheel exceeds six hundred (600) pounds per inch width of tire upon any wheel concentrated upon the surface of the street (said width, in the case of rubber tires, both solid and pneumatic, to be measured between the flanges of the rim); provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to state or federal highways within the city or to trucks making local deliveries within the city limits. 
(e)	Permits. The city traffic engineer, with the approval of the mayor, issue permits for the operation of vehicles exceeding the width, height, length and weight limits prescribed in this section. Such permits shall specify the terms and conditions under which such vehicles may be operated, and designate the streets over which such vehicle may be operated and the hours of the day between which such operation shall be permitted. Each applicant for such permit shall first pay to the city clerk a fee of five dollars ($5.00), receipt for which shall be presented to the city traffic engineer before such permit is issued. 
(f)	Damages. Any person who drives any vehicle exceeding the width, height, length or weight limits prescribed in subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section, whether operating under the permit required by subsection (e) of this section or not, shall be liable for the amount of any damage such vehicle causes to any street, bridge, culvert, sewer or other public property and any such vehicle shall be subject to a lien for the full amount of such damage. 
(Code 1967, § 28-60)
State Law reference- Regulations as to width, height, length and weight of motor vehicles, RSMo 304.170, 304.180. 
Sec. 29-367. - Protective headgear for motorcycle riders. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride as a passenger on any motorcycle in motion unless such person wears protective headgear which meets reasonable standards and specifications established by the state director of revenue. 
(Code 1967, § 28-4)
State Law reference- Protective headgear for motorcyclists, RSMo 302.020. 
Secs. 29-368-29-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LIGHTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Light regulations, RSMo 307.020 et seq.

Sec. 29-376. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
    Approved. The term "approved" shall mean approved by the state director of revenue and, when applied to lamps and other illuminating devices, means that such lamps and devices must be in good working order. 
    Auxiliary lamps. The term "auxiliary lamp" shall mean an additional lighting device on a motor vehicle used primarily to supplement the head lamps in providing general illumination ahead of a vehicle. 
    Head lamp. The term "head lamp" shall mean a major lighting device capable of providing general illumination ahead of a vehicle. 
    Mounting height. The term "mounting height" shall mean the distance from the center of the lamp to the surface on which the vehicle stands. 
    Multiple-beam head lamps. The term "multiple-beam head lamps" shall mean head lamps or similar devices arranged so as to permit the driver of the vehicle to use one of two (2) or more distributions of light on the road. 
    Reflector. The term "reflector" shall mean an approved device designed and used to give an indication by reflected light. 
    When lighted lamps are required. The phrase "when lighted lamps are required" shall mean at any time from a half-hour after sunset to a half-hour before sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet ahead. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.020. 
Sec. 29-377. - Head lamps required. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this division, every motor vehicle other than a motor-drawn vehicle and other than a motorcycle shall be equipped with at least two (2) approved head lamps mounted at the same level with at least one on each side of the front of the vehicle. 
(b)	Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two (2) approved head lamps. Every motorcycle equipped with a sidecar or other attachment shall be equipped with a lamp on the outside limit of such attachment capable of displaying a white light to the front. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.045. 
Sec. 29-378. - When required. 
    No person shall drive, move, park or be in custody of any vehicle or combination of vehicles on any street during the times when lighted lamps are required unless such vehicle or combination of vehicles displays lighted lamps and illuminating devices as required by this division. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.040. 
Sec. 29-379. - Focus, candlepower. 
    No person shall use on any vehicle any approved electric lamp or similar device unless the light source of such lamp or device complies with the conditions of approval as to focus and rated candlepower. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.040. 
Sec. 29-380. - Permissible substitutes for head lamps. 
    Any motor vehicle need not be equipped with approved head lamps provided that every such vehicle during the times when lighted lamps are required is equipped with two (2) lighted lamps on the front thereof displaying white or yellow lights without glare capable of revealing persons and objects seventy-five (75) feet ahead; provided, however, that no such motor vehicle shall be operated at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour during the times when lighted lamps are required. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.050. 
Sec. 29-381. - Arrangement of single-beam head lamps. 
    Approved single-beam head lamps shall be so aimed that when the vehicle is not loaded none of the high-intensity portion of the light shall at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet ahead project higher than a level of five (5) inches below the level of the center of the lamp from which it comes, and in no case higher than forty-two (42) inches above the level on which the vehicle stands at a distance of seventy-five (75) feet ahead. The intensity shall be sufficient to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.055. 
Sec. 29-382. - Arrangement of multibeam head lamps. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this division, the head lamps or the auxiliary lamps or combination thereof on motor vehicles other than motorcycles or motor-driven cycles shall be so arranged that the driver may select at will between distributions of light projected to different elevations and such lamps may, in addition, be so arranged that such selection can be made automatically, subject to the following limitations: 
(1)	There shall be an uppermost distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed and of such intensity as to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least three hundred and fifty (350) feet ahead for all conditions of loading. 
(2)	There shall be a lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam so aimed and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet ahead; and on a straight level road under any condition of loading, none of the high-intensity portion of the beam shall be directed to strike the eyes of an approaching driver. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.060. 
Sec. 29-383. - New vehicles shall have beam indicator. 
    Every new motor vehicle registered in this state after January 1, 1942, which has multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator, which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of lights from the headlamps is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. Such indicator shall be so designed and located that when lighted it will be readily visible without glare to the driver of the vehicle so equipped. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.065. 
Sec. 29-384. - Dimming of lights. 
    Every person driving a motor vehicle equipped with multiple-beam road lighting equipment, during the time when lighted lamps are required, shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements and limitations: Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle within five hundred (500) feet, or is within three hundred (300) feet to the rear of another vehicle traveling in the same direction, the driver shall use a distribution of light or composite beam so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the other driver, and in no case shall the high-intensity portion which is projected to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle be aimed higher than the center of the lamp from which it comes at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet ahead, and in no case higher than a level of forty-two (42) inches above the level upon which the vehicle stands at a distance of seventy-five (75) feet ahead. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.070. 
Sec. 29-385. - Tail lamps, reflectors. 
(a)	Every motor vehicle and every motor-drawn vehicle shall be equipped with at least two (2) rear lamps, not less than fifteen (15) inches or more than forty-eight (48) inches above the ground upon which the vehicle stands, which when lighted will exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear. Either such rear lamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration marker and render it clearly legible from a distance of fifty (50) feet to the rear. When the rear registration marker is illuminated by an electric lamp other than the required rear lamps, all such lamps shall be turned on or off only by the same control switch at all times. 
(b)	Every motorcycle registered in this state, when operated on a highway, shall also carry at the rear, either as part of the rear lamp or separately, at least one approved red reflector, which shall be of such size and characteristics and so maintained as to be visible during the times when lighted lamps are required from all distances within three hundred (300) feet to fifty (50) feet from such vehicle when directly in front of a motor vehicle displaying lawful undimmed headlamps. 
(c)	Every new passenger car, new commercial motor vehicle, motor-drawn vehicle and omnibus with a capacity of more than six (6) passengers registered in this state, when operated on a street, shall also carry at the rear at least two (2) approved red reflectors, at least one at each side, so designed, mounted on the vehicle and maintained as to be visible during the times when lighted lamps are required from all distances within five hundred (500) to fifty (50) feet from such vehicle when directly in front of a motor vehicle displaying lawful undimmed head lamps. Every such reflector shall meet the requirements of this division and shall be mounted upon the vehicle at a height not to exceed sixty (60) inches nor less than twenty-four (24) inches above the surface upon which the vehicle stands. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.075. 
Sec. 29-386. - Auxiliary lamps. 
    Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed three (3) auxiliary lamps mounted on the front at a height not less than twelve (12) inches nor more than forty-two (42) inches above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.080. 
Sec. 29-387. - Cowl, fender lamps. 
    Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two (2) side cowl or fender lamps which shall emit a white or yellow light without glare. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.085. 
Sec. 29-388. - Running board lamps. 
    Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one running board courtesy lamp on each side thereof which shall emit a white or yellow light without glare. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.085. 
Sec. 29-389. - Backup lamps. 
    Any motor vehicle may be equipped with a backup lamp, either separately or in combination with another lamp, but no such backup lamp shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.085. 
Sec. 29-390. - Spot lamps. 
    Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed one spot lamp but every lighted spot lamp shall be so aimed and used as not to be dazzling or glaring to any person. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.090. 
Sec. 29-391. - Arrangement of lamps, other than head lamps. 
    Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle other than head lamps, spot lamps, front direction signals or auxiliary lamps which projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than three hundred (300) candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than seventy-five (75) feet from the vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.100. 
Sec. 29-392. - Colors of various lamps. 
    Head lamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights substantially white in color; auxiliary lamps, cowl lamps and spot lamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights substantially white, yellow or amber in color. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.095. 
Sec. 29-393. - Limitation on number of lamps lighted at one time. 
    At the times when lighted lamps are required, at least two (2) lighted lamps shall be displayed, one on each side of the front of every motor vehicle except a motorcycle and except a motor-drawn vehicle except when such vehicle is parked subject to the provisions governing lights on parked vehicles. Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with head lamps as in this division required is also equipped with any auxiliary lamps or a spot lamp or any other lamp on the front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity greater than three hundred (300) candlepower, not more than a total of four (4) of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one time when upon a highway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.105. 
Sec. 29-394. - Restriction on use of red lights. 
    No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment except a school bus when used for school purposes or an emergency vehicle upon any street or hgiwhay, with any lamp or device thereon displaying a red light visible from directly in front thereof. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.095. 
Sec. 29-395. - Flashing signals. 
    Alternately flashing warning signals may be used on school buses when used for school purposes and on motor vehicles when used to transport United States mail from post offices to boxes of addressees thereof and on authorized emergency vehicles, but are prohibited on other motor vehicles, motorcycles, and motor-drawn vehicles except as a means for indicating a right or left turn. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.100. 
Sec. 29-396. - Horse-drawn vehicles. 
    Any person who shall place or drive, or cause to be placed or driven, upon or along any street of the city any horse-driven vehicle whatsoever, whether in motion or at rest, shall after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise have attached to every such vehicle at the rear thereof a red taillight or a red reflecting device of not less than three (3) inches in diameter of effective area or its equivalent in area. When such device shall consist of reflecting buttons there shall be no less than seven (7) of said buttons covering an area equal to a circle with a three (3) inch diameter. The total subtended effective angle of reflection of every such device shall be no less than sixty (60) degrees and the spread and efficiency of the reflected light shall be sufficient for the reflected light to be visible to the driver of any motor vehicle approaching such horse-drawn vehicle from the rear of a distance of not less than five hundred (500) feet. 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl generally, Ch. 6. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.125. 
Sec. 29-397. - Parked vehicles. 
(a)	Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during the hours between a half-hour after sunset and a half-hour before sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such street or highway no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle. 
(b)	Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a highway or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours between a half-hour after sunset and a half-hour before sunrise and there is no sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of five hundred (500) feet upon the highway, a vehicle so parked or stopped shall be equipped with one or more lamps meeting the following requirements: At least one lamp shall display a white or amber light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of the vehicle and the same lamp or at least one other lamp shall display a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear of the vehicle, and the location of the lamps shall always be such that at least one lamp or combination of lamps meeting the requirements of this section is installed as near as practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closest to passing traffic. 
(c)	Any lighted head lamp upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(d)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to a motor-driven cycle.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.435, 307.110. 
Sec. 29-398. - Other vehicles; how lighted. 
    All vehicles, including agricultural machinery or implements, road machinery, road rollers, traction engines and farm tractors not in this division specifically required to be equipped with lamps, shall be equipped during the times when lighted lamps are required with at least one lighted lamp or lantern exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle and with a lamp or lantern exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear, and such lamps and lanterns shall exhibit lights to the sides of such vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.115. 
Secs. 29-399-29-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ACCIDENTS 

Sec. 29-411. - Notice to police. 
(a)	The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total damage to all property to an apparent extent of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more to one person shall immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the police if such accident occurred within the city. 
(b)	Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving immediate notice of an accident in accordance with subsection (a) of this section and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall give, or cause to be given, the notice not given by the driver. 
Cross reference- Police, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.110, 300.120. 
Sec. 29-412. - Report to police. 
(a)	The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total damage to all property to an apparent extent of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more to one person shall, within five (5) days after such accident, forward a written report of such accident to the police; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at the scene by a police officer while such driver was present thereat. 
(b)	Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report of an accident as required in subsection (a) of this section and such driver is not the owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such accident shall, within five (5) days after the accident, make such report not made by the driver. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.115, 300.120. 
Sec. 29-413. - Confidential nature of reports. 
(a)	All written reports made by persons involved in accidents or by garages shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police or other governmental agencies having use for the records for accident prevention purposes, except that the police or other governmental agencies may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at such accident. 
(b)	No written reports forwarded under the provisions of this section shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident except that the police shall furnish upon demand of any party to such trial, or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the police in compliance with law, and, if such report has been made, the date, time and location of the accident, the names and addresses of the drivers, the owners of the vehicles involved, and the investigating officers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.125. 
Sec. 29-414. - Investigations. 
    It shall be the duty of all police officers to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.030. 
Secs. 29-415-29-425. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 29-426. - Designation. 
    The designated truck routes of the city shall include all state numbered and lettered highways within the city limits and the following named city streets: 
(1)	Arrow Street from Highway 65 to Benton Avenue;
(2)	Benton Avenue from Arrow Street to Marion Street;
(3)	Marion Street from Benton Avenue to English Avenue;
(4)	English Avenue from Marion Street to Boyd Street;
(5)	Boyd Street from English Avenue to Lafayette Avenue;
(6)	Lafayette Avenue from Porter Street to Eastwood Street;
(7)	Eastwood Street from Lafayette Avenue to Odell Avenue;
(8)	Odell Avenue from Eastwood Street to the south city limits.
(Ord. No. 5573, § 2, 4-7-80)
Sec. 29-427. - Vehicles required to use truck routes. 
    Vehicles having a gross licensed weight in excess of twenty-four thousand (24,000) pounds must travel on designated truck routes through the city. Except as provided by section 29-428, travel on any other paved or surfaced street is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 5573, § 1, 4-7-80)
Sec. 29-428. - Deviations. 
    Vehicles licensed for a maximum gross weight in excess of twenty-four thousand (24,000) pounds may deviate from the designated truck routes for pickups and deliveries if such deviation is by the most direct route between the truck route and the destination; provided however, that no such deviation shall be permitted on the following designated streets: 
(1)	North Street from Jefferson Avenue to Lafayette Avenue;
(2)	Lafayette Avenue from North Street to Arrow Street;
(3)	Arrow Street from Lafayette Avenue to Jefferson Avenue;
(4)	Jefferson Avenue from Arrow Street to North Street.
(Ord. No. 5573, § 3, 4-7-80)
Chapter 30 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance fixing utility rates and charges saved from repeal, § 1-5(13); plumbing code, § 7-76 et seq.; garbage, trash, refuse and other solid waste, Ch. 14; health and sanitation, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 26; location of poles, § 26-2; subdivisions, Ch. 27; utility easements in subdivisions, § 27-51.
State Law reference- Regulation of public utilities, RSMo 71.520 et seq.; municipally owned utilities, RSMo Ch. 91.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Adoption of Marshall Municipal Utilities General Rules and Regulations. 
    The Marshall Municipal Utilities General Rules and Regulations applying to utility service documents, which documents are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth, is hereby adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 5909, § 1, 9-6-83)
Secs. 30-2-30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-311 et seq.
State Law reference- Board of public works, RSMo 91.450 et seq.

Sec. 30-21. - Established, qualifications of members. 
    There is hereby established within the city an executive department to be known as the board of public works, to consist of four (4) persons, electors of the city, who have resided therein for a period of two (2) years next before their appointment. 
(Code 1967, § 29-19)
Sec. 30-22. - Appointment, term of members. 
    The members of the board of public works shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority of the members elected to the city council and shall hold office for a term of four (4) years each or until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1967, § 29-20)
Sec. 30-23. - Terms of office to expire in successive years. 
    The term of office of one member of the board of public works shall expire each year, and one member of the board shall be appointed each year. 
(Code 1967, § 29-21)
Sec. 30-24. - Compensation fixed by ordinance, resolution; method of payment. 
    Each member of the Board of Public Works shall receive such annual salary, payable in equal monthly installments, as may be fixed by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1967, § 29-22; Ord. No. 7447, § 1, 3-17-03)
Sec. 30-25. - Compensation for expenses. 
    The members of the board of public works shall be paid such reasonable compensation for their expenses in travel which is incidental to their offices as may be approved by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 29-23)
Sec. 30-26. - Vacancies. 
    In case of removal by death or otherwise a vacancy exists in the board of public works, such vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments are made, but the vacancy shall be filled only for the unexpired term of such vacating member. 
(Code 1967, § 29-24)
Sec. 30-27. - Removal. 
    Any member of the board of public works may for good cause shown be removed in the manner provided for the removal of other officers. 
(Code 1967, § 29-25)
Sec. 30-28. - Members prohibited from holding other public office. 
    No person shall be appointed as a member of the board of public works who holds any public office and any member of the board who shall accept a nomination for or appointment to any other office during his official term shall be deemed thereby to have resigned as a member of the board and his position shall thereby be vacated. 
(Code 1967, § 29-26)
Sec. 30-29. - Political affiliation of members. 
    Not more than two (2) members of the board of public works shall belong to the same political party, and its administration shall in all respects be entirely nonpartisan. 
(Code 1967, § 29-27)
Sec. 30-30. - Election of officers. 
    The Board of Public Works shall annually elect from its members a president and a vice-president, who shall hold their offices for a term of one year. 
(Code 1967, § 29-28; Ord. No. 7447, § 1, 3-17-03)
Sec. 30-31. - Secretary-Term, bond. 
(a)	Appointment-Term. The Board of Public Works shall appoint a secretary, who shall serve for such time as the Board shall determine. 
(b)	Bond Required. The secretary shall either be covered by an insurance policy covering loss of monies and securities or shall give a bond to the City in such sum as the Board shall deem necessary for the faithful performance of his duties as secretary and the turning over and accounting for all monies collected by him according to the rules and regulations of the Board. The insurance policy or bond shall be approved by the Board. 
(Code 1967, § 29-29; Ord. No. 7447, § 1, 3-17-03)
Sec. 30-32. - Same-Powers and Duties. 
(a)	Records of Proceedings. The secretary of the Board of Public Works shall keep a record of all proceedings of the Board. 
(b)	Custodian of Books. The secretary shall have the control and custody of the books and accounts of the waterworks, sanitary sewer, electric light and power plant and such other public utilities as the Board may have under its charge and control. 
(c)	General Accounting Officer. The secretary shall be the general accounting officer of the Board of Public Works and of the public utilities designated in subsection (b). 
(d)	Collection, Accounting of Revenues. The secretary shall collect and account for all the revenue and fines due the waterworks, sanitary sewer, electric light and power plant and such other public utilities under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Board of Public Works and the City Council. 
(Code 1967, § 29-30; Ord. No. 7447, § 1, 3-17-03)
Sec. 30-33. - Meetings; Quorum. 
    The Board of Public Works shall meet at least once a month at its office and three (3) members of said Board shall constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1967, § 29-31; Ord. No. 7447, § 1, 3-17-03)
Sec. 30-34. - Powers and Duties. 
(a)	Control over utilities. The Board of Public Works shall have the power and it shall be its duty to take charge of and exercise control over any water works, sanitary sewer, gas works, telecommunications plant and equipment (including, but not limited to, traditional telephone and cable television plant and equipment) capable of providing voice, and/or video, and/or data, electric light and power plant, steam heating or any other device or plant for furnishing light, power or heat, or telecommunications messages of any type including voice, video, and/or data; or any other public utility whatever, which may be now owned by or hereafter established, by purchase or otherwise, and all appurtenances thereto belonging. 
(b)	Enforce contracts, custodian of books, assets. Said Board shall enforce the performance of all contracts and work and have charge and custody of all books, property and assets belonging or appertaining to such plant or plants. 
(c)	Assessments, collection of charges. Said Board shall have the power and it shall be its duty to assess rates for customers of water, sanitary sewer, gas, light, power or other service, under its control, and to contract with consumers for the same, and collect the revenues therefrom. 
(d)	Rules, regulations. 
(1)	The board shall have the power to make all necessary rules and regulations with reference thereto or with reference to the government of the department, not inconsistent with the general laws of this state and ordinances of the city. 
(2)	The rules, regulations, terms, conditions, and policies adopted by the Board of Public Works may be amended, repealed or modified as may be determined advisable from time-to-time by the Board of Public Works, so long as such change is consistent with the ordinances of the City of Marshall and the statutes of the State of Missouri. Notice of such change shall be provided to the City Administrator within ten (10) days after such action of the Board of Public Works. Any change to the rules, regulations, terms, conditions, and policies shall become final sixty (60) days after approval by the Board of Public Works unless the Mayor, acting alone, or the City Council, upon motion duly passed, vetoes any such rule, regulation, term condition or policy within said sixty-day term. 
(Code 1967, § 29-32; Ord. No. 6913, § 1, 10-2-95; Ord. No. 7447, § 1, 3-17-03; Ord. No. 7726, §§ 1, 2, 1-16-07) 
Sec. 30-35. - Authority to contract for services; approval of Council required. 
    The doing of all work and the furnishing of all supplies for the waterworks, sanitary sewer, electric light plant or any other plant which the Board of Public Works may have under its supervision or control by virtue of this chapter, shall be let out by the Board of Public Works in the same manner as other public works are let out, except in cases where it is not practicable to do such work or furnish material by contract. All contracts shall be submitted to the Council for approval. 
(Code 1967, § 29-33; Ord. No. 7447, § 1, 3-17-03)
Sec. 30-36. - Appointment of additional employees, number, compensation, removal. 
(a)	Appointment. The Board of Public Works shall have the power to appoint a General Manager and such subordinates, including engineers, inspectors, clerks, assistants and other persons as may be necessary. 
(b)	Number, Compensation. The number of such additional appointees and the compensation of all employees and appointees of the Board shall be established by said Board. 
(c)	Removal. The Board shall have the right to remove any of its employees or appointees by a three-fourths vote of its members. 
(Code 1967, § 29-34; Ord. No. 7447, § 1, 3-17-03)
Sec. 30-37. - Changes in personnel classification, compensation; procedure. 
    The Board of Public Works may fix the compensation of new employees, may change the classification of any present or future employee after satisfactory showing of ability commensurate with the requirements for the new position classification, fix the compensation of such employee under his new classification and may change the compensation of any of its employees. Any such action to fix the compensation or increase the compensation of any employee shall be reported to the City Council within thirty (30) days after such compensation of any employee is fixed or changed. 
(Code 1967, § 29-35; Ord. No. 7251, § 1, 3-6-00)
Sec. 30-38. - Bills and salaries; certification and payment. 
    All bills and salaries of the Board of Public Works and all salaries of its employees shall be certified to the City Council, a complete record of which shall be kept by the Board. Such bills and salaries shall be paid by the City Council in the same manner that bills and salaries of other officers and employees of the City are paid. 
(Code 1967, § 29-36; Ord. No. 7447, § 1, 3-17-03)
Sec. 30-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7447, § 2, adopted March 17, 2003, repealed former section 30-39 in its entirety which pertained to overtime pay for personnel of the board of public works and derived from the Code of 1967, § 29-37. 
Sec. 30-40. - Record of accounts and expenditures. 
    It shall be the duty of the Board of Public Works to keep books of accounts, showing with complete accuracy and in detail contemporaneous current entries of the receipts and expenditures of the Board in such manner as to enable the same to be understood and investigated, and also to preserve on file in its office vouchers for all expenditures, which books and vouchers shall at all times be open to the examination of the finance committee or any other committee appointed by the City Council. 
(Code 1967, § 29-38; Ord. No. 7447, § 1, 3-17-03)
Sec. 30-41. - Reports to mayor, city council. 
    When directed by the city council, the board of public works shall make reports of its business and transactions to the mayor and city council, showing in detail all the receipts and expenditures, as well as all suggestions, and recommendations to the council with reference to the management of the same. 
(Code 1967, § 29-39)
Sec. 30-42. - Annual financial report. 
    The Board of Public Works shall file with the City Council, on or before the first of April each year, a complete annual report showing in detail receipts and expenditures of said Board during the last fiscal year, and its financial condition. 
(Code 1967, § 29-40; Ord. No. 7447, § 1, 3-17-03)
Sec. 30-43. - Execution of contracts and official acts. 
    All contracts and official acts of the Board of Public Works shall be signed by the president, or by the General Manager and attested under the hand of the secretary or as otherwise directed by the Board. 
(Code 1967, § 29-41; Ord. No. 7447, § 1, 3-17-03)
Sec. 30-44. - Electric and water revenue payments to be made to City. 
    It is hereby ordained that the Board of Public Works shall pay into the General Fund of the City of Marshall, Missouri, 10% of the gross electric operating revenues or the sum of $973,494.00, whichever is greater, and a sum equal to 5% of the gross water operating revenues. Said payments to be due and payable quarterly covering electric and water services furnished to retail and resale customers by the Municipal Utilities. 
(Ord. No. 6274, § 1, 8-17-88; Ord. No. 7447, § 1, 3-17-03)
Editor's note- -Ord. No. 6274, § 1, adopted Aug. 17, 1987, did not expressly amend this Code. Such provisions have been included as § 30-44 at the discretion of the editor pursuant to § 4 of the ordinance, which provided that the ordinance become effective and supersede Ord. No. 6056 on Oct. 1, 1987, which ordinance was previously codified as § 30-44. 
Secs. 30-45-30-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SYSTEM[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 7074, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 1997, substantially amended former Art. III by the repeal of various sections as set out herein. Section 2 of Ord. No. 7074 provides as follows:   "The Marshall Municipal Utilities Regulations Applying to Sanitary Sewer Service, which are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth, are hereby adopted by the City."
Cross reference- Sewage disposal facilities for eating and drinking establishments, § 13-29.
State Law reference- General sewer system may be established, RSMo 88.832 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7074, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 1997, repealed former section 30-81 in its entirety which pertained to definitions used in this article and derived from the Code of 1967, § 29-107; Ord. No. 5898, 32, 8-1-83. 
Sec. 30-82. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7074, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 1997, repealed former section 30-81 in its entirety which pertained to the adoption of "Standard Sewer Specifications and Standard Drawings" as code for sewer construction and control. Former section 30-82 derived from the Code of 1967, § 29-74; Ord. No. 5898, § 1, 8-1-83. 
Sec. 30-83. - Operation and maintenance of sewer system transferred to board of public works. 
    The city does hereby transfer over to the board of public works, effective June 1, 1972, as the single authority to have charge of the entire sewer system of the city, including but not limited to, the conception, design, construction, financing, control, operation and maintenance of the entire sewer system. 
(Code 1967, § 29-75)
Sec. 30-83.5. - Right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to revise this article in any manner and to establish more stringent limitations or requirements where deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 5898, § 2, 8-1-83)
Secs. 30-84-30-105. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7074, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 1997, repealed former sections 30-84-30-103 in their entirety which pertained to funding and operation of the city's sewer system. Former sections 30-84-30-103 derived from the Code of 1967, §§ 29-76-29-88, Ord. No. 5898, §§ 3-28, Ord. No. 6246, §§ 1-5, 3-16-87. 
DIVISIONS 2, 3. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 7074, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 1997, repealed former Div. 2, §§ 30-106-30-114, and former Div. 3, § 30-121, in their entirety. Former Divs. 2 and 3 respectively pertained to connections to the sewer system and rates and charges and derived from the Code of 1967, §§ 29-96-29-100 and the following:
Ord. No.SectionDate589830, 318- 1-8360071, 2 7-16-84 
Ord. No.SectionDate67142 7-21-9367211 9- 7-93 

Secs. 30-106-30-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER CONSERVATION PLAN 

Sec. 30-131. - Established. 
    There is established a City of Marshall Water Conservation Plan. 
(Ord. No. 7482, § 1, 8-18-03)
Sec. 30-132. - Policy. 
    It is declared that, while water is a renewable resource, it is a finite one; that the general welfare requires that the water resources available to the City be put to the maximum beneficial use to the extent to which they are capable; and that the waste or unreasonable use or unreasonable method of use of water be prevented, and that the conservation of such waters is to be exercised with a view to the reasonable and beneficial use thereof in the interests of the people of the City of Marshall and for the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 7482, § 2, 8-18-03)
Sec. 30-133. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide a mandatory water conservation plan to minimize the effect of a shortage of water to the citizens of the City and, by means of this chapter, to adopt provisions that will significantly reduce the consumption of water over an extended period of time, thereby extending the available water required for the citizens of the City, to protect basic human health, safety and quality of life, to share the impacts caused by a water shortage in accord with the severity of the water shortage, and to minimize the hardship to the City and the general public to the greatest extent possible. 
(Ord. No. 7482, § 3, 8-18-03)
Sec. 30-134. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all potable water retail and wholesale customers and property served by MMU wherever situated and shall also apply to all property and facilities owned, maintained, operated or under the jurisdiction of the various officers, boards, departments or agencies of the City. Wholesale water customers are required by contract to implement and enforce conservation measures as necessary to reduce their consumption in a comparable ratio to the reduction by retail customers. 
(Ord. No. 7482, § 4, 8-18-03)
Sec. 30-135. - Implementation. 
    The plan would become effective upon a determination by the Board of Public Works that a probable water shortage problem exists. When it can be anticipated that there is a probable water shortage, this plan will be implemented until it is determined that a shortage no longer exists. The General Manager shall monitor and evaluate the projected supply and demand for water monthly and the extent of the conservation required by the customers of MMU in order for MMU to prudently plan for and supply water to its customers. The General Manager shall notify and recommend to the Board of Public Works the appropriate stage of water conservation to be implemented. Depending on the severity of the shortage of water, State One, Stage Two or Stage Three may be implemented. Such stage implementation shall be made by Board of Public Works resolution. The resolution and the prohibited use provisions shall become effective and operable immediately upon publication in a daily newspaper of general circulation. 
(Ord. No. 7482, § 5, 8-18-03)
Sec. 30-136. - Stages. 
(a)	Stage One (voluntary). Request voluntary conservation effort and compliance with the following restrictions: 
(1)	No washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, or other paved areas. No use of potable water for any purpose that results in over-spray, flooding or runoff onto hardscape, driveways, streets, adjacent lands or into gutters. 
(2)	No refilling of swimming pools.
(3)	No washing of cars, other motor vehicles, trailers or boats, except from hand-held buckets. Exceptions: the use of wash water which the health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning, such as garbage trucks and vehicles which transport food and perishables. 
(4)	No potable water to be used for dust control.
(5)	No use of water from any fire hydrant except for fighting fires, or as necessary to preserve the public health and safety or for essential government services such as police, fire, and other similar emergency services. 
(6)	No watering of any lawn, garden, trees, or other plants between the hours of 10 a.m. and 5 p.m., except from a hand-held container. Irrigation using recycled water is exempt from this limitation but must be clearly posted. 
(7)	No water shall be used to clean, fill or maintain levels in decorative ponds, fountains or similar structures unless such water is part of a recirculation system or unless such water is recycled water, which must be clearly posted. 
(8)	Hotels and motels are to post notices of water shortage conditions urging guests to conserve water. 
(9)	No customer shall permit water to leak from any facility on his premises; failure to effect the repair of any leak, within forty-eight hours after the customer is notified of or discovers the leak, shall subject said customer to all penalties provided herein for waste of water. 
(10)	No restaurant, hotel, cafe, cafeteria or other public place where food is sold, served or offered for sale, shall serve drinking water to any customer unless expressly requested by the customer. 
(11)	Commercial and industrial users to reduce usage to the maximum extent reasonably possible.
If, after the initiation of Stage One, weather conditions, expected trends in demand, or other factors indicate that the water shortage will continue, Stage Two may be implemented. 
(b)	Stage Two (mandatory). Stage One restrictions would become mandatory. 
If, after initiation of Stage Two, it appears that the water shortage will continue or worsen, Stage Three may be implemented. 
(c)	Stage Three (mandatory). All restrictions in Stage One will continue to be mandatory plus it will be mandatory that commercial and industrial users implement water recycling, delay routine washing of equipment and facilities, change to processes requiring less water, and implement such other feasible water conservation measures. 
(Ord. No. 7482, § 6, 8-18-03)
Sec. 30-137. - Notification provision. 
    With respect to the mandatory provisions of this plan, a customer shall be deemed to have been notified and directed to reduce the use of water as set forth in the plan when the General Manager of Marshall Municipal Utilities or his designated representative posts such notice through the news media, except nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit other means to notify persons of the need to reduce use of water in accordance with the plan. Notification of the implementation of this Water Conservation Plan may be made to water customers through messages on or enclosed with the utility bills. 
(Ord. No. 7482, § 7, 8-18-03)
Sec. 30-138. - Compliance with the plan. 
    All persons who receive Municipal Utilities water service shall be entitled to receive such water service only upon strict compliance with provisions of the Plan. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the mandatory provisions of the Plan when such person is directed to reduce or curtail their use of water as set forth in Stage Two or Stage Three of the Plan. A directive to reduce or curtail use of water shall be presumed when notice is given as set forth in the Plan. 
(Ord. No. 7482, § 8, 8-18-03)
Sec. 30-139. - Penalties. 
(a)	Penalties. Its is unlawful for any customer of MMU to fail to comply with any of the provisions of this plan. The penalties set forth in this section shall be additional to those penalties provided in any other section of this Code. The penalties for failure to comply with any of the provisions of this plan shall be as follows: 
Any person who is reasonably believed by the General Manager of Marshall Municipal Utilities or his designated representative to be violating any of the mandatory provisions of the Plan pertaining to conservation and reduction of water use, shall be first notified of the mandatory requirements of the Plan. If such violation is repeated or continues, an assembly may be installed to restrict flow of water, or the water service may be terminated. The flow-restricting device shall be based upon the size of the meter. The charge for the installation shall be the actual cost of installation, but shall not be less than forty dollars. The flow-restricting device may be removed upon a determination by the Board of Public Works that a shortage no longer exists, or upon written assurance of compliance with the provisions of this Plan. The charge for removal of the flow-restricting device and restoration of normal service shall be twenty-five dollars if restoration of normal service is performed during regular working hours on regular working days. If removal of the flow-restricting device and restoration of normal service is requested by the customer to be made after regular working hours, on holidays or weekends, the restoration service charge shall be fifty dollars. 
(b)	Reduction in Water Supplied. If any customer fails to comply with any provision of this section, MMU may reduce the amount of water provided to that customer to the level which that customer would be using said water if he or she were complying with the provisions of this section. The provisions of this subsection shall be applied in lieu of, or in addition to, any other penalties provided in this section, in the discretion of MMU, and shall be applied without regard to the status or nature of the customer's service. 
(c)	Redress. Any person aggrieved by the enforcement of the requirements of this Plan may appeal to the Board of Public Works. 
(Ord. No. 7482, § 9, 8-18-03)
Sec. 30-140. - Severability. 
    The sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and all other parts of this Ordinance No. 7482 are severable and are not matters of mutually essential inducement; and that, if any one or more of said sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or other parts of this Ordinance shall for any reason be questioned in any court or shall be adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, and the same shall not impair, invalidate, affect or prejudice in any way the remaining provisions of this Ordinance. 
    This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after passage and approval. 
(Ord. No. 7482, § 10, 8-18-03)
Chapter 31 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 7728, § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 2007, repealed former Ch. 31, Arts. I-III, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 31 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1967 and the following: Ord. No. 6057, § 24, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 6676, § 48, 2-1-93; Ord. No. 6678, §§ 5, 6, 12-16-93.
Cross reference- Occupational license taxes, § 28-11, et seq; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 29.

Sec. 31-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Taxicab means a motor vehicle of not more than seven (7) passenger capacity, not including the driver, used in the transportation of persons and their property for hire. 
    Taxicab business means the business of transporting persons and their property by taxicab, but not operating on a fixed route. 
    Taxicab driver means the operator of a taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 7728, § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 31-2. - Vehicle licenses. 
    Every person holding a business license to engage in the operation of a taxicab business within the city limits shall pay a license fee as established in Chapter 28. 
(Ord. No. 7728, § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 31-3. - Insurance. 
(a)	Every holder of a business license to conduct the operations of a taxicab business within this city shall at all times during the course of such operations have on file a certificate of public liability and property damage insurance covering each motor vehicle being operated in the taxicab business in the amount which complies with the motor vehicle safety responsibility law. 
(b)	Such insurance shall not be cancelable without ten (10) days' written notice being first given to the city clerk or to her office. 
(Ord. No. 7728, § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 31-4. - Posting of rates. 
    Rates of fares: The schedule of rates of fares shall be conspicuously posted in each taxicab in such manner as to be readily visible to any passenger. Copies of such schedules shall be on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 7728, § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 31-5. - Inspection of taxicabs. 
    All cabs shall be licensed in accordance with the requirements of the State of Missouri including but not limited to safety inspections. Evidence of satisfactory passage of this inspection shall be presented to the city clerk at the time of the annual city license renewal. 
(Ord. No. 7728, § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 31-6. - Appearance and condition of taxicabs. 
    All taxicabs shall be kept in a thoroughly and mechanically safe operating condition, complying with all of the safety requirements of this Code and other ordinances of the City and the statues of the State of Missouri regulating motor vehicles and all taxicabs shall be kept clean and identifiable as a taxicab by appropriate signs painted on each side of the vehicle. If inadequacies are reported, the city may perform inspections by a designated official or officials as prescribed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 7728, § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 31-7. - Acceptance of passengers. 
    It shall be the duty of the driver of any taxicab to accept as a passenger any person who seeks to use the taxicab when any taxicab is vacant and for hire; provided that such person is not intoxicated and conducts himself in an orderly manner. 
(Ord. No. 7728, § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 31-8. - Revocation of business license. 
    Upon notice and hearing, the city council may revoke the business license for any of the following reasons: 
(1)	Failure to conduct the business of a taxicab business for a period of thirty (30) days or longer; 
(2)	Violation of any ordinances of the city or statues of the State of Missouri;
(3)	Employment of drivers without Class E Chauffeurs license;
(4)	Operation of taxicabs without proof of insurance on file as is prescribed by this chapter; 
(5)	Aiding, abetting or assisting the promotion or advancement of any illegal or immoral activity, affair or business; 
(6)	Failure to comply with section 31-5 and 31-6 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 7728, § 1, 2-5-07)
Chapter 32 - ZONING[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance zoning specific property saved from repeal, § 1-5(11); buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; zoning regulations for massage establishments, § 16-3; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 26; subdivisions, Ch. 27.
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in cities, RSMo Ch. 89.

Zoning 

Article V. District Use Regulations

Sec. 31-73. District A-1 - Agricultural District

A.   INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT It is the intent of the "A-1" Agricultural District to protect agricultural uses in the Planning Area through control of density, land use and land coverage.

B.   DISTRICT REGULATION In District "A-1", no building or land shall be used and no building or structure altered, enlarged or erected, which is arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the uses listed in Section C below. All land annexed into the city and not otherwise zoned at the time of annexation shall automatically be zoned A-1.

C.   USE REGULATIONS (Amended 1/19/93 Ordinance No. 6673)

1.   Agricultural uses, which shall include any use of land for the purpose of growing crops, no use at all -- such as land in soil bank, orchards, trees or forest lands and any other use pertaining to 
farming, agricultural research or any activity, normally connected with farming. Such uses shall allow all the types of structures normally associated with these uses, including dwelling units, storage bins, barns, sheds, tool houses, garages, and including relocation of portable buildings without permit, and any other use or facility ancillary to farming or open land. More than one dwelling unit may be on agricultural land or a farm, provided it is for the occupancy and use of people working on the farm. Only by special permit of the Planning & Zoning Commission, may more than two (2) dwelling units be on a single farm. The Commission shall issue this permit after a hearing, based upon the compatibility of the proposed dwelling unit with the surrounding area. No trailers, trailer houses or mobile homes will be permitted to be occupied as a dwelling unit in A-1 District.

2.   Public parks, playgrounds, recreation areas and community buildings owned and operated by a public agency.

3.   Churches, synagogues and other similar places of worship.

4.   Golf courses, except miniature golf courses and driving tees operated for commercial purposes.

5.   Greenhouses and nurseries.

6.   Public, private, or parochial schools; elementary, junior high, high schools and institutions of higher learning, including dormitory accommodations when located on the same tract as the educational buildings.

7.   Public or Private residential licensed therapy or psychiatric treatment facilities for disadvantaged youth, together with ancillary education facilities, recreation facilities, medical, therapeutic or psychiatric treatment services offices, business offices, and related structures as are customarily associated with such activities.

8.   Public buildings including libraries and museums.

9.   Stands for the sale, at retail, of agricultural products or commodities raised on the premises.

10. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses.

11. Keeping of livestock, poultry or other animals or fowl. Animals or fowl shall be kept in accordance with the existing city ordinances of Chapter 5 and any other that shall pertain. However, in annexed land the owner or operator shall be permitted to keep livestock or fowl in those areas in which they were being kept immediately prior to annexation provided that the number being kept shall not be increased in such numbers as to create a public nuisance.

12. SPECIAL USE PERMIT. The following exceptions may be allowed when submitted, reviewed and approved by the Commission.


a. Airport or heliport.
b. Animal hospitals, clinics or kennels.
c. Cemetery or crematory.
d. Drive-in theaters.
e. Isolation homes, penal institutions, sanitariums or asylums for the insane or mentally retarded.
f. Nursing and care homes subject to inspection and license requirements.
g. Seasonal or temporary uses such as recreation camp or similar enterprise.
h. Telephone exchange, electrical substations or similar public utilities.
i. Any public building erected or land used by any department of the City, County, State, or Federal Government.
j. Animal feed lots subject to the license requirements of the State and subject to the following minimum sanitation and odor practices: (The intent is to establish a healthful environment around the feed lot.)
k. Public buildings including libraries, museums and hospitals.(Amended 7/3/89 Ordinance No. 6416) 

 

 

DRAINAGE

1. All ground surfaces within pens shall be so graded and compacted to insure proper drainage.

 

2. Surface runoff shall be so controlled that no appreciable amount of soil or manure is carried into any roadway ditch or drainage area where it will deposit and form sludge banks where flies and
mosquitoes can breed.

 

D. INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS 

1. Tracts shall be five (5) acres or larger.

 

2. Tracts which are smaller than five (5) acres shall be considered as a subdivision and shall be platted in accordance with the subdivision regulations and must be rezoned.

 

E. HEIGHT REGULATIONS Except as otherwise provided herein, no building or structure shall exceed the following height restrictions:

1. When the building or structure is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential district zone, said building or structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.

 

F. YARD REGULATIONS 

1. Front Yard - The front yards in this district shall be a minimum depth of forty (40) feet.

 

2. Side Yard - The side yards in this district for every dwelling, except accessory buildings, shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet.

 

3. Rear Yard - The rear yards in this district for every dwelling, except accessory buildings, shall not be less than forty(40) feet.

 

G. PARKING REGULATIONS

1. Dwellings - Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.

 

2. Schools - Schools shall be provided with off-street parking spaces as follows:
Elementary - Two (2) parking spaces for each classroom.
Jr. High Schools - Two (2) parking spaces for each classroom.
High School - Eight (8) parking spaces for each classroom plus 
one (1) space for each two employees.

 

3. Churches and other places of public assembly - One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each four (4) seats based upon the maximum designed seating capacity, including choir lofts.

Article V. District Use Regulations

Sec. 31-84. District AH - Airport Hazard District

?

A. INTENT It is hereby found that an airport hazard endangers the lives and 

property users of Airports within the City of Marshall and property or occupants of land in its vicinity, and in effect reduces the size of the area available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of said Airports and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared:

1. That the creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public nuisance.

2. That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety and general welfare that the creation or establishment of airport hazards be prevented.

3. That the prevention of these hazards should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation. Districts now existing or hereafter created shall be known and may be cited at "Airport Hazard Zoning District" - "AH".

 

B. DEFINITIONS As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires:

1. AIRPORT - Any airport now existing or hereafter crated within the City of Marshall.


2. AIRPORT ELEVATION - The highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level.

 

3. AIRPORT HAZARD - Any structure or object of natural growth located on or in the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near such airport, which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or takeoff at such airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or take-off of aircraft.

 

4. STRUCTURE - An object constructed or installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.

 

5. TREE - Any object of natural growth.

 

6. NONCONFORMING USE - Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Section or an amendment thereto.

 

7. HEIGHT - For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in the Section and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.

 

8. PERSON - An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or governmental entity. It includes a trustee, receiver, assignee or similar representative of any of them.

 

9. RUNWAY - A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.

 

10. VISUAL RUNWAY - A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan, a military service's approved military airport layout plant or by any planning document submitted to the FAA by competent authority.

 

11. UTILITY RUNWAY - A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less.

 

12. NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway having anexisting instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on an FAA planning document or military service's military airport planning document.

 

13. PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System(ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an FAA planning document or military service's military airport planning document.

 

14. PRIMARY SURFACE - A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.

 

15. HELIPORT PRIMARY SURFACE - The area of the primary surface coincides in size and shape with the designated landing and takeoff area of a heliport (runway). This surface is a horizontal plane at the elevation of the established heliport elevation.

 

16. STOL PRIMARY SURFACE - An imaginary plane, 300 feet wide, centered on the runway, its length extends 100 feet beyond each runway end. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.

 

17. APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL,HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES - These zones apply to the area under the approach, transitional, horizontal and conical surfaces defined in Sections 3 and 4.

 

C. AIRPORT ZONES There are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the approach zone, transitional zones, horizontal zones and conical zones as they apply to a particular airport. An area located in more than one (1) of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. 
The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
AH (1) Utility Runway Visual Approach and Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is determined by the applicable distance in feet based on the primary surface width as set forth in FAR part 77, as amended. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 

AH (2) Runway Larger Than Utility With Visual Approach and Visibility Minimum As Low as 3/4 Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone - The inner degree of the approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide, The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
AH (3) Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide, The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
AH (4) Heliport Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 300 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,400 feet at horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the primary surface.
AH (5) Fixed Wing Transitional Zones - These zones are hereby established as the area beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and upward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional zones for those portions of the precision approach zones which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach zones and at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
AH (6) Heliport VFR and IFR Transitional Zones - These zones extend outward from the sides of the primary surface and a portion of the sides of the approach zones a horizontal distance of 250 feet from the primary surface centerline and the extended primary surface centerline.
AH (7) Horizontal Zone - The horizontal zone is hereby established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for all runways designated utility or visual, and 10,000 feet radii for all other runways from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to hose arc. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones.
AH (8) Conical Zone - The conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward there from a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The conical zone does not include the precision instrument approach zones and the transitional zones.

D. AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS Except as otherwise provided in this section, no structure shall be erected, altered or maintained and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this Section to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:

1. Utility Runway Visual Approach and Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone
AH (1) - Slopes upward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.

2. Runway Larger than Utility with Visual Approach and Visibility Minimum as
Low as 3/4 Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone AH (2) - Slopes upward thirty-four (34) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.

3. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone AH (3) - Slopes upward fifty (50) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline, thence slopes upward forty (40) feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.

4. Heliport Approach Zones AH(4) - Slopes upward eight (8) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end and at the same elevation as the primary surface, and extending t a distance of 4,000 feet along the extended primary surface centerline.

5. Fixed Wing Transitional Zones AH (5) - Slopes upward and outward seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a
height of 150 feet above the airport elevation. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping upward and outward seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at he sides and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, height limits sloping upward and outward seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically shall be maintained beginning at the sides and at the same elevation as precision instrument runway approach surface,
and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline.

6. Heliport Transitional Zones AH (6) - Slopes upward and outward two (2) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and a portion of the sides of the approach and
extending a distance of 250 feet measured horizontally from and at 90 degree angles to the primary surface centerline and Heliport approach zone centerline.

7. Horizontal Zone AH (7) - One hundred and fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation.

8. Conical Zone AH (8) - Slopes upward and outward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred and fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred and fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation.

Where an area is covered by more than one (1) height limitation, the more re
strictive limitation shall prevail.

E. USE RESTRICTIONS Not withstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this Ordinance in such a manner as to created electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.

F. NONCONFORMING USES
1. Regulations not Retroactive - The regulations prescribed by this section shall not be constituted to require the removal, lowering or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this Ordinance, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and is diligently prosecuted.

2. Marking and Lighting - Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator for the City of Marshall, to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the City of Marshall.

Secs. 31-85 thru 94. RESERVED.

Sec. 31-3. Authority, duties of Building Official


a. Generally. It should be the duty of the Building Official or any deputy or inspector working under his direction, to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to refuse to issue any permit for any building or structure or the use of any premises which would violate any of the provisions hereof, and to cause any building, structure, place or premises to be inspected and examined, and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereat in violation of any provision of this chapter.

b. Institution of action for violations. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, said Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, maintenance, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation and to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use on or about such premises.

Sec. 31-4. Authority of city council to amend upon recommendations of Planning and Zoning Commission
The council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, after public notice and hearings thereon as provided herein, amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the regulations and restrictions as established herein and may change, restrict or extend the boundaries of the various districts established herein. Before taking any action upon any proposed amendment, modification, change, restriction or extension, the same shall be referred by the city clerk of the City of Marshall, Missouri, to planning commission of the City of Marshall, Missouri, for report and recommendation.

Sec. 31-5. Notice, public hearing prior to action on amendments
No action on an amendment, change, modification, repeal shall be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper, or a paper of general circulation in the city.

Sec. 31-6. Protest by owners to proposed amendments; vote of council prescribed.
If a protest against an amendment, change, modification, repeal, restriction or extension shall be presented, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of ten percent (10%) or more, either of the land, exclusive of streets and alleys, included in such proposed change, or within an area determined by lines drawn parallel to and one hundred eighty-five (185) feet distance from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed, such amendment shall not be passed except by three fourths (3/4) vote of the city council.

Sec. 31-7. Penalty for violation of provisions
The owner or general agent of a building or premises where a violation of any provision of the regulations of this chapter has been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the owner, general agent, lessee, or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each and every day that such violation shall continue or by imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every day such violation shall continue, or by both such fine and imprisonment in all the discretion of the court. Any such person who, having been served with an order to remove any such violation, shall fail to comply with said order within ten (10) days after such service, or shall continue to violate any provision of the regulations made under authority of this act in the respect named in such order, shall also be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00).

Secs. 31-8 thru 31-20. Reserved

Article I I. Board of Adjustment

?

Sec. 31-21. Created, membership, qualifications, term

A. ESTABLISHED: MEMBERSHIP A Board of Adjustment, hereafter called the board, is hereby established and created. Such board shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council.

B. QUALIFICATIONS The members of the board shall be freeholders of the city and no member shall be a member of the city council. One of the members shall be a member of the city planning commission.

C. TERM The membership of the first board shall serve respectively: one for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one for four (4) years, and one for five (5) years. Thereafter, members shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years.

Sec. 31-22. Removal, vacancies

A. REMOVAL Members of the Board of Adjustment, created in Section 31-21, shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after a public hearing.
B. VACANCIES Vacancies on the board shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member of any member whose term becomes vacant.

Sec. 31-23. Organization
The board of Adjustment shall elect one of its members to serve as chairman. Such chairman shall serve for one year.

Sec. 31-24. Adoption of rules, meetings, records
The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. All testimony, objections thereto, and rulings thereon, shall be taken down by a reporter employed by the board for that purpose.

Sec. 31-25. Appeals to board: Right, time limitation, filing, transmittal to board
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.

Sec. 31-26. Same: Effect
An appeal as provided for in Section 31-25 stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and due cause shown.

Sec. 31-27. Same: Hearing set, appearance of parties
The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal provided for in Section 31-25, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.

Sec. 31-28. Powers
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:


a.     To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter.

b.     To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter upon which such board is required to pass under this chapter.

c.     In passing upon appeals, where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of such provisions, to vary or modify the application of any of the regulations or provisions of this chapter relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land so that the spirit of the provisions shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.

d.     To grant a permit for a temporary building for commerce or industry in a residential district which is incidental to the residential development, said permit to be issued for a period of not more than two (2) years.

e.     To grant a permit for the extension of a use, height, or area regulation intoan adjoining district for a distance of not more than twenty-five (25) feet, where the boundary line of the district divides a lot in single ownership on November 16, 1981. 


Sec. 31-29. Power to reverse, affirm, etc., any appealed decision
In exercising the powers prescribed in Section 31-28, the Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is made.

Sec. 31-30. Vote required to take action
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect any variation in this chapter.

Sec. 31-31. Appeal from Board of Adjustment
Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality, may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board.

Secs. 31-32 thru 31-41. Reserved

?Building & Zoning Definitions

 

Sec. 31-2. Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms as used herein are defined to mean the following:

Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include plural; and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" or the word "must" is mandatory and not directory; the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the term "used for " includes the meaning "designed for" or "intended for".

Accessory building or use shall mean a subordinate building, a portion of the main building, or a use customarily incident to and located on the lot occupied by the main building or use of the property.

Agriculture Use shall mean the use of a tract of land of not less than five (5) acres for the growing of crops, pasturage, nursery or the raising of poultry, including the structures necessary for carrying out farming operations and the residence or residences of those owning or operating the premises, a member of the family thereof, or persons employed thereon, and the family thereof, but such use shall not include feedlots as defined by the State Statute.

Alley shall mean a public way, which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.

Alteration as applied to a building or structure is a change or arrangement in the structural parts of an existing building or structure. Enlargement, whether by extending a side, increasing in height or the moving from one location or position to another shall be considered as an alteration.

Animal Clinic shall mean any building or structure where animals are diagnosed, cared for or treated for physical ailments.

Animal Hospital shall mean any building or structure where animals are diagnosed, cared for or treated for physical ailments while confined within the building or structure.

Apartment shall mean a room or a suite of rooms within an apartment house arranged, intended, designed for or used as a place of residence of a single family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.

Apartment Hotel shall mean an apartment house, which furnishes for the use of its tenants services of which are not primarily available to the public. Apartment House shall mean a building arranged, intended, designed for or occupied by more than two families.

Basement shall mean a story below the first story as hereafter defined.

Block shall mean a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the outline of the block.

Boardinghouse or Lodging House shall mean a building other than a hotel, occupied as a single housekeeping unit where lodging or meals are provided for six (6) or more persons for compensation pursuant to previous arrangements, but not for the public or transients.

Campgrounds shall mean any piece, parcel, tract or plot of ground, which provides space for transient occupancy and is used or intended to be used for the parking of one or more
camping trailers, tents or similar recreational vehicles. Under no circumstances shall any
one camper occupy a campground for a period exceeding15 consecutive days. The term campgrounds does not include sales lots on which unoccupied camping trailers, whether new or used, are parked for the purposes of storage, inspection or sale.

Campground Trailers shall mean any vehicular portable dwelling unit designed especially for short term occupancy such as: travel trailers, tents, trailers, truck or auto- mounted camping units, converted buses and trucks and all other similar units whether self-propelled, pulled or hauled and designed primarily for highway travel without the necessity of a special permit.

Confined Feeding shall mean the confined feeding of animals for foods, fur or pleasure purposes
in lots, pens, pools or ponds which are not normally used for raising crops and in which no vegetation intended for animal food is growing. This will not include a wintering operation for cows in lots or on farming grounds unless the operation causes a pollution problem. Food animals shall include fish, fowl, cattle, swine and sheep. Fur animals shall include any animal raised for its pelt. Pleasure animals shall include dogs and horses.

Curb Level shall mean the mean level of the curb in front of the lot, or in case of a corner lot, along the abutting street where the mean curb level is the highest.

Day Care Facility shall mean a place for reception, care, training or instruction of children, not of common parentage, residing therein regardless of sex, under the age of 18 years, for
compensation or otherwise including preschool centers, nursery schools, etc., providing that nothing herein contained shall be construed as applying to the regularly established public or parochial schools, colleges, etc. The term day care facility includes the following:
   a. Family Day Care Home: A family home in which care is given to six children
       or less, not related to the day care provider, for any part of the 24 hour day.
   b.Group Day Care Home: A family home in which care is given to ten children
       or less, not related to the day care provider, for any part of the 24 hour day.
   c. Day Care Center: A group program providing care for more than ten children
       in a family home, or more than four children in a facility other than a family
       home, for any part of the 24 hour day.

Driveway shall mean an area established or used for ingress and egress of vehicles from a street
or thoroughfare to any point on private property.

Dwelling shall mean a building arranged, intended, designed for or occupied for residential purposes.

Dwelling, Multiple shall mean a building or portion thereof designed for or occupied as the home
of three (3) or more families or households living independently of each other, including apartment houses, row houses, tenements, and apartment hotels.

Dwelling, Single Family shall mean a residential building having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by one family.

Dwelling, Two Family shall mean a residential building having accommodations for and occupied
exclusively by two families, independently. Two family dwellings shall be considered as duplexes.

Family shall mean any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse or hotel as defined herein.

Flood Hazard Area shall mean an area within the flood plain as determined by the most recent flood elevation study by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Floor Area For Computing Off Street Parking Requirements:
shall mean the gross floor area of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings and shall include the following areas:
   a. The basement floor area.
   b. The area of each floor of the structure.
   c. The attic space having headroom of 7' 10" or more.

Floor Area for Determining Floor Area Ratio:
As used herein shall be computed as the sum of the following areas:
   a. The gross horizontal area of the several buildings measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of        walls separating two buildings, which shall include floor area utilized for stairwells or elevator shafts and floor space used            for mechanical equipment (except equipment open or enclosed, located on the roof);
   b. Penthouses;
   c. Basement floor area;
   d. Attic space having a headroom of 7' 10" or more;
   e. Interior balconies or mezzanines;
   f.  Enclosed porches;
   g. Floor area devoted to accessory uses;
   h. Interior walls.

Floor Area Ratio shall mean the maximum percentage of allowable floor area of a building or
complex (including both principal and accessory buildings) computed by dividing the floor area of said complex or building by the area of the building site.

 

Front Yard shall mean an open space, unoccupied, except as hereinafter provided, across the full width of the lot extending from the front line of the building to the front street line of the lot.

Front Yard Depth shall mean the minimum horizontal distance from the front line of the building to the front street line of the lot.

Garage, Community shall mean any building or premises, other than a public, private or storage garage providing storage for motor vehicles with facilities for washing, but no other services, such garage to be in lieu of private garages within a block or portion of block.

Garage, Private shall mean an accessory building used for the storage only of motor vehicles.

Garage, Public shall mean any building or premises used for the storage, care or repair of motor vehicles, which is operated for commercial purposes.

Garage, Storage shall mean any building or premises, except those defined as private, public or community garages providing storage for motor vehicles, with facilities for washing but no other services.

Height of Buildings shall mean the vertical distance measured from the highest of the following three levels:
   a. From the street curb level;
   b. From the established or mean street grade in case the curb has not been constructed;
   c. From the average finished ground level adjoining the building where it sets back from the street line, to the level of the highest point of the roof beams of flat roofs or roofs inclining not more than one inch to the foot, and the mean height level of the top of the main plate and highest ridge for other roofs.

Height of Yard or Court shall mean the vertical distance from the lowest level of such yard or court to the highest point of any boundary wall.

Home Occupations shall mean a business, profession or trade conducted for gain or support entirely within a residential building subject to the following use limitations:
   a. In all residential Districts, Agricultural and Mobile Home Subdivision Districts:
      1. No commodities shall be displayed or sold on the premises except that which is produced on the premises.
      2. No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be used that creates a nuisance due to but not limited to odor, noise, vibration, glare, etc.
      3. No outdoor storage of materials or equipment used in the home occupation shall be permitted.
      4. No alteration of the principal residential building shall be made which changes the character thereof as a residence.
      5. The home occupation shall be carried on entirely within the principal residential structure and under no circumstances shall the home occupation be carried on within a detached accessory building.
      6. One sign shall be permitted, shall not exceed two square feet in area, shall not be illuminated and shall be affixed to the building. 
(Amended 2/5/96 Ordinance No.6937)
      7. Operators or employees of a home occupation shall not exceed two(2) persons and shall be residents of the home in question.
      8. No manufacturing or processing of any sort whatsoever shall be done and no stock-in-trade shall be displayed or sold on the premises.
      9. Instructions in trades, crafts, dance, drama, music or other similar activities shall be limited to no more than five(5) pupils at any one time.

   b. Particular Home Occupations Permitted: Customary home occupations include, but are not limited to, the following lists of occupations; provided, however, that each listed occupation is subject to the requirements of subsection a, of this section:
      1. Dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors.
      2. Music teachers. Provided that instruction shall be limited to not more than five (5) pupils at one time.
      3. Dance and drama instructors, provided that instruction shall be limited to not more than five (5) pupils at one time.
      4. Artists, sculptors and authors or composers.
      5. Offices for architects, engineers, lawyers, realtors, insurance agents, brokers, doctors, dentists and members of similar professions.
      6. Ministers, rabbis and priests.
      7. Offices for salesmen, sales representatives, manufacturers representatives, when no exchange of tangible goods is made on the premises.
      8. Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving, lapidary work, cabinet making, etc., provided that no machinery or equipment shall be used other than that which would customarily be used in connection with the above home crafts when pursued as a hobby or avocation.
      9. Day care or babysitters caring for six (6) or less unrelated children.
      10. Barber shops and beauty parlors.
      11. Services such as small appliances, radio and T.V. repair, provided only such sales of parts are made as are incident to repairs actually performed on the premises.
      12. Dog and Cat Grooming.(Amended 7/6/99 Ordinance No. 7198)

   c. Particular Home Occupations Not Permitted: Permitted home occupations shall not in any event include the following:
      1. Funeral homes.
      2. Nursery schools, unless specifically permitted by the district regulations.
      3. Restaurants.
      4. Small grocery stores.
      5. Stables or kennels.
      6. Tourist homes, unless specifically permitted by the district regulations.
      7. Renting of trailers or equipment.
      8. Animal kennels or hospitals.
      9. Auto and other vehicle repair.

Hotel shall mean a building occupied or used as a more or less temporary abiding place of individuals or groups of individuals who are lodged, with or without meals, and in which there are more than twelve (12) sleeping rooms, and no provision for cooking in individual
rooms.

Institution shall mean a building occupied by a non-profit corporation or a non-profit establishment for public use.

Kennel shall mean any place, area, building, or structure where dogs over the age of ten (10) weeks and more than three (3) in number are boarded, bred, housed, cared for, fed, raised, or trained.

Kennel-Boarding shall mean any place, area, building, or structure where dogs (including those under one (1) year of age) are boarded, housed, cared for, fed, or trained by other than the owner.

Lot shall mean a parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings and including such open spaces as are required under this chapter, and having its principal frontage upon a public street or place.

Lot Corner shall mean a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. A corner lot shall be deemed to front on that street on which it has its least dimension, unless otherwise specified by the Building Official.

Lot, Depth shall mean the horizontal distance from the front street line to the rear lot line.

Lot Interior shall mean a lot whose side lines do not abut upon any street.

Lot, Lines shall mean lines bounding a lot as defined herein.

Lot, Through shall mean an interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets.

Lot, Width shall mean the horizontal distance between side lines measured at right angles to the depth.

Medical, Dental, or Health Clinic shall mean any building designed for use by one or more persons lawfully engaged in the diagnosis, care, and treatment of physical or mental diseases or ailments of human beings; including but not limited to doctors of medicine, dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths, optometrists, podiatrists and in which no patients are lodged overnight, but which may include an apothecary.

Mobile Home shall mean a factory built residential structure or structures more than eight (8) feet in width, equipped with necessary service connections and made so as to be moveable as a unit or units, and shall include factory built, modular, and mobile homes. Units not meeting all of the single family dwelling requirements of the 1978 BOCA Basic Code shall comply with mobile dwelling requirements in section 425.0 of the 1978 BOCA Basic Code.

Mobile Home Park shall mean any area, piece, parcel, tract, or plot of ground equipment as required for support of mobile homes and used or intended to be used by one or more occupied mobile homes, but under no circumstances shall the mobile home spaces be sold or offered for sale individually, The term mobile home park does not include sales lots on which unoccupied mobile homes, whether new or used, are parked for the purpose of storage, inspection, or sales.

Mobile Home Space shall mean a plot of ground within a mobile home park which can accommodate one mobile home and which provides the necessary utility services for
water, sewerage, and electricity.

Mobile Home Subdivision shall mean any area, piece, parcel, tract, or plot of ground used or intended to be used for the purpose of selling lots for occupancy by mobile homes.

Non-Conforming Use, Building or Yard shall mean one that does not, by reason of design or use, conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.

Non-Conforming Use, Abandoned or Discontinued shall mean business shall be transacted during at least three months of the previous calendar year or the establishment shall be considered abandoned or discontinued. A residence shall be occupied during at least three months of the previous year or the non-conforming use shall be discontinued. Property or business for sale or experiencing other extenuating circumstances must apply to the Planning Commission if an extension is desired.

Nursing Home or Convalescent Home shall mean an institution, business or agency licensed by the State for the reception, board, care or treatment of three or more unrelated individuals, but not including facilities for the care and treatment of mental illness, alcoholism or narcotics addiction.

Parking Space shall mean an area surface for all-weather use, including gravel, sand, or comparable material for the purpose of storing one parked automobile. For the purpose of this regulation, one parking space shall have a minimum width of 9 feet and a minimum length of 20 feet. In computing off-street parking, additional space shall be required for access drives to each parking space.

Place shall mean an open, unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently established or dedicated as the principal means of access to property abutting thereon.

Private Club shall mean a non-profit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building or premises, or portion thereof, the use of such building or premises being restricted to members and their guests. The affairs and management of such private club are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises providing adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed, provided it is secondary and incidental to the promotion of some other common objective by the organization and further provided that such sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable Federal, State and Municipal Laws.

Public Utility shall mean any business which furnishes the general public (a) telephone service, (b) telegraph service, (c) electricity, (d) natural gas, (e) water and sewer, (f) any other business so affecting the public interests as to be subject to the supervision or regulation by an agency of the State.

Rear Yard shall mean the area between the rear lot line and the rear line of the principal building and the side lot lines.

Rear Line shall mean the boundary line, which is opposite and most distant from the front street line; except that in the case of uncertainty the Building Official shall determine the rear line.

Rear Yard Depth shall mean the minimum horizontal distance from the rear line of the principal building to the rear lot line.

Restaurant shall mean a public eating establishment at which the primary function is the preparation and serving of food.

Restaurant Drive-In shall mean an establishment where for, compensation, food is prepared and dispensed and normally consumed on the premises but not necessarily within the confines of the building.

Senior Citizen Apartment shall mean an apartment arranged, intended, and designed for use as a residence by individuals whose age is 60 years or more. (Amended 10/19/87 Ordinance No. 6288)

Service Station shall consist of a building or group of buildings and surfaced area where automobile vehicles may be refueled and serviced, self-service pumps without buildings shall also be included. Such service shall not include tire recapping, body repairs, or major overhauls.

Side Line shall mean any lot boundary line not a front or rear line thereof. A side line may be a part lot line, a line bordering on an alley or place or a side street line.

Side Yard shall mean the area between the main building and the adjacent side line of the lot, and extending through from the front yard to the rear yard.

Sign shall mean any device, which shall display or include any letter, word. model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation or announcement which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business, but shall not include any display of official notice or official flag.

Site Triangle shall mean an area at a street intersection in which nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between the height of 2 1/2 feet and 8 feet above the grades of the bottom of the curb of the intersecting streets, measured from the point of intersection of the centerline of the streets, 65 feet in each direction along the centerline of the streets. At the intersection of major or arterial streets, the 65 foot distance shall be increased to 95 feet.

Special Use Permit shall be a written permit issued by the Zoning Administrator with the written authorization of the Planning and Zoning Commission. This special use permit provides permission under special conditions to make certain special uses of land in certain zoning districts as stipulated in each of the district zoning regulations.

Stable, Private shall mean a stable with capacity for not more than two (2) horses; provided, however, that the capacity of a private stable may be increased if the premises whereon such stable is located contains an area of not less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet for each horse accommodated.

Stable, Public shall mean a stable other than a private stable as defined herein.

Story shall mean that part of a building included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there be no floor above that part of the building which is above the surface of the highest floor thereof. A top story attic is a half story when the main line of the eaves is not above the middle of the interior height of such story. The first story is the highest story having its interior floor surface not more than four (4) feet above the curb level, established or mean street grade, or average ground level.

Street shall mean a public thoroughfare, which affords principal means of access to property abutting thereon.

Street Line shall mean the dividing line between the street right of way and the abutting property.

Street Network
    a. Expressway: A street, which provides fast and efficient movement of large volumes of traffic between areas and does not provide a land service function.
    b. Arterial: A street, which provides for through traffic movement between and around areas with direct access to abutting property, subject to necessary control of entrances, exits and curb uses.
    c. Collector: A street, which provides traffic movement between arterials and local streets, with direct access to abutting property.
    d. Local: A street, which provides access to abutting land and local traffic movement whether in business, industrial or residential areas.

Structural Alteration shall mean any change in the supporting member of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.

Tavern shall mean an establishment in which the primary function is the public sale and serving of alcoholic and cereal malt beverages for consumption on the premises, including
establishments, commonly known as key clubs, which are open, and in which alcoholic and cereal malt beverages are served only to members and their guests.

Tourist Cabin or Trailers Camp shall mean a tract or parcel of land upon which two (2) or more tourist cabins are located, or where temporary accommodations are provided for two (2) or more automobile trailers, tents, or house cars open to the public either free or for a fee.

Tourist Home shall mean a dwelling in which overnight accommodations are provided or offered for six (6) or less transient guests.

Travel Trailer shall mean (1) a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and designed for temporary occupancy for travel, recreational or vacation use; and provided its overall length does not exceed 29 feet; (2) a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation use.

?Article V. District Use Regulations


Sec. 31-78. District C-1 - Central Business District

?

A. INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT  The "C-1" Central Business District is intended for grouping retail merchandising activities into a concentrated area serving the general shopping needs of the trade area. Principal permitted uses include department stores, apparel stores, general retail sales and services, and similar uses appropriated for comparison shopping. The grouping is intended to strengthen the business level of the central business activity.

B. DISTRICT REGULATIONS In District "C-1", no building shall be used and no building or structure altered, enlarged or erected with is arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the uses listed in (C) below.

C. USE REGULATIONS* 
    Types of business use listed at the bottom alphabetically.


D. INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS Automobile, truck or boat sales shall have at 
    least 5,000 square feet of contiguous display area.

E. HEIGHT REGULATIONS A building may be erected to any height not in conflict with other regulations.

F. YARD REGULATIONS


1. Front Yards: No front yard is required for any building in "C-1" District.
However, where a portion of District "C-1" lies within the same block and fronts
upon the same street with a portion of a residential district, and no lot within said
"C-1" District is occupied in that portion of the residential district inclusive
adjoining, then in such case, the front yard requirements of adjoining residential
district inclusive shall likewise be applicable to such portion of "C-1" District.

2. Side Yards: No side yard is required for any building in the "C-1" Central
Business District.

3. Rear Yards: The depth of the rear yard shall be at least four percent (4%) of
the depth of the lot, but such depth need not be more than four (4) feet, except
that on a corner lot no rear yard is required within fifty (50) feet of a side street,
unless the rear line adjoins a Residential District.

G. STORAGE REGULATIONS All storage of goods or material for sale, rent, lease or display shall be within an enclosed building or within an area completely surrounded on all sides by a fence or wall at least eight feet in height so as to provide visual barrier.

H. TRAFFIC REGULATIONS Plans for the erection or structural alteration of any business use dependent on vehicles entering onto the business site or parking lot shall be approved by the City Council. The City Council may require such changes therein in relation to yards, location of curb cuts, width of driveways, location of signs and accessory uses and buildings and construction of buildings as it may deem best suited to insure safety to minimize traffic difficulties and to safeguard adjacent properties.

I. PARKING REGULATIONS Off street parking is not required.

?

?

*C. USE REGULATIONS 
    Types of business use listed alphabetically:

?

1. Amusement places.

2. Animal hospitals, clinics and kennels, providing the establishment and runs are completely enclosed in a building.

3. Antique shops and stores, providing all merchandise is displayed and sold inside a building.

4. Apartments on floors other than the ground floor.

5. Apparel and accessory stores.

6. Appliance sales and service.

7. Art and art supply stores.

8. Artist studios.

9. Auditoriums and similar places of public assembly.

10. Automobile garages (public) and parking lots, except that in public garages no repair facilities shall be maintained on the front portion of the lot or in the front portion of the first story of the building within 30 feet of the front street

.

11. Automobile sales and service, providing that all work is done within an enclosed building and that no inoperable autos or materials are held or stored on the site unless screened by a solid fence at least eight feet in height.

 

12. Auto repair and body shops, providing that all work is done within an enclosed building and that no inoperable autos or materials are held or stored on the site unless screened by a solid fence at least eight feet in height.

 

13. Auto supply stores.

14. Bakery and pastry shops (retail only).

15. Banks and other savings and lending institutions.

16. Barber and beauty shops.

17. Bicycle repair and sales shops.

18. Books and stationary stores.

19. Bowling alleys and recreation buildings.

20. Business and technical schools and schools for photography, music and dancing.

21. Business machine repair, sales and service.

22. Car washes, both automatic and manual.

23. Churches and parish homes.

24. Cigar and tobacco stores.

25. Clothing and costume rental.

26. Commercial recreation uses.

27. Custom dressmaking, furrier, millinery and tailor shops.

28. Delicatessens and catering establishments.

29. Department stores.

30. Drug stores and prescription shops.

31. Dry goods and notion stores.

32. Dry cleaning and laundry establishments (employing not more than five (5) persons on the premises).

 

33. Electric repair shops (household appliances).

34. Fix-it shops (radio, T.V. and small household appliance repair).

35. Florist and gift shops.

36. Furniture and home furnishing stores.

37. Government buildings.

38. Grocery stores (including retail meat markets and produce stores).

39. Hardware stores.

40. Hobby, stamp and coin shops.


41. Household and appliance stores.

42. Hotels and motels.

43. Interior decorator's shops.

44. Insurance sales office.

45. Jewelry and metal craft stores.

46. Leather goods and luggage stores.

47. Lumber yards provided they are wholly within a building or within an area completely surrounded on all sides by a fence or wall at least eight feet high so as to provide a visual barrier.

 

48. Library and museums.

49. Lock and key shops.

50. Mail order catalog stores.

51. Medical, dental and health clinics.

52. Medical and orthopedic appliance stores.

53. Meeting halls and auditoriums.

54. Mortuaries.

55. Messenger or telegraph service stations.

56. Milk and dairy products (retail sales only).

57. Music instrument sales and repair shops.

58. Music studios, radio and television stores.

59. Newsstands.

60. Nightclubs.

61. Offices and office buildings, including offices for abstractors, accountants, actuaries, attorneys, doctors, physicians and other similar professionals.

62. Office supply and office equipment stores.

63. Optician and optometrist shops.

64. Package liquor stores.

65. Paint stores.

66. Parks and recreation areas.

67. Pawn shops.

68. Pet shops.

69. Photographic equipment and supply stores.

70. Photographic studios.

71. Picture frame shops.

72. Printing and publishing houses (including newspapers).

73. Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges.

74. Public buildings.

75. Radio and television studios.

76. Railway, taxi and bus passenger stations.

77. Real estate offices.

78. Rental stores (excluding vehicle or trailer rental).

79. Restaurants and tea rooms (excluding drive-ins).

80. Service stations, providing that no vehicle is stored outside on the property for more than 72 continuous hours and that parts or materials stored outside are screened by a solid fence at least eight feet in height and provided that Section 7-5 and 7-6 of the city ordinances is complied with and provided all storage tanks for gasoline shall be below the surface of the ground, and that no opening for the filling or emptying of such gasoline storage tanks shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any boundary line of a residential district when such boundary line is within the same block.


81. Self-service laundries.

82. Sewing machine stores.

83. Shoe stores.

84. Shoe repair and shoe shine shops.

85. Sporting and athletic goods stores.

86. Stores and shops for the conduct of retail business similar to the uses listed in this section.

87. Tailor shops.

88. Taverns.

89. Theatres.

90. Tire repair shops, providing that all materials and supplies are stored or kept within a solid fence at least eight feet in height.

91. Toy stores.

92. Travel bureaus.

93. Truck repair and body shops, providing all work is done within an enclosed building and that no inoperable truck or material are geld or stored on the site unless screened by a solid fence at least eight feet in height.

 

94. Utility company offices.

95. Variety stores and shops.

96. Wallpaper stores and shops.

97. Watch repair shops.

98. Wholesale establishments.

99. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above uses.

100. Day care facilities located in the main building of churches.
       (Amended 7/7/97 Ordinance No. 7048)

101. Any use permitted in Section 31-79(C) of the Zoning Code of Ordinances.

102. Tourist home 

103. The Planning Commissions may, by special use permit, authorize the 

following exception(s) subject to such conditions, as the Commission deems necessary. This special use shall not be available on the following described tracts: Blocks: 7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27, and 28 of the Original Town of Marshall, Saline County, Missouri. (Amended 4/7/03 Ordinance No. 7449) 

 

(a) Apartments on the ground floor.

Article III

Certificates of Occupancy

?

Sec. 31-42. Required, contents, record fee.

?

A. REQUIRED No vacant land shall be occupied or used, except for agricultural uses, and no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Official.

B. CONTENTS, RECORD  Certificates of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all the building and health laws and ordinances, and with the provisions of these regulations. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Official and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.

C. FEE No fee shall be charged for the certificate of occupancy.

Sec. 31-43. Application required prior to issuance of excavation permit
No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before application has been made for a certificate of occupancy.

Sec. 31-44. Application made with application for building permit
A certificate of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or structural alteration of such building shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.

Sec. 31-45. Required for use or change of use of land, issuance
Certificates of occupancy for the use of vacant land or the change in the character of the use of land as herein provided, shall be applied for before any such land shall be occupied or used and a certificate of occupancy shall be issued within ten (10) days after the application has been made, provided such use is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.

Sec. 31-46. Required for nonconforming use of land, issuance
Certificates of occupancy for a nonconforming use existing on November 16, 1981, shall be issued by the Building Official, and the certificate shall state that the use is a nonconforming use, and does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, The Building Official shall notify all occupants of property being used as nonconforming uses, and said occupants shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of said notice, apply at the office of the Building Official for a certificate of occupancy.

Sec. 31-47. Temporary certificate: issuance, duration
Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building Official for a period not exceeding six (6) months during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Such temporary certificate shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights, duties or obligations of the owners or of the city covered by this chapter, and such temporary certificate shall not be issued except under such restrictions and provisions as will adequately insure the safety of the occupants.

?
Article I V. Establishment of Districts
 

Sec. 31-58. Districts established
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, or the general welfare of the community by regulating and restricting the height, number of stores and size of buildings and other structures, the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, or other purposes the city is hereby divided into ten (10) districts, as follows: 

District A-1: Agricultural District
District R-1: Single Family Residential District
District R-2: Residential District
District R-3: Low Density Multi-Family Dwelling District
District MH-P: Mobile Home Park District
District MH-S: Mobile Home Subdivision District
District C-1: Central Business District
District C-2: Highway Business District
District I-L: Light Industrial District
District I-H: Heavy Industrial District

 

In addition, four (4) overlay districts are hereby created as follows: (Amended 10/4/93 Ordinance No. 6728)

District FP: Flood Plain District
District HP: Historic Preservation District
District AH: Airport Hazard District
District P-D: Planned Development District (Amended 10/4/93 Ordinance No. 6728)

 

Sec. 31-59. Zoning district map as adopted
Boundaries of districts as designated and set out in Section 31-58 of this chapter are hereby established, adopted and declared to be such boundaries as are shown on that map of the city, which is identified by the attestation of the City Clerk and the seal of the city with the written descriptions of the boundaries attached thereto as follows:

Zoning District Map Adopted
Attest: Dorothy Hughes
             City Clerk
             November 16, 1981

The map and all notations, references and information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this chapter as fully as if the same were set forth in full therein. It shall be the duty of the city clerk comptroller immediately upon the passage of any ordinance changing the boundaries of any districts as shown on said map, to post on the map the number of the ordinance and a brief summary of the substance of such change and the area affected thereby.

Sec. 31-60. Determination of district boundaries
When definite distances in feet are not shown on the zoning district map, the district boundaries are intended to be along existing streets, alleys or plotted lot lines or extension of the same, and if the exact location of such line is not clear, it shall be determined by the zoning administrator, due consideration being given to location as indicated by the scale of the zoning district map.

Sec. 31-61. Procedure when streets, alleys or ground differ from map
When on account of any vacation proceedings or for any other cause the streets or alleys on the ground differ from the streets or alleys as shown on the zoning district map, the zoning administrator may apply the district designation on the map to the streets or alleys on the ground in such manner as to conform to the intent and purpose of this chapter.

Sec. 31-62. Restrictions: Use, height and area, population density
Except as hereinafter provided, the following restrictions shall be complied with:

a. Use of building. No buildings or structures shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building, structure or land be used for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which such building, structure or land is situated.

b. Height area limitations. No building or structure shall be erected, constructed, extended, enlarged reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height or area limit herein established for the district in which such building or structure is situated.

c. Lot area, population density. No lot area shall be reduced or diminished so that the yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this chapter, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner, except in conformity with the area regulations established herein.

Sec. 31-63. Projection of cornices over street lines
No cornice shall project over the street line more than five percent (5%) of the width of such street and in no case more than four (4) feet.

Sec. 31-64. Open fire escapes, projection over side, rear yards
An open fire escape may project not more than four (4) feet into a side or rear yard. Solid floored balconies and enclosed fireproof outside stairways may project not more than four (4) feet into a rear yard.

Secs. 31-65 thru 31-72. Reserved

Sec. 31-82  District FP - Flood Plain District


A. PURPOSE Since certain areas of the City of Marshall are subject to flood hazard, the "FP" - Flood Plain District is hereby established in order to protect the public health, lessen the financial burden caused upon the community by rescue and relief efforts occasioned by the occupancy of flood areas and to minimize the danger to life and property which results from development undertaken without full realization of such danger.

B. PROCEDURE In order to utilize the land in the "FP" District, a property owner or user shall submit to the Zoning Administrator a plan for adequate flood protection, relative to the elevation of the flood plain, as determined by the most recent flood elevation study made by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and used as the basic data for determining the extent of the flood plain district. Such plan must be approved by the Zoning Administrator before the flood plain district may be utilized. It may be required that the plan include a report by a registered professional engineer as to the adequacy of the proposed plan for flood protection relative to the elevation of the flood plain as determined in the Flood Elevation Study made by the U.S. Department of HUD, or as amended as provided below, the effect of the proposed improvement on the flooding problems on other properties, and such other hydrologic problems as may result from the improvement.

C. USE REGULATIONS The "FP" Flood Plain District shall function as an overlay to the Zoning District Map of the City of Marshall. Those uses permitted by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Marshall within the several zoning districts shall be subject to the additional requirements of the "FP" District regulations if they fall within the "FP" District boundaries.

1. Structures. The Building Official shall review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial improvement (including prefabricated and mobile homes) must (1) be
designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure, (2) use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage and (3) use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.

2. Storage. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in the time of flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, shall be at or above the level of the 100 year flood.

3. Floodway Improvements and Drainage Works. Fill or encroachment or obstruction of any kind within the 100 year flood plain shall not be allowed that would impair any floodway's ability to carry and discharge the water resulting from the 100 year flood, except if the effects of increased flood heights are fully offset by floodway improvements.

4. Subdivisions. The Zoning Administrator shall review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to assure that (1) all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimized flood damage, (2) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and (3) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.5. Water and/or Sewage Systems . The Municipal Utilities shall require new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewerage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and require on-site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding.

Sec. 31-81
District I-H - Heavy Industrial
 

A. INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT  The "I-H" Heavy Industrial District is intended for the purpose of allowing basic or primary industries, which are generally not compatible with residential and/or commercial activity. Certain extremely obnoxious or hazardous uses will require special permission to locate in this district.

B. DISTRICT REGULATIONS  In District "I-H", no building or land shall be erected, altered or enlarged, which is arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the uses listed in Subsection C. below.

C. USE REGULATIONS* 
    Types of industry listed alphabetically at the bottom of page.

D. INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS
1.     A building, structure or use, allowed in this district may occupy all that portion of a lot except for the area required for off-street loading and unloading and their access roads and as otherwise required in Section G and I.

2.     In the case where the required off-street parking and/or loading and unloading will be provided within the building or structure, then the building or structure may cover the entire lot except as otherwise required in Section F.

 

E. HEIGHT REGULATIONS None.

F. YARD REGULATIONS 

1. Front Yard: No front yard shall be required for uses permitted in this District.

 

2. Side Yard: Provided there is conformance with the city fire code, no side yard shall be required for uses in this district except where such use abuts a dwelling or dwelling district zone, in which case there shall be required fifty (50) feet landscape buffer with trees, and evergreen shall be provided to screen the residential area on the side of the lot which abuts the residential district.

 

3. Rear Yard: The depth of a rear yard shall be at least ten (10) feet, except that on a corner lot no rear yard is required within fifty (50) feet of a side street, unless the rear line adjoins a residential or commercial district. An evergreen buffer approved by the Commission shall be provided along those rear lot lines which adjoin a residential district.

 

G.     PARKING REGULATIONS 

1. Commercial and Industrial uses allowed in this district shall provide one (1) off-street parking space for every two regular employees per shift, and said parking spaces shall be provided within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed structure.

 

2. Plans and Approval Required (Amended 7/6/87 Ordinance No. 6266) Plans showing layout and design of all required off-street parking areas shall be submitted and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, prior to issuing a building permit. Before approving the parking layout, the Commission shall be satisfied that the spaces provided are usable and meet standard design criteria. All required off- street parking areas, including access driveways, shall be improved with asphalt, concrete or similar dust-free surface and all parking spaces shall be clearly marked.

3. Exceptions Off-street parking requirements in this district may be waived by the Governing Body when it can be established that off-street parking, to satisfy the above requirements, is provided or is available, either private or public, on adjoining property or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the proposed use. In determining whether or not sufficient off-street parking is available to satisfy the requirements of this section, vacant land or space allocated to other uses shall not be considered.

 

H. TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

1. No loading or unloading operation shall be permitted in the right-of-way of any street or alley.

2. Curb cuts for access to parking, loading and unloading areas shall be first approved by the Director of Municipal Services. In making application for such curb cuts, the Applicant shall present his proposal in writing and provide the Director of Municipal Services with sufficient plans showing location, width and type of surface proposed across the public right-of-way.

 

I. LOADING AND UNLOADING REGULATIONS

1. Required: On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage of goods displayed, and which shall include any warehouse, goods displayed, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles, of materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets or alleys.

2. Amount of space prescribed: Such space unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall include a ten (10) foot by fifty (50) foot loading space with fourteen (14) foot height clearance for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction thereof in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet of building floor use for above mentioned purposes or for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction thereof in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet of land use for above mentioned purposes. These requirements may, upon appeal, be increased, modified or waived by the Board of Adjustment where, it its judgment, the conditions or circumstances provide substantial reasons to justify such action.

?

?

?

*C. USE REGULATIONS 
    Types of industry listed alphabetically:

1. Auto repair and body shops.

2. Bottling works.

3. Blacksmith shops.

4. Book binderies.

5. Building materials, storage and sales.

6. Canning and preserving factories.

7. Carpenter, cabinet, plumbing and sheet metal shops.

8. Carpet cleaning establishments.

9. Chemical laboratories not producing noxious fumes or odors.

10. Contractor's office and equipment storage yards.

11. Construction equipment sales and rentals.

12. Dry cleaning and laundry plants.

13. Electro-plating works.

14. Feed and seed stores, flour mills and grain processing.

15. Forges (hand).

16. Fish packing or storage plants.

17. Frozen food lockers.

18. Freight terminals.

19. Galvanizing works, by special permit of the Planning and Zoning Commission only.

20. Grain elevators.

21. Greenhouses and nurseries, retail and wholesale.

22. Ice plants.

23. Kennels and kennel boarding.

24. Laundries.

25. Lumber yards.

26. Machine yards.

27. Machinery sales and storage lots.

28. Milk bottling or distribution plants.

29. Manufacturing or fabrication establishments, which are not noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, dust, fumes, gas, odor or smoke.

30. Monument and marble works.

31. Motor vehicle sales and storage.

32. Moving transfer and storage plants.

33. Photo engraving plants.

34. Poultry storage or slaughtering.

35. Planning mills.

36. Printing plants.

37. Public utility and public service uses.

38. Produce markets (wholesale).

39. Railroad freight yards.

40. Radiator repair shops.

41. Sanitary landfill (governmental) provided that no hazardous waste materials as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency are stored or deposited on the site.

42. Sign painting plants.

43. Storage in bulk of, or warehouse for, such materials as asphalt, brick, building material, cement, cotton, coal, contractor's equipment, feed, fertilizer, grain, gravel, grease, hay, ice, lead, lime, machinery, metals, plaster, poultry, roofing, rope, sand, scrap paper or rags, stone, tar, tarred or creosoted products, terra cotta, timber, wood and wool.

44. Truck and rail terminals.

45. Tire repair shops.

46. Upholstering shops.

47. Veterinary hospitals.

48. Warehouses or storage houses.

49. Wholesale houses.

50. Service stations. (Provided Sec. 7-5 and 7-6 of the City Ordinances are complied with.)

51. Stores, shops and retail trade.

52. SPECIAL USE PERMIT - The following uses of land may be 

allowed by the Council in this District upon submission, review and recommendation of the Commission:

a. Auto wrecking yards; junkyards and scrap processing yards are subject, however, to the following:

1. Located on a tract of land at least three hundred (300) feet from a residential district zone.
2. The operation shall be conducted wholly within a noncombustible building or within an area completely surrounded on all sides by a fence, wall or hedge at least six (6) feet high. The fence, wall or hedge shall be of uniform height, uniform texture and color and shall be so maintained by the proprietor as to insure maximum safety to the public and preserve the general welfare of the neighborhood. The fence, wall or hedge shall be installed in such a manner as to retain all scrap, junk or other material within the yard.
3. No junk shall be loaded, unloaded or otherwise placed either temporarily or permanently outside the enclosed building, hedge, fence or wall, or within the public right-of-way.
4. Burning of paper, trash, junk or other waste materials shall be permitted only after approval of the Fire Department. Said burning, when permitted, shall be done during daylight hours only.

 

b. Petroleum refining.

 

c. Stockyard and slaughter houses.

 

d. Ready-mix concrete and asphalt mix plants.

 

e. Manufacturing or storage of bulk oil, gas and explosives.

 

f.  Other uses which may be noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or vibration.

 

53. Any use permitted in Sec. 31-80 (C) of the Zoning Ordinance.

Article V. District Use Regulations


Sec. 31-79. District C-2 - Highway Business District

?

A. INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT  This district is intended to provide commercial locations for uses which serve as a convenience to the traveler, require large areas of land or require convenient access to all parts of the community in order to have efficient operation. It is further intended that the uses be of a single-purpose character and not be a nature in which people walk from store-to-store as in a nucleated center. Floor areas are restricted and screening and off-street parking are required to reduce possible adverse effects on surrounding residential uses.

B. DISTRICT REGULATIONS  In district "C-2", no structure or land shall be used and no structure altered, enlarged or erected which is arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the uses listed below.

C. USE REGULATIONS* 
    Highway Business District uses listed alphabetically at bottom of page. 

D. INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS The principal building or buildings and storage area in this District shall not cover more than fifty (50%) percent of the ground area on which the building or buildings are located. Automobile, truck or boat sales shall have at least 5,000 square feet of contiguous display area.

E. HEIGHT REGULATIONS No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2 1/2) stories, except that where a District "C-2" joins a District "C-1" within the same block, the height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet or three (3) stories within that same block.

F. YARD REGULATIONS 

1. Front Yards: No setback is required for existing structures. All additions and new structures shall meet the following requirements:

a. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet measured from the front lot line and if located on an arterial street, the front yard shall be 40 feet measured from the front lot line.
b. Where a lot or lots have double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets for all uses permitted in this district.
c. Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, there shall be a front yard on each street side of the corner lot, except the buildable width of such lot shall not be reduced to less than 28 feet. No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on either street.

 


2. Side Yards: There shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than five (5) feet.
3. Rear Yards: Except as otherwise provided in the Supplementary District Regulations, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 10 feet or 20% of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller.
4. A solid or semi-solid fence or wall at least six feet high, but not more than eight feet high, shall be provided adjacent to any adjoining residential district; however, in the event the adjacent residential district and the commercial development are separated by a street right-of-way, a 10 foot landscape buffer which shall consist of trees, shrubs and evergreens shall be provided along the property line and be maintained by the owner or owners of this property in the "C-2" District.

 

G. LOADING AND UNLOADING REGULATIONS

1. Required   On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage or goods display, and which shall include any warehouse goods display, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets or alleys.
2. Amount of space prescribed . Such space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall include a ten (10) foot by fifty (50) foot loading space for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction thereof in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet of building floor-use for above mentioned purposes, or for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction thereof in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet for above mentioned purposes. These requirements may, upon appeal, be increased, modified or waived by the Board of Adjustment where, in its judgment, the conditions or circumstances provide substantial reasons to justify such action.

 

H. PARK REGULATIONS Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as follows:

1. Automobile, truck, trailer and mobile home sales, service and rental lots: One parking space for every 3,000 square feet of open sales lot area devoted to then sale, display and rental of said vehicles, plus one parking space for each service bay and employee.
2. Banks, post offices and business and professional offices: One parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area.
3. Bowling Alleys: Five parking spaces for each lane.
4. Car Washes: Three holding spaces for each car washing stall plus two drying spaces for each car washing stall.
5. Funeral homes and mortuaries: One parking space for each four seats based upon the designed maximum capacity of the parlor, plus one additional parking space for each employee and each vehicle maintained on the premises.
6. Furniture and appliance stores. Household equipment or furniture repair shops:
One parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area.
7. Medical and dental clinics or offices: One parking space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area.
8. Restaurants, night clubs, taverns and lounges: One parking space for each 2.5 seats based on the designed seating capacity provided, however, the drive-in restaurants shall have a minimum of at least two parking spaces.
9. Retail stores and shops: One space per 200 square feet of floor area.
10. Service stations: One parking space for each employee plus two spaces for each service bay.
11. Theatres, auditoriums and places of assembly with fixed seats: One space for each 3.5 seats.
12. Theatres, auditoriums and places of assembly without fixed seats: One parking space for each three people, based on the designed maximum capacity of the building.
13. Warehouse, storage and wholesale establishments: One parking space for each two employees based on the largest working shift in any 24 hour period.
14. Churches: One parking space for each four seats based upon the maximum designed seating capacity, including choir lofts.
15. All other businesses and commercial establishments not specified above: One parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area.

?

 

*C. USE REGULATIONS 
Business uses listed alphabetically:

1. Animal hospitals.

2. Arcades.

3. Automobile and truck sales and service, providing that no inoperable vehicle is stored more than 72 hours unless within an enclosed building or within an area screened by a solid fence at least eight feet in height and parts or material kept outside are within an area screened by a solid fence at least eight feet in height.

4. Automotive accessory Retail shops.

5. Bakeries and pastry shops.

6. Banks and other lending institutions.

7. Beauty and barbershops.

8. Bicycle sales and repair shops.

9. Boat sales, service and rental, providing that no inoperable boat is stored more than 72 hours unless within an enclosed building or within an area screened by a solid fence at least eight feet in height and parts or materials kept outside are within an area screened by a solid fence at least eight feet in height.

10. Bowling alleys and recreational buildings.

11. Car washes.

12. Churches.

13. Construction equipment rental and sales.

14. Dance halls.

15. Electric and telephone substations.

16. Food stores.

17. Gift and souvenir shops.

18. Glass service shops.

19. Government buildings.

20. Gymnasiums and other recreational facilities intended for but not limited to tennis, handball, racquetball and swimming.

21. Hotels and motels, including accessory service uses, such as newsstands, messenger and telegraph stations, swimming pools, flower and gift shops.

22. Indoor theatres.

23. Laundromats.

24. Lumber and building material sales yards.

25. Moving and storage, provided all goods or material stored for more than 72 hours are screened by a solid fence at least eight feet in height.

26. Mobile home sales and service.

27. Mortuaries.

28. Motorcycle sales, service and rental, providing that no inoperable motorcycle is stored more than 72 hours unless within an enclosed building or within an area screened by a solid fence at least eight feet in height and parts or materials kept outside are within an area screened by a solid fence at least eight feet in height.

29. Nursery and garden stores.

30. Nursing homes and Hospitals. (Amended 7/3/89 Ordinance No. 6416)

31. Package liquor stores.

32. Photography studios.

33. Pool halls.

34. Printing shops.

35. Professional offices.

36. Restaurants and tea rooms, including drive-in establishments.

37. Roller skating rinks.

38. Service stations or filling stations, providing that no vehicle is stored outside on the property for more than 72 continuous hours and that parts or materials stored outside are screened by a solid fence at least eight feet in height, provided Sections 7-5 and 7-6 of the City Ordinances is complied with and provided all storage tanks for gasoline shall be below the surface of the ground, and that no opening for the filling or emptying of such gasoline storage tanks shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any boundary line of a residential district when such boundary line is within the same block.

39. Sporting goods stores.

40. Storage buildings and warehouses.

41. Stores, shops and retail trade.

42. Taverns.

43. Tire sales and service, providing that all materials and supplies are stored or kept within a solid fence at least eight feet in height.

44. Tractor sales and service, providing that no inoperable vehicle is stored more than 72 hours unless within an enclosed building or within an area screened by a solid fence at least eight feet in height.

45. Upholstery shops.

46. The Planning and Zoning Commission may, by special use permit, authorize the following uses subject to such conditions as the Commission deems necessary, to include but not limited to, proper setbacks, landscaping, screening, fencing, maintenance provisions and similar requirements.

 

a. Outdoor amusement establishments such as amusement parks

permanent carnival and kiddie parks, miniature golf and pitch and putt courses, driving ranges and other similar establishments.

b. Drive-in theatres.

 

c. Campgrounds, subject to the following regulations:

 

1. Campgrounds shall be utilized for the accommodations of camping trailers, tents and other similar camping vehicles, and under no circumstances shall a campground be utilized for the occupancy of mobile homes.

2. The tract to be used for a campground shall not be less than two acres in area.

3. The applicant for a campground shall prepare or cause to be prepared a preliminary campground plan, drawn to a scale of not less than 1"=100' and three (3) copies of said plan shall be submitted to the Commission for their review and recommendations. Such plans shall comply with the following minimum requirements.

 
a. Contours at intervals of one foot shall be indicated on the plan.
b. The campgrounds shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
c. Campgrounds shall have a maximum density of 20 camping spaces per gross acre, and a minimum area of 1,250 square feet shall be provided for each space.
d. Each camping space shall be at least 25 feet wide and minimum of 50 feet in depth.
e. Travel trailers shall be located on each space so as to maintain a setback of no less than 20 feet from any public street, right-of-way or property line.
f. All camping spaces shall front on a private roadway of not less than 24 feet in width, and all roadways shall have unobstructed access to a public street.
g. A solid or semi-solid fence or wall at least six feet high, but not more than eight feet high, shall be provided between the campgrounds and any adjoining property which is zoned for residential purposes. In lieu of said fence or wall, a landscape buffer may be provided not less than 25 feet in width.

 

4. Upon arrival of the preliminary campgrounds plan by the Commission, the applicant shall prepare and submit a final plan which shall incorporate any changes or alterations requested.

Sec. 31-83
District HP - Historic Preservation District

?

A. INTENT Within districts now existing or hereafter created, it is intended to permit creation of District HP Historic Preservation District in general areas or for individual structures and premises officially designated as having historic or cultural significance. Regulations within such districts are intended to protect against destruction of or encroachment upon such areas, structures and premises, to encourage uses which will lead to their continuance, conservation and improvement in a manner appropriate to the preservation of the cultural and historic heritage of the city, to prevent creation of environmental influences adverse to such purposes, and to assure that new structures and uses within such districts will be in keeping with the character to be preserved and enhanced. It is further the intent of these regulations that the Planning Commission shall seek the advice and assistance of groups or individuals qualified by interest, training and experience in achieving the objectives as set forth.

B. APPLICATION FOR HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT DESIGNATION 
1. Applications for HP zoning shall be prepared by the property owners in the area concerned and shall include signatures in support of the application from each of the property owners in the proposed district. Single lot districts are permitted.
Each application shall contain information and recommendations as indicated below concerning the areas, buildings and premises proposed for such zoning.

2. Proposed district boundaries shall in general be drawn to include all appropriate properties reasonably near to each other within the area.

3. A report shall be submitted with the application, establishing and defining the historic and cultural features of the district and describing the structures and features of substantial public significance, present trends and conditions, and desirable public objectives for conservation, development or redevelopment.
Such report shall include, among other pertinent matters:

 

An analysis of existing structures by period of construction (if known), architectural style (if significant), condition, present use, assessed valuation, and other matters relating to planning or regulating future development, such as location on lots, location of yards and other open spaces, access to interior of the block, and off-street parking provided. In addition to general analysis, two specific and detailed classifications shall be established:

 

1. A classification of individual structures and premises of substantial public interest, with maps, photographs and other data indicating the public importance of preservation and particular features it is desired to preserve.

2. A classification of existing structures, premises and uses likely to have an adverse effect on the desired character of the district, including those near and visually related to the district, with maps, photographs and other data indicating the reasons for such classification.

?

C. DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
1. In order to promote general welfare through the preservation and protection of features of historical significance, no person shall be permitted to build, erect, construct, alter, destroy or remove buildings or structures, or in any way change the outward appearance of any building or structure without having obtained approval for so doing by the Planning Commission as herein created. Evidence of such required approval shall be a letter of approval issued by such Commission.

2. By general rule or by specific request in a particular case, the Planning Commission may require submission of any or all of the following in connection with the application: architectural plans, site plans, landscaping plans, proposed signs with appropriate detail as to character, proposed exterior lighting arrangements, elevations of all portions of structures with important relationships to public view (with indications as to construction materials, design of doors and windows, colors and the like), photographs or perspective drawings indicating visual relationships to adjoining structures and spaces, and such other exhibits and reports as are necessary for its determinations after examination of the material submitted and field examination if necessary in the case, the Commission shall issue a letter of approval only if it finds that the proposal is in
fact appropriate to the character, appearance and efficient functioning of the district and meets requirements established by City Council.

D. USE REGULATIONS The "HP" Historic Preservation District shall function as an overlay to the Zoning District Map of Marshall. Those uses permitted by the Zoning Ordinance of Marshall, within the several zoning districts, shall be subject to the additional requirements of the "HP" District regulations if they fall within the "HP" District boundaries.

1. Residential structures shall be limited to the use for which they were originally intended and shall be used for occupancy in the manner for which they were originally designed.

2. Commercial, industrial or public buildings shall be used according to the Use Regulations of their respective existing district.

E. INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS The Intensity of Use Regulations for the existing zoning district shall apply to the designated "HP" District.

F. HEIGHT REGULATIONS The Height Regulations for the existing zoning district shall apply to the designated "HP" District.

G. YARD REGULATIONS
1. The minimum Yard Regulations for the existing zoning district shall apply to the designated "HP" District.

2. To the extent that existing patterns of lotting contribute to the character of HP Districts, it is the intent of these regulations to encourage continuation of such patterns. It is further intended to prevent future fragmentation of land ownership
likely to have adverse effects on such character. Lots or portions of lots existing in HP districts may be combined, but no existing lot or combination of lots, parcels or portions thereof in single ownership at the time of zoning to HP status,
shall be reduced in width, depth or area without the approval of the Planning Commission. The Commission may grant individual applications for such approval upon finding that such reduction would not adversely affect the
character of the district in general or of surrounding property, or may establish general rules regarding approval to apply within the district or any sub-area established.

H. PARKING AND LOADING OR UNLOADING REGULATIONS
1. The parking and loading or unloading regulations for the existing zoning district shall apply to the designated "HP" District.

2. No required off-street parking or loading space shall be located in any required front yard.

Article V. District Use Regulations


Sec. 31-80. District I-L - Light Industrial District

?

A. INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT The "I-L' Light Industrial District is intended for the purpose of allowing certain industrial uses which do not create obnoxious sounds, glare, dust or odor. Height and land coverage are controlled to insure compatibility with adjoining uses.

B. DISTRICT REGULATIONS  In District "I-L" no building or land shall be used and no building or structure altered, enlarged or erected, which is arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the uses listed in Subsection C below.

C. USE REGULATIONS* 
    Light Industry use listed alphabetically at the bottom of the page.

D. INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS

1. A building structure or use, allowed in this district, may occupy not more than seventy-five (75) percent of the lot area.

2. In case where the required off-street parking and/or loading and unloading will be provided within the building or structure, then the structure may cover not more than seventy (70%) percent of the lot area.

 

E. HEIGHT REGULATIONS None.

F. YARD REGULATIONS 

1. Front Yard: No front yard shall be required for uses permitted in this district.

2. Side Yard: Provided there is compliance with the city fire code, no side yard shall be required for uses in this district except where such use abutts a dwelling or dwelling district zone, in which case there shall be required twenty-five (25) feet of side yard with an evergreen buffer approved by the Commission on the side of the lot which butts the residential district.

3. Rear Yard: The depth of a rear yard shall be at least ten (10) feet, except that on a corner lot no rear yard is required within fifty (50) feet of a side street unless the rear line adjoins a residential or commercial district. An evergreen buffer approved by the Commission shall be approved along those rear lot lines which adjoins a residential district.

 

G. PARKING REGULATIONS

1. Commercial and industrial uses allowed in this district shall provide one (1) off- street parking space for every two regular employees per shift with the following exceptions:
Service stations - One (1) parking space for every two regular employees plus two (2) spaces for each service bay.

2. Plans and Approval Required . Plans showing layout and design of all required off-street parking areas shall be submitted and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to issuing a building permit. Before approving the parking layout, the Commission shall be satisfied that the spaces provided are usable and meet standard design criteria.

3. Exceptions . Off-street parking requirements in this district may be waived by the Governing Body when it can be established that off-street parking, to satisfy the above requirements, is provided or is available, either private or public, on adjoining property or within one hundred-fifty (150) feet of the proposed use. In determining whether or not sufficient off-street parking is available to satisfy the requirements of this section, vacant land or spaces allotted to other uses shall not be considered.

 

H. TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

1. No loading or unloading operation shall be permitted in the right-of-way of any street or alley.

2. Curb cuts for access to parking , loading and unloading areas shall be first approved by the Director of Municipal Services. In making application for such curb cuts, the applicant shall present this proposal in writing and provide the Director of Municipal Services with sufficient plans showing location, width and type surface proposed across the public right-of-way. This shall be done in accordance with existing ordinance on streets.

 

I. LOADING AND UNLOADING REGULATIONS 

1. Required. On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage or goods displayed, and which shall include any warehouse, goods displayed, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles, of materials or merchandise, thereshall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets or alleys.

2. Amount of space prescribed. Such space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall include a ten (10) foot by fifty (50) foot loading space with fourteen (14) foot height clearance for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction thereof in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet of building floor-use for above mentioned purposes, or for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction thereof in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet of land-use for above mentioned purposes. These requirements may, upon appeal, be increased, modified or waived, by the Board of Adjustments where, in its judgment, the conditions or circumstances provide substantial reasons to justify such action. 

?

?

*C. USE REGULATIONS 
    Light Industry use listed alphabetically:

1. Animal hospitals or clinics.

2. Auto repair and body shops.

3. Bakeries.

4. Book binders.

5. Bottling works.

6. Building material sales (except for ready-mix concrete and similar uses which emit dust, odor or smoke).

7. Canning or preserving factories.

8. Carpenter, cabinet, plumbing or sheet metal shops.

9. Carpet cleaning establishments.

10. Contractor's office and equipment storage yard, providing the storage yard is completely enclosed with a six (6) foot solid fence or wall.

11. Creameries.

12. Dry cleaning and/or laundry plants.

13. Electro-plating works.

14. Fish packing or storage plants.

15. Frozen food lockers.

16. Freight terminals.

17. Garment factories.

18. Galvanizing works, by special use permit of the Planning and Zoning Commission only.

19. Greenhouses and nurseries, retail and wholesale.

20. Ice plants.

21. Kennels and kennel boarding.

22. Laundries.

23. Light manufacturing operations - providing that such use is not noxious or offensive by reason of vibration or noise beyond the confines of the building or emission of dust, fumes, gas, odor or smoke.

24. Machine shops, provided that no mechanical power in excess of ten (10) horsepower is used in the operation of any one machine.

25. Machinery sales, service repairs, painting and storage.

26. Monument sales.

27. Motor vehicle sales.

28. Moving, transfer and storage plants.

29. Photo engraving plants.

30. Printing plants.

31. Produce markets (wholesale).

 

32. Public utility and public service uses as follows:

a. Substations.
b. Railroads.
c. Telephone exchange, micro-wave towers, radio towers, television towers, telephone transmission buildings. electric power plants.
d. Public utility storage yards when the entire storage area is enclosed by at least a six (6) foot wall or fence.

 

33. Service stations, provided Sections 7-5 and 7-6 of the city ordinances are complied with.

34. Sign printing and manufacturing.

35. Stone cutting plants.

36. Truck and rail terminals.

37. Upholstery shops.

38. Veterinary hospitals.

39. Warehouses.

40. Wholesale merchandise sales and storage.

41. Any use permitted in Sec. 31-78 (C) of the Zoning Ordinances.

Article V. District Use Regulations


Sec. 31-76. District MH-P - Mobile Home Park District.

?

A. INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT It is the intent and purpose of the "MH-P" Mobile Home Park District to provide low density mobile home parks which should be compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and would be consistent with the future land use plan of the community.

B. DISTRICT REGULATIONS In District "MH-P", no structure or land shall be used, and no structure shall be altered, enlarged or erected, which is arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the uses listed in the Use Regulations section of this district.

C. USE REGULATIONS

1. Mobile home parks, subject to the following regulations:

a. The tract to be used for a mobile home park shall not be less than three acres in area. Home parks shall be permitted to expand to the conforming three acre requirement provided the expansion is on contiguous or adjacent property subject to city ordinances.

b. The mobile home park shall be under one ownership and control and individual occupants other than said owner shall not purchase or own any place, parcel or portion of said park.

c. The applicant for a mobile home park shall prepare or cause to be prepared a preliminary Mobile Home Park plan, drawn to a scale of not less than 1"=100', and three (3) copies of said plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for their review and recommendations. Such plans shall comply with the following requirements:

 

1. Contours at intervals of five feet shall be indicated on the plan.
2. The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
3. Mobile home parks hereafter approved shall have a maximum density of eight mobile homes per gross acre, and a minimum of 3,600 square feet shall be provided for each mobile home space.
4. Each mobile home space shall be at least 40 feet wide and be clearly defined.
5. Mobile homes shall be located on each space so as to maintain a setback of no less than 25 feet from any public street, highway right-of-way or district "R" district boundary; as to maintain a setback of no less than ten (10) feet from the edge of a park roadway or sidewalk or a rear boundary line when such boundary line is not common to any public street, highway right-of-way or "MH-P" district boundary and as to maintain a setback of no less than ten (10) feet from any side boundary line of a mobile home space.
6. All mobile home spaces shall front upon a private roadway of no less than 32 feet in width including curbs on each side. All roadways shall have unobstructed access to a public street.
7. Common walks shall be provided in locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated; for example, to the entrance and to the office and other important facilities.
8. All roadways and sidewalks within the mobile home park shall be paved with at least 6" of rolled stone base and 2" of asphaltic concrete or at least 6" of Portland cement concrete, and shall be adequately lighted at night.
9. A community building may be provided which may include recreational facilities, laundry facilities, storm shelter and other similar uses designed to serve the mobile home park residents.
10. Each mobile home park shall devote a minimum of 200 square feet per mobile home space for an area suitable for recreation. Individual recreational areas shall not be less than 5,000 square feet and required setbacks, roadways and off-street parking spaces shall not be considered as recreational space.
11. There shall be 25-foot setback between a residential district and any structure building, or mobile home located within the mobile home park.
12. Each mobile home shall have installed a skirting material that covers any open area under the mobile home and is firmly fastened to the mobile home. Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the Planning Commission for a period not to exceed 180 days from the original date of the mobile home.

?

 

d. A mobile home park shall not be used for other than residential purposes; mobile homes intended and set up for occupancy may be offered for sale in the mobile home park only be resident owners or their agents.
e. Upon approval of the preliminary mobile home park plan by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall prepare and submit a final plan, which shall incorporate any changes or alterations requested. The final plan and the Planning Commission recommendations shall be forwarded to the City Council for their review and final action.
f. Any substantial deviation, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, from the approved plan shall constitute a violation of the building or zoning permit authorizing construction of the project. Changes in plans shall be resubmitted for reconsideration and approval by the Planning Commission and City Council prior to the issuance of a building or zoning permit.
g. The use or parking of a mobile home, whether or not the wheels have been removed, in any place in the city other than in and according to the provisions of district MH-P or MH-S is strictly prohibited.

?

2. Churches, synagogues and other similar places of worship.

3. Public and parochial schools.

4. Home occupations.

5. Accessory buildings and uses.

 

 

D. WATER SUPPLY

1. An accessible, safe and potable supply of water as approved by the State Health Department shall be provided in each park or camp, if a public water supply is reasonably available to the park or camp, it shall be used.

2. The size and location of water mains and fire hydrants shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer and shall be in accordance with the requirements of the agency from which the water supply is obtained.

3. Individual water service connections shall be provided at each mobile home space.

4. When a private water supply is provided, it shall provide an adequate water supply with minimum flow rates of four gallons per minute for each of the first five mobile home spaces and an additional two gallons per minute for each additional space for the next ten spaces, and an additional one gallon per minute for the next twenty-five spaces, and an additional one gallon per minute for each additional space thereafter. Said system shall provide a minimum of twenty pounds per square inch of pressure at all connections provided.

 

E. SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

1. Individual sewer connections shall be provided for each mobile home space and  shall be in accordance with all codes and regulations regarding such systems. If a public sewer system is reasonably available to the park, it shall be used according to all pertinent municipal regulations.

2. All sewerage systems shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer and shall be submitted to the appropriated governing body for their approval.

3. When the sewer lines of the park are not connected to a public sewer, a sewerage treatment plant or sewerage disposal system approved by the Health Officer or the engineer having jurisdiction shall be provided. Such facility shall have the proper permits from the Missouri Department of Natural Resources.

 

F. COMPLIANCE The mobile home park shall be in compliance with this article and all other regulations and the site shall be in conformance with applicable regulations of the locality and state.

G. PARKING OR STORING A mobile home may be parked in the mobile home park, providing that it shall not be a nuisance and does not constitute a fire hazard, and further providing said mobile home is not offered for sale by other than the resident owner or his agent.

H. UNUSED MOBILE HOME PARK Whenever a property, zoned "MH-P", ceases to be used for such purposes for a period of two years, the Planning Commission shall initiate action and hold a public hearing to rezone said property.

I. PARKING REGULATIONS There shall be two off-street parking spaces for each mobile home.

Article V. District Use Regulations


Sec. 31-77. District MH-S - Mobile Home Subdivision District

?

A. INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT It is the intent and purpose of the "MH-S" Mobile Home Subdivision District to provide low-density mobile home development, which would be compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood where individuals could purchase lots for the placement of mobile homes.

B. DISTRICT REGULATIONS In District "MH-S", no structure or land shall be used, and no structure shall be altered, enlarged or erected which is arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the uses listed in the Use Regulations section of this District.

C. USE REGULATIONS 

1. Mobile home subdivisions:
a. Provided that the mobile home subdivision is platted in accordance with the adopted Subdivision Regulations.
b. Provided all mobile homes shall have a sheeting material covering all openings under the mobile home and fastened to it.
c. Provided any foundation not used for 120 continuous days shall be removed or enclosed by a four foot picket or similar fence.

 

2. Churches, synagogues and other similar places of worship.

3. Public and parochial schools.

4. Accessory buildings and uses.

 

D. INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS 

1. A mobile home subdivision shall have a gross area of not less than 5 acres.

2. Only one mobile home shall be permitted on each lot, and each lot shall have a minimum area of 5,000 square feet and a minimum width of 45 feet at the front building line.

 

E. HEIGHT REGULATIONS No building or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height.

F. YARD REGULATIONS 

1. Front Yards:
a. The front yard shall be a minimum of 25 feet in depth measured from the front lot line.
b. Where lots have double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
c. In those instances where lots front on only one of the intersecting streets within the same block, the corner lot shall maintain a front yard setback, as set out in "a" above, on that street upon which other lots front, and the setback on the other intersecting street may be reduced to not less than 15 feet.

2. Side Yards: There shall be a side yard on each side of the principal residential building which shall have a width of not less than five feet, and all other permitted and conditional uses shall provide a minimum of 25-foot setback.

3. Rear Yards: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller.

 

G. PARKING REGULATIONS 

1. Residences: Two parking spaces.

2. Churches: One parking space for each four seats based upon the maximum designed seating capacity, including choir lofts.

3. Elementary, junior high and equivalent parochial and private schools: Two for each classroom.

4. High schools, colleges, universities and other similar public or private institutions of higher learning: Eight parking spaces for each classroom, plus one space for each two employees.

5. Stadiums, gymnasiums and auditoriums: One parking space for each 3.5 seats based on the designed seating capacity.

?Article V. District Use Regulations

 

Article VI. Non-Conformances

 
Sec. 31-95. Non-Conforming Uses of Land.

?

Where, on November 16, 1981, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

1. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land to an extent greater the 25% of the total area of land occupied or used at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.

2. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, except as in compliance with "1" above.

3. If any such nonconforming use of land is discontinued (see definition) for any reason, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in which such land is located.

4. A nonconforming use must continue in substantially the same form.

5. All intensity of use, height, yard, parking, etc., regulations shall conform in all respects for the district in which it is located when making any enlargement, increase or extension as permitted in "1" above.


Sec. 31-96. Nonconforming Structures.

Where a lawful structure exists on November 16, 1981, that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

1. No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity to an extent greater than 25% of the total area of the structure occupied or used at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.

2. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration of a nonconforming building partially or completely destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or act of the public enemy, subsequent to November 16, 1981, or prevent the continuance of the use of such building or part thereof, as such use existed at the time of such destruction of such building or part thereof, or prevent a change of such existing use under the limitations provided herein, provided an
application for a building permit to rebuild said structure is filed with the City of Marshall within six (6) months from the date said structure is destroyed and provided that new construction is completed and occupied within 18 months from the date of the issuance of the building permit.

3. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved.


Sec. 31-97. Nonconforming Uses of Structures.


If a lawful use of a structure, or of a structure and premises in combination, exists on November 16, 1981, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

1. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located, shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structures altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district which it is located, or as permitted under Section 31-95(1) and/or Section 31-95(2).

2. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such buildings.

3. If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use providing that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use and that the proposed nonconforming use is not substantially different from the existing use. Any proposed changes shall be approved by a majority of the members of the City Council, present and voting, provided that if any person residing within two
hundred and fifty (250) feet of the property upon which such use is situated shall make his or her written remonstrance then the approval for the operation of such a use may be permitted only by a two-thirds vote of the members of the Council present and voting.

4. When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned (see definitions), the structure or structure and premises in combination shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located.

5. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination; removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land unless said removal or destruction is by fire or natural disaster in which case reconstruction will be permitted as provided under Section 31-95(1) and/or Section 31-95(2).


Sec. 31-98. Change of Property to More or Less Restrictive Classification.


A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use or more restricted nonconforming use, may not thereafter be changed back to a less restricted use than that to which it was changed. If any property is hereafter transferred to a more restricted district by change in the district boundaries. or the regulations and restrictions in any district are made more restrictive or a higher classification by amendment to this chapter, the provisions of this chapter relating to the nonconforming use of buildings or premises existing on November 16, 1981, shall apply to buildings or premises occupied or used at the time of passage of such amendment.Sec. 31-99. Repairs and Maintenance.

On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repairs or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing.

Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety upon order of such official.


Sec. 31-100. Extension of Existing Buildings, Time Limitation.


The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to prevent the extension of any building existing in any district on the date of the passage of this ordinance to the height to which the walls, foundation and framework on such existing building originally were intended, designed and constructed to carry; provided, however, that the actual construction of the extension in height permitted by this section shall have been duly commenced within ten (10) years from said date.


Secs. 31-101 thru 119. RESERVED

?
Article V. District Use Regulations

Sec. 31-84. District AH - Airport Hazard District

?

A. INTENT It is hereby found that an airport hazard endangers the lives and 

property users of Airports within the City of Marshall and property or occupants of land in its vicinity, and in effect reduces the size of the area available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of said Airports and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared:

1. That the creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public nuisance.

2. That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety and general welfare that the creation or establishment of airport hazards be prevented.

3. That the prevention of these hazards should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation. Districts now existing or hereafter created shall be known and may be cited at "Airport Hazard Zoning District" - "AH".

 

B. DEFINITIONS As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires:

1. AIRPORT - Any airport now existing or hereafter crated within the City of Marshall.


2. AIRPORT ELEVATION - The highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level.

 

3. AIRPORT HAZARD - Any structure or object of natural growth located on or in the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near such airport, which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or takeoff at such airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or take-off of aircraft.

 

4. STRUCTURE - An object constructed or installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.

 

5. TREE - Any object of natural growth.

 

6. NONCONFORMING USE - Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Section or an amendment thereto.

 

7. HEIGHT - For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in the Section and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.

 

8. PERSON - An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or governmental entity. It includes a trustee, receiver, assignee or similar representative of any of them.

 

9. RUNWAY - A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.

 

10. VISUAL RUNWAY - A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan, a military service's approved military airport layout plant or by any planning document submitted to the FAA by competent authority.

 

11. UTILITY RUNWAY - A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less.

 

12. NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway having anexisting instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on an FAA planning document or military service's military airport planning document.

 

13. PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System(ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an FAA planning document or military service's military airport planning document.

 

14. PRIMARY SURFACE - A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.

 

15. HELIPORT PRIMARY SURFACE - The area of the primary surface coincides in size and shape with the designated landing and takeoff area of a heliport (runway). This surface is a horizontal plane at the elevation of the established heliport elevation.

 

16. STOL PRIMARY SURFACE - An imaginary plane, 300 feet wide, centered on the runway, its length extends 100 feet beyond each runway end. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.

 

17. APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL,HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES - These zones apply to the area under the approach, transitional, horizontal and conical surfaces defined in Sections 3 and 4.

 

C. AIRPORT ZONES There are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the approach zone, transitional zones, horizontal zones and conical zones as they apply to a particular airport. An area located in more than one (1) of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. 
The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
AH (1) Utility Runway Visual Approach and Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is determined by the applicable distance in feet based on the primary surface width as set forth in FAR part 77, as amended. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 

AH (2) Runway Larger Than Utility With Visual Approach and Visibility Minimum As Low as 3/4 Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone - The inner degree of the approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide, The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
AH (3) Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide, The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
AH (4) Heliport Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 300 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,400 feet at horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the primary surface.
AH (5) Fixed Wing Transitional Zones - These zones are hereby established as the area beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and upward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional zones for those portions of the precision approach zones which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach zones and at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
AH (6) Heliport VFR and IFR Transitional Zones - These zones extend outward from the sides of the primary surface and a portion of the sides of the approach zones a horizontal distance of 250 feet from the primary surface centerline and the extended primary surface centerline.
AH (7) Horizontal Zone - The horizontal zone is hereby established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for all runways designated utility or visual, and 10,000 feet radii for all other runways from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to hose arc. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones.
AH (8) Conical Zone - The conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward there from a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The conical zone does not include the precision instrument approach zones and the transitional zones.

D. AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS Except as otherwise provided in this section, no structure shall be erected, altered or maintained and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this Section to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:

1. Utility Runway Visual Approach and Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone
AH (1) - Slopes upward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.

2. Runway Larger than Utility with Visual Approach and Visibility Minimum as
Low as 3/4 Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone AH (2) - Slopes upward thirty-four (34) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.

3. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone AH (3) - Slopes upward fifty (50) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline, thence slopes upward forty (40) feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.

4. Heliport Approach Zones AH(4) - Slopes upward eight (8) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end and at the same elevation as the primary surface, and extending t a distance of 4,000 feet along the extended primary surface centerline.

5. Fixed Wing Transitional Zones AH (5) - Slopes upward and outward seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a
height of 150 feet above the airport elevation. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping upward and outward seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at he sides and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, height limits sloping upward and outward seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically shall be maintained beginning at the sides and at the same elevation as precision instrument runway approach surface,
and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline.

6. Heliport Transitional Zones AH (6) - Slopes upward and outward two (2) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and a portion of the sides of the approach and
extending a distance of 250 feet measured horizontally from and at 90 degree angles to the primary surface centerline and Heliport approach zone centerline.

7. Horizontal Zone AH (7) - One hundred and fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation.

8. Conical Zone AH (8) - Slopes upward and outward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred and fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred and fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation.

Where an area is covered by more than one (1) height limitation, the more re
strictive limitation shall prevail.

E. USE RESTRICTIONS Not withstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this Ordinance in such a manner as to created electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.

F. NONCONFORMING USES
1. Regulations not Retroactive - The regulations prescribed by this section shall not be constituted to require the removal, lowering or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this Ordinance, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and is diligently prosecuted.

2. Marking and Lighting - Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator for the City of Marshall, to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the City of Marshall.

Secs. 31-85 thru 94. RESERVED.

Article V. District Use Regulations

Sec. 31-84. District AH - Airport Hazard District

?

A. INTENT It is hereby found that an airport hazard endangers the lives and 

property users of Airports within the City of Marshall and property or occupants of land in its vicinity, and in effect reduces the size of the area available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of said Airports and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared:

1. That the creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public nuisance.

2. That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety and general welfare that the creation or establishment of airport hazards be prevented.

3. That the prevention of these hazards should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation. Districts now existing or hereafter created shall be known and may be cited at "Airport Hazard Zoning District" - "AH".

 

B. DEFINITIONS As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires:

1. AIRPORT - Any airport now existing or hereafter crated within the City of Marshall.


2. AIRPORT ELEVATION - The highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level.

 

3. AIRPORT HAZARD - Any structure or object of natural growth located on or in the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near such airport, which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or takeoff at such airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or take-off of aircraft.

 

4. STRUCTURE - An object constructed or installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.

 

5. TREE - Any object of natural growth.

 

6. NONCONFORMING USE - Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Section or an amendment thereto.

 

7. HEIGHT - For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in the Section and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.

 

8. PERSON - An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or governmental entity. It includes a trustee, receiver, assignee or similar representative of any of them.

 

9. RUNWAY - A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.

 

10. VISUAL RUNWAY - A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan, a military service's approved military airport layout plant or by any planning document submitted to the FAA by competent authority.

 

11. UTILITY RUNWAY - A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less.

 

12. NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway having anexisting instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on an FAA planning document or military service's military airport planning document.

 

13. PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System(ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an FAA planning document or military service's military airport planning document.

 

14. PRIMARY SURFACE - A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.

 

15. HELIPORT PRIMARY SURFACE - The area of the primary surface coincides in size and shape with the designated landing and takeoff area of a heliport (runway). This surface is a horizontal plane at the elevation of the established heliport elevation.

 

16. STOL PRIMARY SURFACE - An imaginary plane, 300 feet wide, centered on the runway, its length extends 100 feet beyond each runway end. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.

 

17. APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL,HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES - These zones apply to the area under the approach, transitional, horizontal and conical surfaces defined in Sections 3 and 4.

 

C. AIRPORT ZONES There are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the approach zone, transitional zones, horizontal zones and conical zones as they apply to a particular airport. An area located in more than one (1) of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. 
The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
AH (1) Utility Runway Visual Approach and Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is determined by the applicable distance in feet based on the primary surface width as set forth in FAR part 77, as amended. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 

AH (2) Runway Larger Than Utility With Visual Approach and Visibility Minimum As Low as 3/4 Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone - The inner degree of the approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide, The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
AH (3) Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide, The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
AH (4) Heliport Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 300 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,400 feet at horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the primary surface.
AH (5) Fixed Wing Transitional Zones - These zones are hereby established as the area beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and upward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional zones for those portions of the precision approach zones which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach zones and at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
AH (6) Heliport VFR and IFR Transitional Zones - These zones extend outward from the sides of the primary surface and a portion of the sides of the approach zones a horizontal distance of 250 feet from the primary surface centerline and the extended primary surface centerline.
AH (7) Horizontal Zone - The horizontal zone is hereby established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for all runways designated utility or visual, and 10,000 feet radii for all other runways from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to hose arc. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones.
AH (8) Conical Zone - The conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward there from a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The conical zone does not include the precision instrument approach zones and the transitional zones.

D. AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS Except as otherwise provided in this section, no structure shall be erected, altered or maintained and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this Section to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:

1. Utility Runway Visual Approach and Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone
AH (1) - Slopes upward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.

2. Runway Larger than Utility with Visual Approach and Visibility Minimum as
Low as 3/4 Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone AH (2) - Slopes upward thirty-four (34) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.

3. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone AH (3) - Slopes upward fifty (50) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline, thence slopes upward forty (40) feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.

4. Heliport Approach Zones AH(4) - Slopes upward eight (8) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end and at the same elevation as the primary surface, and extending t a distance of 4,000 feet along the extended primary surface centerline.

5. Fixed Wing Transitional Zones AH (5) - Slopes upward and outward seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a
height of 150 feet above the airport elevation. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping upward and outward seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at he sides and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, height limits sloping upward and outward seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically shall be maintained beginning at the sides and at the same elevation as precision instrument runway approach surface,
and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline.

6. Heliport Transitional Zones AH (6) - Slopes upward and outward two (2) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and a portion of the sides of the approach and
extending a distance of 250 feet measured horizontally from and at 90 degree angles to the primary surface centerline and Heliport approach zone centerline.

7. Horizontal Zone AH (7) - One hundred and fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation.

8. Conical Zone AH (8) - Slopes upward and outward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred and fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred and fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation.

Where an area is covered by more than one (1) height limitation, the more re
strictive limitation shall prevail.

E. USE RESTRICTIONS Not withstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this Ordinance in such a manner as to created electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.

F. NONCONFORMING USES
1. Regulations not Retroactive - The regulations prescribed by this section shall not be constituted to require the removal, lowering or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this Ordinance, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and is diligently prosecuted.

2. Marking and Lighting - Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator for the City of Marshall, to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the City of Marshall.

Secs. 31-85 thru 94. RESERVED.

?

Article V. District Use Regulations

Sec. 31-74. District R-1 - Single Family Residential District

A. INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT  The"R-1" Single Family District is established for the purpose of single-family dwelling and to allow certain public facilities. It is intended that no use be permitted in this district that will tend to devaluate property for residential purposes or interfere with the health, safety, order or general welfare of persons residing in the district. Regulations are intended to control density of population and to provide adequate open space around buildings and structures in the district to accomplish these purposes.

B. DISTRICT REGULATIONS In District "R-1", no structure or land shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged, which is arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the uses listed in the Use Regulations.

C. USE REGULATIONS 

1. Single family dwellings.

 

2. Public parks and recreation areas and community buildings owned and operated by a public agency.

 

3. Church plants and synagogues (not permitted in converted residential building or structure in this district, unless they are in full compliance with the building code for such use).

 

4. Reserved.

 

5. Public or parochial schools, elementary, jr. high and high schools and private schools with equivalent curriculum.

 

6. Accessory buildings and uses.

 

7. Home occupations, only within the principal residential structure.

 

8. Golf courses, except miniature and pitch and putt golf courses and driving tees operated for commercial purposes.

 

9. A private stable will be allowed on a lot having an area of more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, provided that it is located not less than one hundred (100) feet from the front lot line, but not less than thirty (30) feet from any side or rear lot line. On such lots there shall not be kept more than one horse, pony or mule for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area, and one cow for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area. Twenty-five (25) fowl shall be permitted for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area. No such fowl shall be kept or housed nearer than one hundred (100) feet to the front lot line, or thirty (30) feet from any side or rear lot line. City ordinances of Chapter 5 shall apply.

 

10. The Planning Commission may, by special use permit, authorize the following exceptions subject to such conditions as the Board deems necessary to include, but not restricted to, proper setbacks, landscaping, screening, fencing, maintenance provisions and other similar requirements.


a. Any public building erected or land used by any department of the City, County, State or Federal Government.

 

b. Telephone exchange, electric substations, cable T.V. or other similar public utilities.

 

c. Cemetery or crematory.

 

d. Group day care home and day care center.

 

e. Tourist Home.

 

f. Hospitals. (Amended 7/3/89 Ordinance No. 6416)

 

g. Offices and office buildings, including offices for abstractors, accountants, actuaries, attorneys, doctors, physicians and other similar professionals; storage in bulk or warehouse for such materials as computers, computer related high-tech products, computer software and dry prepackaged nonperishable products: telemarketing; telecomputing; distribution of computers, computer related high-tech products, computer software and dry prepackaged nonperishable products; so long as parcels are shipped from the premises only by United Parcel Service, Federal Express or United States Mail; Provided, however, that this special use may be granted only with respect to a building previously used as a hospital for not less than 25 years with no intervening use inconsistent with this special use; Provided further that no materials shall be stored outside the confines of the structures existing on the land as of the date the special use permit is granted; Provided further that the special use permit shall specify the parking regulations for the affected property; and Provided further that the structures existing on the premises as of the date the special use permit is granted shall not be expanded upward or outward, and no new structures shall be constructed on the premises.(Amended 10/26/92 Ordinance No. 6658)
h. Masonic Meeting Halls. (Amended 12/7/87 by Ordinance No. 6299)

 

D. INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS Every building or portion of building hereafter erected or altered for residence purposes in District "R-1" shall provide a lot area of not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet per family, provided that where a lot has less square feet than herein required in separate ownership as of November 16, 1981, but not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet, this regulation shall not prohibit the erection of a one family dwelling. Where a public or community sewer is not available and in use for the disposal of all sanitary sewerage, each lot shall provide no less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet per family. Every lot shall have a minimum frontage of sixty (60) feet on a street. No parabolic (dish) antenna shall be located in the front yard or side yard. (Amended 12/7/87 by Ordinance No. 6299)

E. HEIGHT REGULATIONS No building shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height.

F. YARD REGULATIONS 

1. Front Yards:?


a. The front yard shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in depth measured from the front lot line. However, where the frontage upon the same side of a street between intersecting streets is occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings having front yards of greater depth than are required by this chapter, no other lot upon the same side of such street between such intersecting streets shall be occupied by a building with a front yard of less that the least depth of any such existing front yards, unless by permission of the Board of Adjustment. This shall not be deemed to require a front yard of more than one hundred (100) feet.

 

b. Where lots have double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.

 

c. In those instances where lots front on both intersection streets within the same block, no building on a corner lot shall project more than five (5) feet in front of the building line established for buildings fronting on the intersecting street.



2. Side Yards:
There shall be a side yard having a width of not less than five (5) feet as measured from the outer projection on each side of the principal residential building and all other permitted and conditional uses shall provide a five (5) foot side yard.

3. Rear Yards :
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet or thirty (30%) percent of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller.

G. PARKING REGULATIONS The following number of off-street parking spaces are required in District "R-1" for the following uses:

1. Single family: Two spaces per dwelling unit.

2. Churches: One parking space for each six seats based upon the maximum designated seating capacity, including choir lofts.

3. Elementary, junior high and equivalent parochial and private schools: Two for each classroom.

4. High schools, colleges, universities and other similar public or private institutions of higher learning: Eight parking spaces for each classroom plus one space for each two employees.

5. Stadiums, auditoriums or gymnasiums: One parking space for each 3.5 seats based upon the maximum designated seating capacity.

Article V. District Use Regulations

Sec. 31-75. District R-2 - Residential District

A. INTENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICT The "R-2" Residential District is established for the purpose of residential control and to allow certain public facilities. It is intended that no uses be permitted in this district that will tend to interfere with the health, safety, order or general welfare of persons residing in the district or to devaluate property for residential purposes. Regulations are intended to control density of population and to provide adequate open space around buildings and structures in the district to accomplish these purposes.

B. DISTRICT REGULATIONS In District "R-2", no structure or land shall be used, and no structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged, which is arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the uses listed in the Use Regulations.

C. USE REGULATIONS

1. Single family dwellings.

2. Public parks and recreation areas and community buildings owned and operated by a public agency.

3. Church plants and synagogues (not permitted in converted residential building or structure in this district, unless they are in full compliance with the building code for such use).

4. Accessory buildings and uses.

5. Public or parochial schools, elementary, junior high and high schools and private schools with equivalent curriculum.

6. Group day care homes under the following regulations:


a. That such uses shall be permitted only if the rear yard in which the home would operate meets the minimum requirements of this section and is enclosed with a suitable fence.

 

b. That such uses are located in the dwelling used by the operator as his or her private residence.

 

c. That no assistant other than a member of the family household is employed.

 

d. That no advertising or identification sign shall be placed on the premises.
 

 

7. Home occupations (permitted in attached accessory buildings or principal residential structures).

8. Golf courses, except miniature and pitch and putt golf courses and driving tees operated for commercial purposes.

9. Duplexes. (Amended 2/2/04 by Ordinance No. 7512)
(A) Two-family Town Home as a permitted use, with regulations as follows:

a. Each lot containing a Two-family Town Home shall have at least fifty (50) feet of frontage on a street for each single-family dwelling.
b. Each lot containing a Two-family Town Home shall have at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of lot area for each single-family dwelling.
c. Each lot containing a Two-family Town Home shall have a front yard and two side yards with setbacks in compliance with Section 31-75(F); or a front yard, rear yard and one side yard with setbacks in compliance with Section 31-75(F). 

 

10. A private stable will be allowed on a lot having an area of more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, provided that it is located not less than one hundred (100) feet from the front lot line, not less than thirty (30) feet from any side or rear lot line, On such lots there shall not be kept more than one horse, pony or mule for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area, and one cow for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area. Twenty-five (25) fowl shall be permitted for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area. No such fowl shall be kept or housed nearer than one hundred (100 feet to the front lot line, or thirty (30) feet from any side or rear lot line. City ordinances of Chapter 5 shall apply.

11. The Planning Commission may, by special use permit, authorize the following exceptions subject to such conditions as the Commission deems necessary to include, but not restricted to, proper setbacks, landscaping, screening, fencing, maintenance provisions and other similar requirements. 

 

a. Any public building erected or land used by any department of the City, County, State or Federal Government.


b. Telephone exchange, electric substations, cable T.V. or other similar public utilities.


c. Apartments with three or more dwelling units.

d. Boarding and lodging houses.

e. Dormitories or institutional housing.

f. Funeral homes.

g. Cemeteries.

h. Day care centers.

i. Non-profit institutions.

j. Nursing homes.

k. Tourist homes.

l. Hospitals. (Amended 7/3/89 Ordinance No. 6416)

m. Stadiums, Gymnasiums and Auditoriums

n. Recreational areas.

 

 

D. INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS 
Lot Area Per Family . Every building or portion of building hereafter erected or structurally altered for residential purposes in District "R-2" shall provide a lot area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet per family in single family dwellings, eight thousand (8,000) square feet per two family dwelling and 2,500 square feet per family in three (3) or more family dwellings with a minimum of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet, provided that where a lot has less area than herein required, in separate ownership, but not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet at the time of the passage of this article, this regulation shall not prohibit the erection of a one family dwelling. Where a public or community sewer is not available and in use for disposal of all sanitary sewerage, each lot shall provide not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet per family, Each lot shall have at least fifty (50) feet of frontage on a street. No parabolic (dish) antenna shall be located in the front yard or the side yard. (Amended 12/7/87 by Ordinance No. 6299)

E. HEIGHT REGULATIONS No building shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height.

F. YARD REGULATIONS 

1. Front Yards:


a. The front yard shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in depth measured from the front lot line. However, where the frontage upon the same side of a street between intersecting streets is occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings having front yards of greater depth than are required by this chapter, no other lot upon the same side of such street between such intersecting streets shall be occupied by a building with a front yard of less than the least depth of any such existing front yards, unless by permission of the Board of Adjustment. This shall not be deemed to require a front yard of more than one hundred (100) feet.

 

b. Where lots have a double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.

 

c. In those instances where lots front on both intersecting streets within the same block, no building on a corner lot shall project more than five (5) feet in front of the building l ine established for buildings fronting on the intersecting street.



2. Side Yards :
There shall be a side yard on each side of the principal residential building, equal to one-fourth (1/4) of the building height but not less than five (5) feet as measured from the outer projection, and all other permitted and conditional uses shall provide a minimum twenty-five (25) foot setback.

3. Rear Yards:
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet or thirty (30%) percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller.

 

 

G. PARKING REGULATIONS: The following number of off-street parking spaces are required in District "R-2" for the following uses:

1. Single family and two family units: Two spaces per dwelling unit.

2. Three or more dwelling unit apartments: Two spaces per dwelling unit.

3. Churches: One parking space for each six seats based upon the maximum
designed seating capacity, including choir lofts.

4. Elementary, junior high and equivalent parochial and private schools: Two for each classroom.

5. High schools, colleges, universities and other similar public or private institutions of higher learning: Eight parking spaces for each classroom, plus one space for each two employees.

6. Hospitals: One parking space for each two beds, plus one parking space for each resident or staff doctor, plus one space for each two employees based on the largest working shift in any 24 hour period.

7. Lodges, non-profit institutions or other similar buildings: One parking space for each three seats based on the designed maximum seating capacity.

8. Boarding or lodging houses: One parking space for each three sleeping rooms or fraction thereof.

9. Nursing homes, rest homes or similar uses: One parking space for each five beds based on the designed maximum capacity of the building, plus one parking space for each employee based on the largest working shift in any 24 hour period.

10. Funeral homes: One parking space for each four seats based on the designed maximum capacity of the parlor(s), plus one additional parking space for each employee and each vehicle maintained on the premises.

11. Stadium, gymnasiums and auditoriums: One parking space for each 3.5 seats based on the designed seating capacity.

Article V. District Use Regulations

Sec. 31-75a. District R-3 - Low Density Multi-Family Dwelling District.

A. INTENT 

District "R-3", is intended primarily to accommodate non-elevator residential development at a medium density. The principal use of land is for townhouses and garden apartment buildings in convenient relation to outlying major thoroughfares and outlying business centers. This district would also include recreational, religious and educational uses necessary to provide a balanced residential area.

B. DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

In district "R-3", no structure or land shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the uses listed in the Use Regulations.

C. USE REGULATIONS 

1. Low density multi-family dwelling units subject to the intensity of use regulations.

2. Public parks and recreation areas and community buildings owned and operated by a public agency.

3. Church, plants and synagogues (not permitted in converted residential buildings or structures in this district, unless they are in full compliance with the building code for such use).

4. Accessory buildings and uses.

5. Public or parochial schools, elementary, junior high and high schools and private schools with equivalent curriculum.

6. Family day care homes and group day care homes under the following regulations:


a. That such uses shall be permitted only if the rear yard in which the home would operate meets the minimum requirements of this section and is enclosed with a suitable fence.

 

b. That such uses are located in the dwelling used by the operator as his or her residence.

 

c. That no assistant other than a member of the family household is employed.

 

d. That no advertising or identification sign shall be placed on the premise.

 

 

7. Home occupations (permitted in attached accessory buildings or principal
residential structures).

8. Any use permitted in Section 71-35 (C) of the Zoning Code of Ordinances.

D. INTENSITY OF USE REGULATIONS 
1. Maximum lot area per dwelling unit:
Single Family---------------------------------------------------6,000 s.f./d.u.
Two Family-----------------------------------------------------4,000 s.f./d.u.   (8,000 s.f. minimum lot size)
Multi-Family----------------------------------------------------2,500 s.f./d.u.   (9,000 s.f. minimum lot size)

2. Minimum lot width: 60 feet.

3. No parabolic (dish) antenna shall be located in the front yard or side yard. (Amended 12/7/87 by Ordinance No. 6299)

E. HEIGHT REGULATIONS 
1. Maximum structure height: 45 feet or 2 1/2 stories (Whichever is smaller)

Exception: Buildings containing three stories may be occupied for residential purposes in the downhill or lower portion provided at least fifty percent (50%) of the area of the lower story's exterior walls are exposed to outside light and air entirely above grade and said exterior walls contain windows and doors permitting the entrance of daylight and outside air. The main entry to such building shall be located at mid-level so that no occupant shall be required to traverse more than one story of stairs from the main building entrance to the highest or lowest occupied story, Approval shall be given by the Zoning Administrator upon submittal of preliminary site and building plans.

F. YARD REGULATIONS 
1. Minimum Front Yards:
The minimum front yard requirements shall be the same as required in all other residential districts.

2. Side Yards:
a. Interior side yards 8 feet.
b. Where the side yard fronts on a street, the required front yard setback shall be provided.

3. Rear Yards: 
Minimum rear yard 25 feet.

G. MINIMUM BUILDING FLOOR AREA 
1. Single Family Residences: 
One Bedroom------------------------700 s.f.
Two Bedroom-----------------------750 s.f.
Three Bedroom--------------------- 850 s.f.

2. Duplex: 
For Each Side-----------------------700 s.f.

3. Multi-Family: 
Senior Citizen and (Amended 10/19/87 Ordinance No. 6288)
Efficiency---------------------------- 500 s.f.
One Bedroom------------------------600 s.f.
Two Bedroom----------------------- 700 s.f.
Three Bedroom----------------------850 s.f.

H. PARKING REGULATIONS 
1. All dwelling units: 1 1/2 spaces per dwelling unit except efficiency apartments and senior citizen one-bedroom apartments which shall have one space per unit. (Amended 10/19/87 (Efficiency apartments shall have one space.) Ordinance No. 6288)

2. Churches: One parking space for each six seats based upon the maximum designated seating capacity, including choir lofts.

3. All other uses will be the same as the "R-2" zoning district requirements.


Chapter 33 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 7856, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 2008, enacted stormwater management regulations as Ch. 33. The city has made these regulations available in booklet form and has elected not to set them out in this Code.

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1967 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1967 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1967 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequently thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
SectionSection
this Code1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-4 1-5 1-9 1-6 1-7 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-10 1-10 2-44 1-112-43 2-1 2-42 2-2 2-41 2-32-2 2-62-51 2-72-52 2-82-53 2-92-34 2-102-316 2-317, 2-318 2-320 2-112-319 2-122-321 2-138-31 2-148-32 2-158-33 2-16 2-360 2-232-16 2-242-18 2-252-19 2-26 2-20 2-27 2-21 2-28 2-26 2-29 2-27 2-30 2-28 2-31 2-29 2-32 2-30 2-33 2-31 2-34 2-32 2-352-33 3-1 3-113-2 3-133-3 3-123-4 3-143-5 3-154-2 4-20 4-49 4-3 4-19 4-50 4-4 4-49 4-54-18 4-48 4-64-34 4-74-52 4-19 4-26 4-61 4-20 4-27 4-62 4-214-29, 4-30 4-65 4-224-31 4-234-32 4-67 4-244-35 4-254-36 4-70 4-27 4-63 4-28 4-64 4-29 4-66 4-31 4-4 5-1, 5-2 6-2 5-36-1 5-76-4 5-86-6 5-96-7 5-116-3 5-126-8 5-236-21 5-256-22 5-266-23 5-276-24 5-286-25 5-296-26 5-306-27 5-326-28 5-336-29 5-346-30 5-356-31 5-366-32 5-486-465-496-475-506-485-536-475-546-495-556-505-566-515-576-525-586-465-58.16-5 5-58.26-5 5-606-535-616-546-1 29-316 6-2 29-335 6-3 29-336 6-4 29-337 6-5 29-338 6-6 29-340 6-7 29-341 6-8 29-342 6-9 29-343 6-10 29-344 6-11 29-345 6-12 29-339 6-13 29-346 6-14 29-317 6-15 29-318 6-16 29-319 6-17 29-320 6-18 29-321 6-19 29-322 6-20 29-323 6-21 29-8 6-22 29-324 6-23 29-325 6-24 29-326 6-25 29-327 6-26 29-329 6-27 29-330 6-28 29-328 6-29 29-331 6-30 29-332 7-17-11 7-1.17-12 7-27-137-326-18 7-87-147-1825-1 7-1925-12 7-2025-1 7-2125-13 7-2225-14 7-2325-15 7-2425-167-2525-177-26 25-188-128-66 8-228-67 8-328-68 8-428-69 8-528-70 8-628-71 8-728-72 8-828-73 8-928-74 8-1028-75 8-11 28-76 8-12 28-77 8-13 28-788-14 28-79 8-15 28-80 8-16 28-81 8-17 28-82 8-18 28-83 8-19 28-84 8-20 28-85 8-21 18-3 9-1 8-11 9-2 8-12 9-38-13 9-48-14 9-58-15 9-68-16 9-78-17 9-98-18 9-108-19 9-118-20 9-12, 9-138-21 9-148-21 10-1 10-1 10-3 10-2 10-910-3 10-1010-4 10-1210-5 10-1310-6 10-2410-16 10-2510-17 10-2610-18 10-2710-19 10-2810-20 10 1/2-19-1 10 1/2-119-16 10 1/2-129-17 10 1/2-139-19 10 1/2-149-20 10 1/2-159-21 10 1/2-169-22 10 1/2-179-23 10 1/2-189-24 10 1/2-199-2 11-1-11-5 11-21 11-5.111-2-11-9 11-6 2-16 11-7 2-17 11-8 11-5 11-1311-10 11-1411-1 12-017-26 12-1 7-31 12-2 7-32 12-3 7-33 12-4 7-34 12-5 7-35 12-6 7-41 12-6.17-42 12-8 7-43 12-9 7-44 12-10 7-45 12-11 7-46 12-12 7-56 12-13 7-57 12-14 7-58 12-15 7-59 12-16 7-60 13-1 2-331 13-2 2-332 13-3 2-333 13-42-334 13-52-341 13-62-342 13-72-343 13-82-344 13-92-345 13-102-346 13-112-347 13-132-348 13-142-349 13-152-335 13-232-356 13-242-357 13-252-358 13-262-359 14-1 12-41 14-2 12-42 14-1014-37 14-1312-1 14-1412-2 14-1518-19 14-17 12-3 14-2812-16 14-2912-17 14-3012-18 14-3112-19 14-3212-20 14-3312-21 14-3412-22 14-3512-23 14-36 12-24 14-3912-26 14-4012-27 14-4112-28 14-4212-29 14-4712-25 15-1 13-1 15-3 13-2 15-1113-21 15-1213-2215-1313-2315-1413-2415-1513-2515-16 13-2615-17 13-2815-18 13-2815-19 13-2915-20 13-2015-21 13-3115-22 13-3215-23 13-3315-24 13-3415-2513-3515-2613-3615-2713-3715-2813-3815-2913-3915-3013-4115-3113-4115-3213-4216-1 14-1, 14-2 16-2 14-16 16-3 14-17 16-4 14-18 16-5 14-19 16-6 14-20 16-7 14-21 16-8 14-22 16-9 14-23 16-11 14-36 17-1-17-5 17-1 17-615-1 17-715-2 17-1015-3 17-23 15-16 17-2415-17 17-2515-18 17-2615-19 17-2715-20 17-2815-21 17-2915-22 17-3015-23 17-3115-24 17-42 17-1 17-43 17-1 17-44-17-46 17-417-4717-2 17-517-4817-1 17 1/2-1 7-126 7-127 17 1/2-2 7-128 17 1/2-3 7-129 18-1 28-11 18-2 28-12 18-3 28-13 18-5 28-14 18-628-15 18-728-16 18-828-17 18-928-18 18-1028-19 18-1128-19.5 18-1228-20 18-1328-21 18-1428-22 18-1528-24 18-16 28-23 18-31 5-1 18-32 5-16 18-12924-11 18-13024-12 18-131 24-13 18-132 24-14 18-133 24-15 18-134 24-16 18-135 24-17 18-14620-1 18-14720-2 18-14820-16 18-14920-17 18-15020-19 18-15120-18 18-15220-20 18-15320-21 18-154, 18-15520-3 18-15620-4 18-15720-5 18-16821-1 18-16921-2 18-17021-16 18-17121-17 18-17221-18 18-18428-56 18-18528-57 18-18628-58 18-18728-59 18-18828-60 18-19124-26 18-19224-36 18-19324-37 18-19424-38 18-19524-39 18-19624-40 18-19724-27 19-1 17-1 19-2 17-2 19-3 17-3 19-4 17-419-5 17-519-6 17-619-1717-21 19-1817-22 19-1917-23 19-2017-2419-21 17-2519-22 17-2619-23 17-2719-24 17-2820-1 18-31 20-2 18-87 20-3 18-135 20-4 18-135 20-5-20-7.1 18-82 20-7.24-2 20-918-20 20-1118-2 20-1218-4 20-1318-5 20-1418-48 20-1518-48 20-16 18-1 20-17 18-16 20-18 26-17 20-20 18-17 18-21 20-21 18-85 20-2218-58 20-2318-101 20-2418-101 20-24.118-44 20-2518-84 20-2618-86 20-2818-49 20-2918-102 20-3018-103 20-5518-116 20-56-20-5818-122 18-125 20-5918-116 20-6018-132 20-6218-135 20-6318-135 20-6518-133 20-6618-132 21-52-66 21-18 2-66 21-192-67 21-202-68 21-212-69 21-222-70 21-232-71 21-242-72 21-252-73 21-262-74 21-372-81 21-382-82 21-392-83 21-402-84 21-412-85 2-100 21-422-101 21-432-86 21-442-87 21-472-96 21-482-97 21-492-98 21-502-99 21-512-85 2-100 21-522-102 21-532-103 21-542-104 21-552-105 21-722-10621-732-117 21-742-118 21-752-119 21-762-120 21-772-121 21-782-122 21-902-131 21-912-132 21-922-133 21-932-134 21-1042-141 21-1052-142 21-1062-143 21-1072-144 21-1082-145 21-1092-146 21-1102-147 21-1212-152 21-1222-151 21-1232-153 21-1242-154 21-1252-155 21-1262-156 21-1372-162 21-1382-162 21-1392-163 21-1402-164 21-1412-165 21-1422-166 21-1432-167 21-1992-286 21-2002-287 21-2012-289 21-2022-289 21-2032-290 21-2062-296 22-119-1 22-219-3 22-319-4 22-419-5 22-619-6 22-1019-7 22-1119-8 22-1219-2 22-20 19-21 22-21 19-22 22-22 19-23 22-23 19-25 22-24 19-24 22-25 19-26 22-26 19-27 22-27 19-28 22-28 19-29 22-29 19-30 23-1 7-76 23-2 7-77 23-3 7-78 23-4 7-116 24-122-16 22-46 24-222-17 24-322-18 24-422-19 24-522-20 24-622-21 24-722-22 24-822-23 24-922-24 24-1022-25 24-11 22-26 24-12 22-27 24-13 22-28 24-14 22-29 24-15 22-30 24-16 22-31 24-17 22-32 24-18 22-33 24-19 22-34 24-20 22-35 24-3022-47 22-49 22-50 24-3122-47 24-3222-48 24-3322-51 24-3422-52 24-3522-53 24-36 22-54 24-4722-66 22-67 24-4822-68 24-4922-69 24-5022-70 24-5122-71 25-1 23-1 25-2 23-2 25-3 23-3 25-4 23-4 25-523-5 25-623-6 26-1 26-1 26-2 26-2 26-3 26-16 26-4 26-20 26-5 26-19 26-6 26-21 26-7 26-22 26-8 26-23 26-9 26-24 26-1026-3 26-1229-7 29-15 26-1326-25 26-1426-4 26-1526-26 26-16 26-27 26-17 26-28 26-19, 26-20 26-29 26-21 26-30 26-22 26-31 26-23 26-32 26-26 29-365 26-27 29-82 29-327 26-28 26-33 26-29 26-34 26-30 26-35 26-31 26-36 26-32 26-37 26-33 26-38 26-4326-51 26-4426-52 26-4526-53 26-4626-54 26-4726-55 26-4826-56 26-4926-56.5 26-5026-57 26-51 26-58 26-6226-66 26-6326-67 26-6426-68 26-66 26-69 26-67 26-70 26-68 26-71 26-69 26-72 26-70 26-73 26-71 26-74 26-72 26-75 26-8326-86 26-8426-87 26-8526-88 26-86 26-89 26-87 26-90 26-88 26-91 26-89 26-92 26-90 26-93 26-91 26-94 26-92 26-95 26-93 26-96 26-10426-106 26-10526-107 26-106 26-108 26-107 26-109 26-108 26-110 26-109 26-111 26-110 26-112 26-111 26-113 26-112 26-114 26-113 26-115 27-1 27-1 27-2 27-2 27-3, 27-4 27-3 27-527-4 27-1527-16 27-16 27-17 27-17 27-18 27-18 27-19 27-19 27-20 27-20 27-21 27-21 27-22 27-22 27-23 27-23 27-24 27-24 27-25 27-25 27-26 27-26 27-27 27-27 27-28 27-28 27-29 27-29 27-30 27-3927-41 27-4027-42 27-41 27-43 27-42 27-44 27-43 27-45 27-44 27-46 27-45 27-47 27-46 27-48 27-47 27-49 27-48 27-50 27-49 27-51 27-50 27-52 27-51 27-53 27-52 27-54 28-3 29-30 28-429-3 29-71 29-317 29-367 28-16 29-177 28-17 29-178 28-19 29-96 28-20 29-161 29-162 28-21 29-116 28-22 29-138 28-23, 28-24 29-149 28-2529-5 28-2629-199 28-2729-200 28-2829-214 29-216 28-3029-218 29-221 28-4129-71 28-42, 28-4329-72 28-4429-73 28-45, 28-4629-96 28-4729-97 28-4829-98 28-4929-99 28-5029-106 28-5129-101 28-5329-204 28-5429-107 28-5529-102 28-56 29-137 28-57 29-146 28-58 29-358, 29-359 28-59 29-9 28-60 29-366 28-72 29-206 28-73 29-201 28-74 29-220 28-75 29-202 28-76 29-266-29-270 28-8929-200 29-1930-21 29-2030-22 29-2130-23 29-2230-24 29-2330-25 29-2430-26 29-2530-27 29-26 30-28 29-27 30-29 29-28 30-30 29-29 30-31 29-30 30-32 29-31 30-33 29-32 30-34 29-33 30-35 29-34 30-36 29-35 30-37 29-36 30-38 29-37 30-39 29-38 30-40 29-39 30-41 29-40 30-42 29-41 30-43 29-74 30-82 29-75 30-83 29-76 30-8429-77 30-8529-78 30-8629-79 30-8729-80 30-8829-81 30-88.529-82 30-8929-83 30-9029-84 30-9129-85 30-8629-86 30-9229-8730-9329-8830-9429-8930-9529-96 30-10629-97 30-10729-98 30-10829-99 30-10929-100 30-11029-10830-12129-10930-12229-11030-12329-11130-12429-11330-12529-11430-12629-11530-12730-1 31-1 30-231-2 30-331-3 30-431-4 30-531-5 30-628-24 30-731-6 30-831-7 30-931-8 30-1031-930-1131-1030-1231-1130-1331-1230-1431-1330-1531-1430-1631-1530-1731-1630-1831-1730-29 31-3430-30 31-3130-31 31-3230-32 31-3330-33 31-3530-34 31-3630-35 31-3730-36 31-3830-37 31-3930-38 31-4030-39 31-4130-40 31-4230-41 31-4430-42 31-43 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1967 Code, which are listed herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1967 Code, a table of which immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance
NumberAdoption
DateSectionSection
this Code9812-21-5417 29-205 45832-6-6731-5 55734-7-80129-427 229-246329-428 56008-4-80116-1 216-26 16-46 316-2 416-27 616-28 16-49 716-31 16-50 816-47 16-48 916-30 1016-33 16-51 1116-52 1216-35 1316-54 14 16-29 15 16-6 16-7 16-8 16-9 16-10 16 16-11 17 16-12 18 16-4 19 16-5 20 16-14 21 16-13 22 16-34 23 16-32 24 16-34 16-53 25 16-3 56048-18-8012-96 22-97 32-100 42-103 52-105 56058-18-80122-29 56139-2-80229-202 28-8629-237 28-8729-236 28-8829-238 28-9029-198 28-9129-239 28-9229-240 28-9329-241 28-9429-242 28-110 29-251 28-111 29-25228-112 29-25328-113 29-25428-114 29-25528-115 29-256 28-116 29-257 56149-2-80I12-17 562610-6-80112-17 562710-6-80129-226 564011-17-80112-17 565012-3-80120-1 565212-15-8017-66 27-67 37-68 47-69 56702-17-811(13-132)2-366 1(13-133)2-367 1(13-134)2-368 1(13-135)2-369 1(13-136)2-370 1(13-137)2-371 1(13-138)2-372 56712-17-811(24-30)22-47 1(24-30)22-49, 22-50 1(24-32)22-48 1(24-33)22-51 1(24-34)22-52 56854-20-8112-51 57036-15-8114-64 57087-1-811(22-31)19-42 1(22-32)19-43 1(22-33)19-44 57097-1-8112-32323-323.132-323.257228-3-81128-24 57238-3-8117-1827-1937-2047-2157349-21-81129-237 222-18 57369-21-81214-48 314-49 414-50 514-51 614-52 714-53 814-54 914-55 1014-56 1114-57 1214-58 1314-59 14 14-60 15 14-61 16 14-62 17 14-63 18 14-64 19 14-65 20 14-66 21 14-67 22 14-68 574510-19-81112-51 212-52 312-53 412-54 512-55 612-56 576312-7-811, 22-323.157722-1-8213-1157732-1-82128-19.5 57783-1-8219-24 57864-5-8217-27 58208-2-82112-20 58279-7-82112-68 212-69 312-70 412-71 612-72 712-73 583310-4-822-926-38 584010-18-82114-23 214-36 58592-7-83129-228 29-227 58725-16-83129-226 58765-16-831-618-64 58988-1-83130-82 230-83.5 330-84430-86530-87630-88730-88.58-2030-8921 30-89.1-30-89.522 30-9023-25 30-9126 30-9627 30-97-30-10228 30-933030-11131 30-11233 30-1213430-1223530-1233730-1243930-12540, 4130-1264230-12759018-15-83218-84 59048-15-831(103/4-1)2-3221(103/4-2)2-322.11(103/4-3)2-322.21(103/4-4)2-322.31(103/4-5)2-322.41(103/4-6)2-322.51(103/4-7)2-322.61(103/4-8)2-322.759099-6-83130-1 593212-5-8318-22 59391-16-841     Rpld22-35 212-27 59472-21-84114-1, 14-2 32-1 42-51 56-2(b) 9Ch. 2, Div. 10(note) 102-161 59573-19-84222-21 59583-19-8417-141 47-142 59714-17-8412-141-2-149 59885-21-841     Rpld3-11-3-152     Added3-1-3-8 59936-4-8417-59 60077-16-841, 230-11360128-6-8412-367 60148-6-841-49-36-9-39 60168-20-84112-81-12-89 60178-20-84122-18 60209-4-8417-11 2-117-12 60219-4-8417-76 2-107-76.160229-4-8417-151 2-4, 77-152 60259-17-8412-17 60279-17-841, 27-26 60289-17-8416-47(a)603410-15-8417-27 604412-3-84112-41 212-43 3     Rpld12-1, 12-3 412-4-12-15.3, 29-85, 29-86 604712-17-841     Rpld2-141-2-147 32-1 46-30 56-47(a), 6-48628-68, 28-72, 28-76, 28-82 728-81(4) 8, 928-13, 28-14 1028-16 1128-18 60511-7-85122-24, 22-25 60562-4-85130-44 60572-4-851-8, 25, 26 Adopting Ordinance, p. ix92-51, 2-1 102-85(16) 11     Rpld2-86 122-87 132-100(2) 14 2-101 15 2-349 16 4-66(5) 17 11-6 18 11-7 19 17-1(2) 20 18-86 21 22-33 22 31-6(5) 23 28-1-28-3 24 31-50-31-5860592-4-85127-4(a) 60633-4-85126-5, 26-6 60653-4-85122-30-22-31 60815-6-85117-42-17-44 60835-6-85114-68 61028-5-85122-35 61078-19-851-102-141-2-150 11     Rpld2-141-2-149 61139-3-85122-21(f) 61452-3-86131-1361523-3-861-530-11461583-17-86118-64(e), (f) 61767-7-861     Rpld26-32 61807-21-86126-59 61817-21-8612-367(2)-(6) 61827-21-86122-27 61969-15-861     Rpld17-1-17-6 2     Added17-1-17-3 3     Rpld17-21-17-28 4     Added17-21-17-23 517-44(b) 622112-1-86117-3(b), 17-23(b), 17-44(b) 6246 3-16-871-530-1036256 5-18-871-419-6.1 6264 6-15-87119-5 6270 8- 3-87112-27 6272 8-17-87112-70(a) 6274 8-17-871     Added30-44 4     Rpld30-44 628510- 5-871, 226-51 6338 6-20-88129-1 229-164-29-168 636010-17-8812-42 636511- 7-88 3     Rpld2-346 636611- 7-88 110-3 6382 1-17-891     Added7-76 2     Rpld7-76,7-76.1 3     Added7-76.16383 1-17-891     Added7-151 2     Rpld7-151,7-152 3     Added7-152 6384 1-17-891     Added7-11 2     Rpld7-11-7-14 3     Added7-12 6385 1-17-891     Added7-141 2     Rpld7-141,7-142 3     Added7-142 6389 2- 6-891     Added12-41 2     Rpld12-41,12-43 3, 4     Added12-43 6422 8-21-89118-87 6429 9-18-89131-136468 5- 7-90129-6 229-8 6471 5-21-9014-49(a) 6492 9-17-901     Rpld31-13      Rpld31-14650411-19-90114-23(c), (d), (e) 214-36(4) 650712- 3-901-13Ch. 7, Art. X 7-170-7-182 6528 4- 1-9117-61, 7-99 7-103      Rpld7-78 6542 6-17-9119-16 29-17 39-20 49-22 59-24(8) 6559 9- 3-91118-1 6560 9- 3-91112-43 658212-16-9117-26 658312-16-91112-41 312-43 412-43 658412-16-9117-76 37-76.1658512-16-911Ch. 7, Art. IX 7-166 37-167 658612-16-9117-11 27-12 658712-16-9117-151 37-152 6592 1-16-921Ch. 7, Art. VIII 7-160 6676 2- 1-9312-1 22-42 32-51 42-81 52-83 62-85 7Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4(tit)82-96 92-98 102-100(1) 112-96-2-105, 2-347,2-349, 2-358,2-367, 26-54,26-59 122-144 132-155(10) 14 2-161 15 2-297 16      Rpld Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 4, 2-322-2-322.717      Rpld Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 4 2-223-2-323.218 2-332 19 2-333 20      Rpld 2-344 21 2-370 22 4-49(a) 23 6-23 24      Rpld 6-24, 6-25 25      Rpld 7-18-7-2126 14-20 27 23-2 28 26-58 29 28-57 3028-58 31 28-69 32 28-75 33 29-71 3429-239 3529-251 36     Rpld29-252-29-2553729-257 38     Rpld29-331 3929-335 4029-336 41     Rpld29-337 4229-340 43     Rold29-341 4429-343 4529-344 4629-345 4729-346 4831-9(b)6678 2-16-93113-3 214-23 314-36 42-373 531-13631-146679 2-16-9317-160 6683 3- 1-93129-47 6703 6-21-9314-49(a) 24-66 6711 7-19-93118-1 6714 7-21-931     Rpld30-121-30-1272     Added30-1216716 8-16-931     Added28-61 6718 8-16-93114-16(c), (f) 2     Rpld14-16(e) 314-23 6721 9- 7-931     Added30-111(c)673310-25-931     Rpld25-1, 25-11-25-18 2     Added25-1-25-4,
25-11-25-15,
25-21-25-25,
25-31-25-35 673411- 1-93110-3(5) 2     Added10-3(6) 6746 2- 7-94225-1-25-4, 25-11-25-15, 25-21-25-25, 25-31-25-35 6769 6- 6-9417-116, 7-117,
7-119(a) 680710-17-94114-23 682011- 7-941, 27-26 682111- 7-94112-41 3, 612-43 682211- 7-9417-76 3, 57-76.1682311- 7-9417-166 3, 57-167 682411- 7-9417-11 3, 57-12 682511- 7-9417-151 3, 57-153682611- 7-9417-160 6851 3- 6-9517-116, 7-117 6852 3- 6-9512-335 6853 3- 6-95129-228 6890 6-19-95118-19 6897 8- 7-9512-51 691310- 2-95130-34(a) 6957 6- 3-9617-170-7-182 217-1(7) 3     Rpld17-3, 17-23, 17-44 4     Added17-616960 6- 3-961, 27-166 3, 57-167 6975 8-19-961-13     Rpld11-1-11-9      Added11-1-11-12 6976 8-19-96129-48 6979 9- 3-96127-49 6982 9-16-96128-66 228-68 3     Rpld28-70 4     Amd28-71(b) 528-78, 28-79 628-79 728-82 828-83 928-84(a) 7019 2-18-97128-19 7020 2-18-971, 27-151 3, 57-152 7021 2-18-971, 27-76 3, 57-77 7022 2-18-971, 27-11 3, 57-12 7023 2-18-971, 212-41 3, 4, 612-43 7027 3- 3-971     Rpld29-228 2     Rnbd29-229      as29-228 429-1 529-229 629-230 729-231 7037 2-21-97128-67 7040 5- 5-971     Rpld6-1-6-8, 6-21-6-32, 6-46-6-542     Added6-1-6-19, 6-21-6-36 7062 9-15-971, 211-1 707410- 6-971     Rpld30-81, 30-82, 30-84-30-103,30-106-30-114,30-121707610-20-97129-1 709012-15-97125-21 7093 1- 5-981-419-51 5, 619-52, 19-53 7103 3-16-98118-105, 18-106 7104 3-16-98122-19 714210- 5-9816-2(x) 26-5.1[2] 7175 5- 3-001-47-26 7182 5- 3-9912-298-2-305 7194 7- 6-99129-220 722711- 1-991, 228-21(c), (d) 7251 3- 6-00130-37 7267 7-17-001-42-306-2-309 7321 6- 4-0117-11 3, 57-12 7322 6- 4-01112-41 3, 612-43 412-44 7323 6- 4-0117-151 3, 57-152 7324 6- 4-011, 37-107, 7-108 7325 6- 4-0117-166 3, 57-167 7326 6- 4-0117-76 3, 57-76.17327 6- 4-0117-160 37-1627336 7-16-011-42-306-2-309 7339 7-16-01129-1 229-229 329-230 7341 8- 6-01112-27 7342 8- 6-01127-18 7386 3-25-0212-296(c) 7388 4-15-02122-35 7403 7-15-021-42-306-2-309 7444 2-18-03116-2 7447 3-17-03130-24, 30-30-30-36, 30-38, 30-40, 30-42-30-44 2     Rpld30-39 7460 5-19-03129-198, 29-199, 29-205(b)(6), (c)(2), 29-207, 29-210-29-212 7473 7-21-031-42-306-2-309 7482 8-18-031-1030-131-30-140 7484 9- 2-0314-49 749811- 3-031-57-26 7521 3-15-041     Rpld7-101 2     Amd7-103 7532 4-19-0417-12 7533 4-19-0417-42 7534 4-19-0417-77 7535 4-19-0417-152(note) 7536 4-19-0414-61(a)(3) 24-66(7) 7550 7-19-041-42-306-2-309 7590 1-18-0517-107 27-108 7591 1-18-0517-166 27-167 7592 1-18-0517-160 27-161 7593 1-18-0517-151 27-152 7594 1-18-0517-76 2     Rpld7-76.1, 7-77      Added7-77 7595 1-18-0517-201 27-202 7596 1-18-05112-41 212-43 312-44 7597 1-18-0517-221 27-222 7598 1-18-0517-11 27-12 7606 3- 7-05125-14(5), (9) 7612 3-21-05118-22 7613 3-21-051-628-101-28-121 7624 6- 6-0514-66 7629 7-18-051-42-306-2-309 7633 7-18-0512-3227636 8- 1-05110-21 766011-21-0512-296(b) 7672 2- 6-0612-51 7685 4-17-061, 228-56 7694 7-17-061-42-306-2-309 7726 1-16-071, 230-34 7728 2- 5-071     Rpld31-1-31-17, 31-31-31-44,31-50-31-58     Added31-1-31-8 7731 2- 5-071-828-12 928-18(6) 10     Rpld28-19.54     Amd28-24 7739 4-16-071, 27-107, 7-108 7740 4-16-071, 27-166, 7-167 7741 4-16-071, 27-160, 7-161 7742 4-16-071, 27-151, 7-152 7743 4-16-071, 27-76, 7-77 7744 4-16-071, 27-201, 7-202 7745 4-16-071, 212-41, 12-43 7746 4-16-071, 27-221, 7-222 7747 4-16-071, 27-11, 7-12 7748 4-16-071, 27-26 7752 5- 7-07125-24 7761 7-16-071-42-306-2-309 779112-17-07112-52.1 212-54 7820 6-16-08128-17 7825 7-21-081-42-306-2-307 7836 9-15-08122-18, 22-21, 22-67, 22-68 784510-20-081-39-16-9-18 4, 59-20, 9-21 69-24(l) 785512- 1-08126-7-26-9 785612- 1-081Ch. 33(note) 7884 6-15-0916-2 26-5.1 7886 7- 6-09118-22 7899 7-20-091-42-306-2-309 790510- 5-09128-24 228-67 790610- 5-0914-61(5)-(7) 2, 34-66 7922 2- 1-10 128-17 228-24(6) 7926 3- 1-10 1, 27-107, 7-108 7928 3-15-101, 27-76, 7-77 7929 3-15-101, 27-166, 7-167 7930 3-15-101, 27-201, 7-202 7931 3-15-101, 27-221, 7-222 7932 3-15-101, 27-11, 7-12 7934 4- 5-101, 27-151, 7-152 7935 4- 5-10112-41 212-43 312-44 7936 4- 5-101, 27-160, 7-161 7937 4- 5-101, 2, 47-26 7940 4- 5-1017-58 27-98, 7-99 37-102 7951 7-19-101-42-306-2-309 792611-15-10114-23 8005 7-18-111-42-306-2-309 8011 9- 6-11 119-9 8014 9-19-1117-175 8035 2-6-12110-3(7) 8057 7-16-121-42-306-2-309 8058 7-16-1217-160 2     Added7-161(f)-(h) 312-41 4     Rnbd12-43(f) as (g)      Added12-43(f) 8060 8- 6-12 1     Rpld13-21-13-42 2     Added13-21 807811-19-12129-266-29-270 2     Added29-271 808812-17-12Art. 1, §§ A-C7-241-7-243 Art. 2, §§ A-G7-244-7-250 Art. 3, §§ A-D7-261-7-264 Art. 4, §§ A-E7-271-7-275 Art. 5, §§ A-G7-281-7-287 Art. 67-251 Art. 77-252 Art. 87-254 Art. 107-253 8090 1- 7-1317-271(h) 8103 3-18-13118-102 8110 4-15-0314-61(a)(8), (9) 24-66(15), (16) 8122 8- 5-131-42-307-2-310 813610- 7-131     Rpld24-11-24-17      Added24-11-24-22 228-4813710- 7-131     Added12-45 813810- 7-131     Added10-3(8) 8167 7- 7-141-42-306-2-309 8170 8- 4-14117-1(7) 217-2 3     Added17-3 4     Rpld17-22 8222 7- 6-15 1-42-306-2-309 8224 7- 15 122-67 8233 8- 3-1517-11 27-12 8234 8- 3-1517-221 27-222 8235 8- 3-151, 2     Rpld7-141, 7-142      Added7-141, 7-142 8236 8- 3-15112-41 212-43 312-44 8237 8- 3-1517-201 27-202 8238 8- 3-1517-151 27-152 8239 8- 3-1517-76 27-77 8240 8- 3-1517-107 27-108 8241 8- 3-1517-167 27-168 8242 8- 3-1517-160 27-161 8243 8- 3-151, 2, 47-26  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
RSMo
Section Section
this Code1.0201-2 1.020(6)1-2 1.020(10)1-2 1.020(11)1-2 1.020(12)1-2 1.020(17)1-2 1.0301-2 1.0401-2 1.0501-2 32.05728-120 Ch. 44Ch. 8(note) 8-12 8-15 8-21 44.080Ch. 8, Art. II(note) 44.080(3)8-21 44.0908-18 44.110(1)8-19 44.1158-16 70.22028-109 70.600Ch. 12, Art. III, Div. 12, Subdiv. III (note)70.7052-297 70.7302-297 71.010Ch. 2(note) 71.370Ch. 13(note) 71.520Ch. 30(note) 71.610Ch. 28, Art. II(note) 71.640Ch. 12, Art. IV, Div. 2(note)71.680Ch. 14(note) Ch. 15(note) 71.690Ch. 14(note) 71.74018-3 71.780Ch. 17(note) 75.541Ch. 22, Art. II(note) Ch. 77Ch. 2(note) 77.0302-16 ch. 11, Art. II(note) 77.040Ch. 11(note) 11-1 77.0602-17 77.080Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 3(note)77.100Ch. 2, Art. II(note) 77.110Ch. 2, Art. II(note) 77.190Ch. 12(note) 77.2302-34 77.260Ch. 2, Art. II(note) 7-241 Ch. 15(note) 77.270Ch. 2, Art. II Div. 3(note)77.3202-34 77.330Ch. 2, Art. II(note) Ch. 2, Art. III(note) Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3(note)Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 9(note) Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 10(note) 77.340Ch. 2, Art. II(note) Ch. 2, Art. III(note) Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2(note)2-161 22-29 77.350Ch. 15(note) 77.370Ch. 2, Art. III(note) Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 8(note) Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 5(note)Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 6(note)Ch. 10, Art. II(note) 77.370(2)Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 6(note)77.380Ch. 2, Art. III(note) Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3(note)Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 5(note)Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 6(note)Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 8(note) 77.390Ch. 2, Art. III(note) Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3(note)Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 5(note)Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 6(note)Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 8(note) Ch. 2, Art. IIII, Div. 1O(note)2-19 2-153 2-161 77.410Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3(note)77.420Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3(note)77.440Ch. 2, Art. II(note) Ch. 2, Art. III(note) Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3(note)77.450Ch. 2, Art. IIII, Div. 5(note)Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 6(note)Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 8(note) 77.460Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 3(note)77.470Ch. 2, Art. II(note) Ch. 2, Art. III(note) 77.480Ch. 2, Art. III(note) 77.500Ch. 7(note) 77.510Ch. 6(note) Ch. 6, Art. II(note) 6-4 6-4677.520Ch. 5(note) Ch. 26(note) 77.530Ch. 17(note) 77.540Ch. 23(note) 23-4 Ch. 13(note) Ch. 17(note) 17-3 17-23 77.570Ch. 12, Art. IV (note)Ch. 18(note) 77.5901-10 85.541-85.57122-16 85.541(1)22-18 85.541(2)Ch. 22, Art II(note) 85.541(2)(2)22-19 22-24 85.541(2)(3)22-24 85.541(2)(5)22-29 22-30 85.57122-17 Ch. 88Ch. 26, Art. II(note) 88.533Ch. 26, Art. IV(note) 88.832Ch. 30, Art. III(note) Ch. 89Ch. 32(note) 89.1107-283 89.410Ch. 27(note) Ch. 90Ch. 19(note) 90.520Ch. 19, Art. II(note) 19-21 19-22 90.53019-23 19-26 90.54019-24 19-25 90.55019-1 19-27 19-28, 19-29 90.56019-30 Ch. 91Ch. 30(note) 91.450Ch. 30, Art. II(note) 94.010Ch. 28(note) 94.110Ch. 5(note) Ch. 13, Art. II(note) Ch. 20(note) 20-18 Ch. 21, Art. II(note) Ch. 23, Art. II(note) Ch. 24, Art. III(note) Ch. 28, Art. II(note) Ch. 31(note) 94.38428-102 Ch. 95Ch. 2, Art. V(note) 95.295-95.305Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 5(note) 95.315Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 3(note) Ch. 96Ch. 15(note) 98.330Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 6(note) 98.340Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 6(note) Ch. 99Div. 6(note)Ch. 7, Art. V(note) 7-129 105.350Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 12, Subdiv. II(note) 105.370Ch. 12, Art. III, Div. 12, Subdiv. II(note) 105.430Ch. 12, Art. III, Div. 12, Subdiv. II(note) 105.4542-307 105.4582-307 105.4872-308 106.220Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2(note) Ch. 111Ch. 11(note) Ch. 11511-1 115.00111-1 115.07711-9 115.11511-5 115.12111-3 115.12311-2 115.12511-6 115.13311-4 115.34711-7 115.44711-8 115.62911-10 Ch. 122Ch. 11(note) Ch. 149Ch. 28, Art. III(note) 150.380Ch. 20(note) 20-1 150.39020-16 150.390(2)20-18 20-20 150.470Ch. 20(note) 20-1 150.48020-16 150.50020-18 Ch. 196Ch. 13(note) 196.19013-42196.23013-42196.23513-42196.24013-42196.24513-42196.25013-42196.26513-42209.15029-300 Ch. 2114-17 4-47 Ch. 213Ch. 9(note) 213.100Ch. 9, Art. II(note) 226.500Ch. 25(note) 226.650Ch. 24, Art. III(note) Ch. 25210-3 260.200Ch. 14, Art. III(note) 260.200-260.24514-19 Ch. 2696-8 Ch. 2706-4 Ch. 296Ch. 9(note) Ch. 300Ch. 29(note) 300.01029-1 300.01529-26 300.02029-27 300.02529-36 300.03029-414 300.03529-37 300.04029-38 300.05029-40 300.06029-28 300.06529-41 300.07029-29 300.07529-30 29-31 300.08029-4 300.08529-3 300.09029-6 300.09529-2 300.10029-75 300.10529-121 300.11029-411 300.11529-412 300.12029-411 29-412 300.12529-413 300.130Ch. 29, Art. IV(note) 29-177 300.13529-176 300.14029-178 300.14529-179 300.15029-180 300.15529-181 300.16029-182 300.16529-183 300.17029-184 300.17529-185 300.18029-186 300.18529-7 300.19029-7 29-79 300.19529-42 29-43 300.20029-44 300.21029-105 300.21529-146 300.22029-150 29-151 300.22529-149 300.23029-152 300.23529-148 300.24029-161 300.24529-162 300.25029-163 300.26029-116 300.26529-117 300.27029-118 300.27529-119 300.28029- 120 300.28529-122 300.29029-79 300.30029-85 300.30529-86 300.31029-284 300.31529-283 300.32029-282 300.32529-281 300.33029-82 300.33529-84 300.34029-10 300.34529-83 300.35029-8 300.35529-8 1 300.36529-80 300.37029-291 300.37529-135 29-292 29-293 300.38029-294 300.38529-295 300.39029-296 300.39529-297 300.40029-299 300.40529-298 300.41029-301 300.41529-201 300.42029-214 29-215 300.42529-216 300.43029-217 300.43529-3 97 300.44029-2 05 300.44529-203 300.45029-208 300.45529-213 300.46029-207 300.46529-211 300.47029-210 300.47529-209 300.48029-212 300.48529-218 300.49029-218 300.49529-219 300.50029-219 300.50529-221 300.51029-222 29-233300.51529-224 300.52029-196 300.52529-197 300.53029-199 300.53529-200 300.54029-200 300.54529-198 300.55029-5 300.55529-35 300.56029-58 300.56529-59 300.57029-60 300.57529-32 300.58029-33 300.58529-34 300.59029-34 300.59529-46 301.25029-356 302.01029-71 302.02029-367 Ch. 30329-48 303.024.429-48 303.22029-48 303.23029-48 303.24029-48 304.01029-72 304.01129-106 304.01529-76 304.01629-130-29-134 304.01729-136 304.01929-78 304.03029-124 304.03529-125 304.04429-1 304.05029-137 304.08029-300 304.120Ch. 29(note) Ch. 29, Art. III,
Div. 2(note)304.15029-225 304.155     Ch. 17, Art. II(note) 29-230 304.15629-230 304.16029-15 304.17029-366 304.18029-366 304.25029-365 304.34129-147, 29-148 304.35129-119, 29-123 Ch. 305Ch. 3(note) 305.170     Ch. 3, Art. II(note) Ch. 307     Ch. 29, Art. IX(note) 307.01029-12 307.01529-364 307.020Ch. 29, Art. IX,
Div. 2(note)
29-376 307.04029-378, 29-379 307.04529-377 307.05029-380 307.05529-381 307.06029-382 307.06529-383 307.07029-384 307.07529-385 307.08029-386 307.08529-387-29-389 307.09029-390 307.09529-392, 29-394 307.10029-391, 29-395 307.10529-393 307.11529-398 307.12529-396 307.14031-7 307.17029-357, 29-358 29-359, 29-360-29-363307.18329-328 307.18529-329 307.18829-317 307.19029-321 Ch. 311Ch. 4(note) Ch. 4, Art. III(note)311.0204-1 311.050Ch. 4, Art. III,
Div. 2(note)311.0604-63 311.0804-64 311.0974-61 311.180-311.2004-66 311.2004-61 311.2154-66(9) 311.220Ch. 4, Art. III,
Div. 2(note)
4-66 311.2404-67 311.2504-69 311.2904-49 311.2984-49 311.3004-3 311.3104-50 311.3204-47 311.3254-48 311.3504-51 311.4704-46 311.4824-61 311.580(2)4-52 Ch. 312Ch. 4(note) Ch. 4, Art. II(note)
4-36 312.0104-1 312.0304-26 312.0404-28 312.0504-34 312.0804-27 312.1004-31 312.1104-29, 4-32 312.1304-35 312.140Ch. 4, Art. II,
Div. 2(note)
4-31 312.2374-36 312.3904-16 312.4004-19 312.4054-17 312.4074-18 312.4104-20 Ch. 314Ch. 9(note) Ch. 318     Ch. 5, Art. II(note) Ch. 320Ch. 12(note) 320.110     Ch. 12, Art. IV(note) Ch. 321Ch. 12(note) Ch. 3226-47324.240 et seq.16-2 367.011     Ch. 23, Art. II(note) 367.011 et seq.24-13, 24-15 Ch. 387Ch. 23(note) 387.64029-125 Ch. 388Ch. 23(note) Ch. 389Ch. 23(note) 389.61023-1, 23-2 Ch. 479Ch. 10(note) 479.020     Ch. 10, Art. II(note)
10-16 479.26010-3 488.502610-3(7) Ch. 53628-117 542.30110-21 Ch. 566Ch. 18(note) 560.06518-46 560.12018-48 560.17529-13 560.3806-6 563.6706-6 563.6806-6 Ch. 565     Ch. 18, Art. III(note)565.07018-31 565.09018-32 Ch. 566     Ch. 18, Art. VII(note)566.13018-116 Ch. 567     Ch. 18, Art. VII(note)

Ch. 18, Art. VII,

Div. 3(note)567.01018-131 567.02018-132 567.03018-133 567.04018-143567.08018-135 Ch. 569     Ch. 18, Art. IV(note) 569.06018-45 569.09018-47 569.14018-44 Ch. 570     Ch. 18, Art. IV(note)
Ch. 18, Art. IV,
Div. 2(note)570.02018-57 570.03018-58 570.05018-59 570.06018-60 570.07018-61 570.08018-62 570.10118-56 570.11018-63 570.12018-64 570.13018-65 570.14018-66 570.15018-67 570.16018-68 570.17018-69 Ch. 571     Ch. 18, Art. V(note)
Ch. 18, Art. VI(note)571.03018-102, 18-103 Ch. 572     Ch. 18, Art. VII(note) Ch. 573     Ch. 18, Art. VII(note)
Ch. 18, Art. VIII,
Div. 2(note)573.01018-121 573.03018-122 573.04018-123 573.05018-124 573.06018-125 573.07018-126 Ch. 574     Ch. 18, Art. V(note) 574.01018-82 574.02018-83 574.03018-81 574.05018-85 574.06018-86 Ch. 575     Ch. 18, Art. II(note) 575.08018-19 575.1101-8 575.12018-18 575.15018-17 575.16018-17 575.19518-20 575.23018-21 Ch. 576     Ch. 18, Art. II(note) Ch. 577     Ch. 18, Art. V(note)
Ch. 18, Art. VI(note)577.01029-73 577.02029-74 577.03029-74 577.05029-74 577.08029-229 577.10018-104 577.15018-49 590.100-590.180     10-4(5) 620.200     Ch. 2, Art. IV,
Div. 3(note) 
