Chapter 100
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 100.010. General Penalty Provisions. [R.O. 2007 §100.010;
Ord. No. 1808 §3, 4-5-1990; Ord. No. 5084 §1, 10-12-2006; Ord. No.
6296 §1, 1-12-2017]
A. Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City, or in any rule,
regulation, notice, condition, term or order promulgated by any officer
or agency of the City under authority duly vested in him/her or it, any
act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense or
misdemeanor or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any
act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision
of this Code or any such ordinance, rule, regulation, order or notice
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00)
or by imprisonment not to exceed three (3) months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
Exceptions:
1. In any case wherein the penalty for an offense is fixed by a Statute
of the State, the statutory penalty, and no other, shall be imposed
for such offense.
2. The Court shall only sentence a person to confinement for a
violation: (i) involving alcohol or controlled substances, (ii)
endangering the health or welfare of others, or (iii) for eluding or
giving false information to a law enforcement officer.
3. The punishment of a "minor traffic violation" as defined by Section
479.350, RSMo., shall be subject to the following provisions:
a. The maximum fine and court costs that can be imposed for the
violation of any minor traffic violation shall be two hundred
twenty-five dollars ($225.00).
b. Court costs shall be assessed against such person unless the
court finds that the defendant is indigent.
4. The punishment of a municipal ordinance violation for which
penalties are authorized by Section 67.398, RSMo., (nuisances),
Section 71.285, RSMo., high grass and weeds and litter and debris
nuisances), or Sections 89.120 and 89.490, RSMo., (zoning
violations) shall be subject to the following provisions:
a. The maximum fine and court costs that can be imposed for
such violation shall be:
(1) For the first violation within any 12-month period of time:
two hundred dollars ($200.00).
100:1
Section 100.011. Equitable Relief. [R.O. 2007 §100.011; Ord. No.
5084 §1, 10-12-2006]
In addition to any other remedies or penalties established for violations of
any ordinance or Code Section or any rule, regulation, notice, condition,
term or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the City under duly
vested authority, the City Official responsible for the enforcement of such
ordinance, Code Section, rule, regulation, notice, condition, term or order
may, on behalf of the City and after approval by the City Administrator,
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for such legal or equitable relief
as may be necessary to enforce compliance with such ordinance, Code
Section, rule, regulation, notice, condition, term or order. In such action the
court may grant such legal or equitable relief including, but not limited to,
mandatory or prohibitory injunctive relief as the facts may warrant. Upon
(2) For the second violation within any 12-month period of
time: two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00).
(3) For the third violation within any 12-month period of time:
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
(4) For the fourth and any subsequent violation within any
12-month period of time: four hundred fifty dollars
($450.00).
b. Court costs shall be assessed against such person unless the
court finds that the defendant is indigent.
5. A person shall not be placed in confinement for failure to pay a fine
unless such non-payment violates terms of probation or unless the
due process procedures mandated by Missouri Supreme Court Rule
37.65 or its successor rule are strictly followed by the Court.
B. Except where otherwise provided, each and every day any violation of
this Code or any ordinance of the City or any rule, regulation, order or
notice promulgated by any officer or agency of the City under authority
duly vested in him/her or it shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by an amendment thereof,
or by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall
extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding or abetting of
another person to do said act. Whenever any act is prohibited by this
Code, an attempt to do the act is likewise prohibited.
D. In case of the amendment by the City Council of any Section of such
Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as
provided in Subsection (A) of this Section shall apply to the Section as
amended or, in case such amendment contains provisions for which a
penalty other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in
another Section in the same Chapter, the penalty so provided in such
other Section shall be held to relate to the Section so amended, unless
such penalty is specifically repealed therein.
Section
100.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
100.011
100:2
the successful prosecution of any such action, the City may be awarded by
the court reasonable attorney fees as allowed by law.
Section 100.012. Restrictions On Delinquent Applicants. [R.O. 2007
§100.012; Ord. No. 5084 §1, 10-12-2006]
A. For the purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
APPLICANT — An individual or a corporation, firm, partnership, joint
venture, association, organization or entity of any kind, including any
shareholder, owner, officer, partner, joint venturer or member of such
entity or any other person holding an ownership interest in such entity
requesting any City permit, license, franchise or other approval.
RELATED PERSON OR ENTITY —
RELEVANT LAW —
A firm, partnership, joint venture, association, organization or
entity of any kind in which the applicant holds any stock, title or
other ownership interest of at least twenty percent (20%);
1.
A firm, partnership, joint venture, association, organization or
entity of any kind which holds any stock, title or other ownership
interest in the applicant of at least twenty percent (20%); or
2.
An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
organization or entity of any kind whose affairs the applicant has
the legal or practical ability to direct, either directly or indirectly,
whether by contractual agreement, majority ownership interest,
any lessor ownership interest, familial relationship or in any other
manner.
3.
Any Statute or regulation of the United States or the State of
Missouri,
1.
Any ordinance or Municipal Code provision of the City or any rule,
regulation, notice, condition, term or order promulgated by any
officer or agency of the City under duly vested authority of the City,
or
2.
Any final judgment or order of any court of competent jurisdiction
when a Statute, ordinance, Municipal Code provision, rule,
regulation, notice, condition, term, order or judgment at issue
regulates conduct or conditions germane to the issuance of the
requested permit, license, franchise or other approval as provided
by the applicable ordinance or Municipal Code provision of the City.
3.
B. In enforcing or administering the ordinances of the City, no permit,
license, franchise or approval of any kind shall be granted to any
applicant if the applicant or a related person or entity is charged with or
in violation of any relevant law until such time as the applicant or the
Section
100.011
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
100.012
100:3
Section 100.015. Construction of Ordinances. [Ord. No. 5408 §1,
1-8-2009]
related person or entity resolves the pending charge or comes into
compliance with the relevant law.
C. In acting on any new application or on any reapplication by an applicant
whose prior permit, license, franchise or other approval has been
denied, suspended, revoked or forfeited, the reviewing or enforcement
officer may consider past violations of relevant law by the applicant or a
related person or entity in considering whether to issue the permit,
license, franchise or approval requested by the applicant. Taking into
account the nature and character of the permit, license, franchise or
other requested approval in question and the need for the City to rely
on representations and/or future conduct by the applicant when acting
pursuant to the permit, license, franchise or other requested approval
by the City, the reviewing or enforcement officer may deny the
application or reapplication if the past violations of relevant law are
reasonably recent in time and of such character or magnitude as to
reasonably call into question the fitness of the applicant or the City's
ability to rely on representations and/or future conduct by the
applicant.
D. If a permit, license, franchise or other approval has been denied,
suspended, revoked or forfeited, the applicant may not submit a new
application for one (1) year from the date of the denial, suspension,
revocation or forfeiture unless the reviewing or enforcement officer
finds that substantial new facts or a change in circumstances warrant
reconsideration; provided however, that if the ordinances governing the
particular permit, license, franchise or other approval in question
prescribe a different disqualification period, those ordinances shall
govern.
E. Any aggrieved applicant may appeal the decision of the reviewing or
enforcement officer to the City Administrator within five (5) business
days of said decision. The City Administrator may reverse or modify the
decision of the reviewing or enforcement officer provided the applicant:
1. Establishes an inability to effect compliance with any relevant law
because of the ownership structure of any pertinent related entity,
if the denial in question was due to conduct or circumstances of a
related person or entity, or
2. Establishes that he/she has not been charged with, nor is, if
applicable, in violation of any relevant law.
A. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the City, the
following principles of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be
otherwise expressly provided in any Section or ordinances, or unless
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council, or unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.
Section
100.012
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
100.015
100:4
Section 100.020. Official Seal. [R.O. 2007 §100.020; Ord. No. 1184
§31, 1-17-1985; Ord. No. 5500 §1, 8-27-2009]
The Official Seal of the City of O'Fallon shall be a metallic disc not more than
two and one-half (2½) inches in diameter with the words "City of O'Fallon,
O'Fallon, Missouri" and "Founded in 1856" engraved in the border, and the
words" Official Seal" and a graphic representation of the cupola on City Hall
engraved in the center.
Chapter 105
ELECTIONS
Cross References — As to specific elective offices, see §110.010; as to oath
of office, see §115.010.
1. Whenever any distance requirement appears in the Code, the
requisite distances between the relevant facilities or land uses in
question shall be measured by the straight line distance between
the nearest points of the exterior walls (exclusive of overhangs) of
the buildings within which the relevant facilities or uses are
located.
Section
100.015
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
100.020
100:5

ARTICLE I
Generally
Section 105.010. Conformance of City Elections With State Law.
[Ord. No. 6597, 8-22-20191]
A. All City elections shall be conducted and held in conformance with the
provisions of Chapter 115, RSMo.
B. The City Clerk or the Clerk's designee shall be responsible for
accepting all declarations of candidacy for all City elections and
certifying to the St. Charles County Election Authority all measures and
candidates to be voted on at all City elections.
C. The City Clerk or the Clerk's designee shall clearly designate where
candidates shall form a line to effectuate such filings and determine the
order of such filings; except that, in the case of candidates who file a
declaration of candidacy prior to 5:00 p.m. on the first day for filing, the
City Clerk shall determine by random drawing the order in which such
candidates' names shall appear on the ballot. The drawing shall be
conducted so that each candidate, or candidate's representative if the
candidate filed under Subsection 2 of Section 115.355, RSMo., 2016,
shall draw a number at random at the time of filing. The City Clerk or
the Clerk's designee shall record the number drawn with the
candidate's declaration of candidacy. The names of candidates filing on
the first day of filing for each office on each ballot shall be listed in
ascending order of the numbers so drawn.
D. The names of the candidates for each office shall be listed in the order
in which they are filed, except that candidates who file a declaration of
candidacy prior to 5: 00 p.m. on the first day for filing the candidates
shall be listed in the order determined as provided in Subsection (C),
above.
1. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 6597 also amended the title of this Section to include "; Candidate
Filing Procedures."
Section
105.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
105.010
100:7

ARTICLE II
Wards
Section 105.020. Wards. [R.O. 2007 §105.050; Ord. No. 1945 §§1—2,
7-3-1991; Ord. No. 3772 §§1—2, 11-10-1998; Ord. No. 5511 §1,
10-8-2009; Ord. No. 5725 §1, 8-25-2011]
A. Effective with the general municipal election on April 3, 2012, the City
of O'Fallon shall be redistricted and redivided into five (5) wards for
purposes of electing members of the City Council. The boundaries and
areas of each of the five (5) wards shall be as described and delineated
below.
1. Ward One. Shall consist of those voters residing in an area
beginning at the intersection of I-70 and South Main St., north
along the centerline of South Main St. and continuing along the
centerline of North Main St. to the intersection of North Main St.
and Pieper Rd./Hwy P, northeast along the centerline of Pieper Rd.
to its intersection with Homefield Blvd., then southeast along the
centerline of Homefield Blvd. to a point adjacent to the southern
boundary of Homefield Estates Plat 2, then following the southern
and eastern boundaries of Homefield Estates Plat 2 to the
southernmost point of Highgrove Place Plat 1, then northeast along
the southeast border of said plat to the centerline of Old Hwy 79,
east along the centerline of Old Hwy 79 to its intersection with new
Hwy 79, southeast along the centerline of Hwy 79 including all
areas west of Hwy 79 and east of North Main St./South Main St., to
the intersection of Hwy 79 and Veterans Memorial Pkwy, west
along the right-of-way of Veterans Memorial Pkwy, to its
intersection with Belleau Creek Dr., south along the centerline of
Belleau Creek Dr. but including the few parcels east of Belleau
Creek Dr. within city limits near its intersection with Veterans
Memorial Pkwy, continuing along the centerline of Knaust Rd.,
including all of Chadwyck subdivision, to the point where Knaust
Rd. enters Calumet Ranch subdivision, therefrom west along the
boundaries between Calumet Ranch, Hutchings Farm, and
Hutchings Farm Commercial subdivisions on the south and
Huntington Downs, Timber Hills, Butternut Stage, Whitegate
Villas, and the Shops at Laura Hill subdivisions on the north, to the
right-of-way of Hwy K, north along the centerline of Hwy K,
continuing on as South Main St., to its intersection with I-70, the
point of beginning.
2. Ward Two. Shall consist of those voters residing in an area
beginning at the intersection of Hwy K and Fallon Pkwy, north
along the centerline of Hwy K, to the point on the centerline of Hwy
K immediately adjacent to the borderline of Hutchings Farm
Commercial subdivision and the Shops at Laura Hill, east along the
boundaries between Hutchings Farm Commercial, Hutchings
Farm, and Calumet Ranch subdivisions on the south, and the shops
Section
105.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
105.020
100:9
at Laura Hill, Whitegate Villas, Butternut Stage, Timber Hills, and
Huntington Downs subdivisions on the north, to its intersection
with Knaust Rd and progressing south along the centerline of
Knaust — but including the section of Calumet Ranch subdivision
to the east of Knaust — to include all areas east of Hwy K as far
south as Hwy 40, continuing from Hwy 40 west to its intersection
with Hwy K, then following the centerline of Hwy K north to
the intersection of Technology Dr, following the centerline of
Technology Dr. southwest to the intersection of Weldon Springs
Rd, then following the centerline of Weldon Springs Rd northwest
along the western boundaries of William Erker, The Preserves at
Research Park, Recycling Acres, and Fieldstone Farms
subdivisions, then northeast along the northern border of
Fieldstone Farms subdivision, then generally northeast across
Dardenne Creek to the western then the northern boundary of
Sports Park II, north via the right-of-way of Tri Sport Cir to its
intersection with Waterford Crossing, east along the centerline of
Waterford Crossing to Hwy K, and north along the centerline of
Hwy K to its intersection with Fallon Pkwy, the point of beginning.
3. Ward Three. Shall consist of those voters residing in an area
beginning at the intersection of McClure Rd and the centerline of
Hwy N, west along the centerline of Hwy N and continuing to and
including Wyndgate Village subdivision, south along the western
boundary of Wyndgate Village to and including Willow Walk
Estates, east along Diehr Rd. including those sections of Wyndgate
Village and those areas to the south of Diehr Rd., to its intersection
with Hwy DD, east along the centerline of Hwy DD but including
Foxhaven subdivision to its south, to Hwy DD's intersection with
Hwy 40, southeast along the right-of-way of Hwy 40 to its
intersection with Hwy K, then following the centerline of Hwy K to
its intersection with Technology Dr., following the centerline of
Technology Dr. southwest to the intersection of Weldon Springs Rd,
then following the centerline of Weldon Springs Rd northwest to its
intersection with Brook Ln., continuing along the centerline of
Weldon Springs Rd southwest to the southeast border of Carriage
Hills subdivision, continuing along said subdivision border to the
northwest, then generally to the northeast to the southern border
of Knolls subdivision, following said border to the northeast, then
north to the eastern border of The Villages at Dardenne along the
centerline of Henning Rd, then following the Henning Rd
Centerline north to its intersection of McClure Rd, then following
the McClure Rd centerline northeast to the point of beginning.
4. Ward Four. Shall consist of those voters residing in an area
beginning at the intersection of Mexico Rd and Hwy K, south along
the centerline of Hwy K to its intersection with Waterford Crossing,
continuing west along the centerline of Waterford Crossing to the
eastern border of Waterford Crossing subdivision, then north along
said border to the southern border of Villages at Dardenne —
Section
105.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
105.020
100:10
Prairie Village, then continuing west across the southern border
of Villages at Dardenne — Prairie Village, proceeding in a
northwesterly direction following the western border of Villages
at Dardenne — Prairie Village to the centerline of McClure Rd,
following said centerline north to its intersection with Hwy N,
then east along the Hwy N centerline to the western boundary
of Villages at Dardenne — Bates Village subdivision, north along
that subdivision boundary, northwest along the western subdivision
boundary of Royal Springs Manor, continuing northwest along the
southern boundary of Bayfield subdivision and continuing on to
southern boundary of Feise Forest subdivision, to its intersection
with Feise Rd., west to the westernmost city limit immediately
adjacent and north of Feise Rd, generally northwest along that
boundary to the southwest corner of Great Warrior Meadows
subdivision, north along the western boundaries of Sunset Ridge
Estates, Bryan Valley, and Thornbury Crossing subdivisions, west
along the southern Boundary of O'Fallon Lake Estates and north
along its western boundary to its intersection with the centerline
of Veterans Memorial Pkwy, then continuing easterly along said
centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Bryan Rd, south
along the centerline of Bryan Rd to its intersection with Mexico Rd,
and east along the centerline of Mexico Rd to its intersection with
Hwy K, the point of beginning.
5. Ward Five. Shall consist of those voters residing in an area
beginning at the intersection of I-70 and South Main St., north
along the centerline of South Main St. and continuing along the
centerline of N. Main St., to its intersection with Pieper Rd/Hwy P,
northeast along the centerline of Pieper Rd. to its intersection with
Homefield Blvd., then southeast along the centerline of Homefield
Blvd. to a point adjacent to the southern boundary of Homefield
Estates Plat 2, then following the southern and eastern boundaries
of Homefield Estates Plat 2 to the southernmost point of Highgrove
Place Plat 1, then northeast along the southeast border of said plat
to the centerline of Old Hwy 79, east along the centerline of Old
Hwy 79 to its intersection with new Hwy 79, then northwest along
the centerline of new Hwy 79 and including all areas to the
northernmost city limits (here and thenceforth as of July 2011),
back southeast along the centerline of Hwy 79 to the northern
intersection of Hwy 79 and Old Hwy 79, southeast along the
centerline of Old Hwy 79 to its intersection with N. Main St., west
and south including all areas north of I-70 and west of N. Main/S.
Main, to the centerline of Veterans Memorial Pkwy near the
northern boundary of O'Fallon Lakes subdivision, following the
centerline of Veterans Memorial Pkwy east to its intersection with
Bryan Rd, south along the centerline of Bryan Rd to its intersection
with Mexico Rd, east along the centerline of Mexico Rd to its
intersection with Hwy K and north along Hwy K to the point of
beginning, the intersection of I-70 and South Main St.
Section
105.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
105.020
100:11
Section 105.030. through Section 105.290. (Reserved)
B. The above Ward boundaries are set forth on a City map which is
incorporated by reference, and should a dispute arise between the map
and the above boundary description, the map shall prevail. Said map
shall be periodically revised to reflect changes in the City limits through
annexation.
Section
105.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
105.030
100:12
ARTICLE III
Initiative, Referendum and Recall
Section 105.300. Initiative.2 [Ord. No. 5612 §1, 8-12-2010]
The registered voters of the City have power to propose ordinances to the
City Council and, if the City Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed
without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a City election,
provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital programs
or any ordinance relating to the appropriation of money, salaries of City
Officers and employees, levy of taxes, administrative or executive matters
or ordinances establishing zoning districts or designating real property to
be in one zoning district or another. No proposed initiative ordinance shall
contain more than one (1) subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its
title.
Section 105.310. Referendum.3 [Ord. No. 5612 §1, 8-12-2010]
The registered voters of the City have power to require reconsideration
by the City Council of any adopted ordinance and, if the City Council
fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a
City election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or
capital programs or any ordinance relating to the appropriation of money,
salaries of City Officers and employees, levy of taxes, administrative or
executive matters or ordinances establishing zoning districts or designating
real property to be in one zoning district or another.
Section 105.320. Recall.4 [Ord. No. 5612 §1, 8-12-2010]
A. Any official elected by popular vote may be removed by the registered
voters qualified to vote for his successor subject to the following
limitations:
1. The official has held office for at least six (6) months prior to
commencement of recall.
2. In the case of an office, the term of office which is of two (2) years
or less, only one (1) recall petition may be filed during a term.
3. In case of an office, the term of office which is greater than two (2)
years, additional recall petitions may be filed but not within six (6)
months after voter disapproval of the last recall petition.
4. The recalled official may not be a candidate to succeed him or
herself at a special election to fill the vacancy created by his or her
recall, nor may he or she be appointed by the appointing authority
to fill the vacancy.
2. Charter Reference—Also see City Charter Art. 9, Sec. 9.1(A).
3. Charter Reference—Also see City Charter Art. 9, Sec. 9.1(B).
4. Charter Reference—Also see City Charter Art. 9, Sec. 9.1(C).
Section
105.300
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
105.320
100:13
Section 105.330. Commencement of Proceedings, Petitioners'
Committee, Affidavit.5 [Ord. No. 5612 §1, 8-12-2010]
Section 105.340. Petitions.6 [Ord. No. 5612 §1, 8-12-2010]
5. No official elected by popular vote shall be subject to recall within
six (6) months from his or her induction into office or during the
last six (6) months of his or her term.
6. The grounds for recall are limited to misconduct in office,
incompetence or failure to perform official duties of the office
prescribed by law or by ordinance.
A. Three (3) registered qualified voters who are qualified to vote on the
issue which is the subject of the process shall commence initiative,
referendum or recall proceedings by filing with the City Clerk an
affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee for the
matter and will be solely responsible for circulating the petition and
filing it in proper form. The initiating affidavit shall clearly state the
names and residential address of each member of the committee and
shall specify the address to which any notices to the committee are to
be sent. The initiating affidavit shall also set out in full the complete text
of the proposed initiative ordinance or state the number, title and date
of adoption of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered, or specify the
name and office of the elected official to be recalled, whichever is
applicable to the process being proposed. The initiating affidavit for
recall shall also contain a concise statement of the grounds for the
recall in two hundred (200) words or less.
B. No more than three (3) working days after receipt by the City Clerk of
an initiating affidavit submitted in full compliance with the
requirements of this Section, the City Clerk shall prepare and issue to
the petitioners' committee an appropriate form of petition in
compliance with the requirements of the City Charter and this Article
for use in the proposed process. In the case of referendum, the City
Clerk shall also prepare and provide a certified copy of the complete
ordinance proposed for submission in the initiating affidavit. Copies of
the form prepared by the City Clerk shall be used by the petitioners'
committee to solicit and submit names of subscribers. All petitions used
shall be on forms identical in all respects to that prepared by the City
Clerk and provided to the petitioners' committee.
A. Form And Content. All papers of a petition shall be eight and one-half
(8½) by eleven (11) inches in size and uniform in appearance and shall
be assembled as one (1) instrument for filing. Each signature shall be
executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the full
address of the residence, not a P.O. Box, of the person signing and the
5. Charter Reference—Also see City Charter Art. 9, Sec. 9.2.
6. State Law Reference—See §§116.030, 116.949, RSMo. Charter Reference—Also see City
Charter Art. 9, Sec. 9.3(B) and (C).
Section
105.320
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
105.340
100:14
date of signature. Each copy of the petition shall contain or have
attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the
ordinance proposed for adoption by initiative or a true and complete
copy of the ordinance to be submitted to referendum as certified by
the City Clerk, as appropriate, and the estimated costs of any election,
which shall be provided by the City Clerk. Referendum petitions shall
also state the full title of the ordinance sought to be referred on the
face thereof. Recall petitions shall state the name and office of the
elected official sought to be recalled and must contain a statement of
the ground or grounds for the recall in two hundred (200) words or less.
No petition shall seek the recall of more than one (1) officer, but several
propositions for recall may be circulated concurrently and separately
submitted at the same election on the same ballot.
B. Affidavit Of Circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have incorporated
therein or attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the
circulator thereof stating that the circulator personally circulated the
paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were
affixed in the circulator's presence, that the circulator believes them to
be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to
be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the
full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
C. Generic Format Of Petitions. The following shall be substantially the
form of each page of each petition:
_____ [INITIATIVE/REFERENDUM/RECALL] _____ PETITION
NOTICE: It is a violation of law punishable by a term of
imprisonment not to exceed one (1) year in the County Jail or a
fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or both, for
anyone to sign any petition with any name other than his or her
own, or knowingly to sign his or her name more than once for the
same measure for the same election, or to sign a petition when
such person knows he or she is not a registered voter qualified to
vote thereon.
To: The City Council of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri:
We, the undersigned, registered voters of the City of O'Fallon
who are qualified to vote on the subject of this petition,
respectfully order that
Initiative: The proposed ordinance [insert full title of
ordinance], a copy of which is attached hereto,
shall be submitted to the voters of City of O'Fallon,
for their approval or rejection, at an election to be
held as provided by law;
Section
105.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
105.340
100:15
ReferendumO:rdinance No. _____ as adopted by the O'Fallon
City Council on __________ and entitled [insert full
title of ordinance], a true and accurate copy of
which is attached hereto, shall be referred to the
voters of the City of O'Fallon, for their approval or
rejection, at an election to be held as provided by
law;
Recall: That [name of elected official] be recalled from the
office of [insert name of office] for the reason that
[insert 200 word statement of grounds as stated
in initiation affidavit] and that removal of such
official be submitted to the voters of City of
O'Fallon, for their approval or rejection, at an
election to be held as provided by law;
and each for himself or herself says: I have personally signed
this petition; I am a registered voter in the City of O'Fallon
[and Ward X thereof for Council recall]; my registered voting
address is correctly written after my name.
The Election Authority for St. Charles County has estimated
that the cost to the City of O'Fallon for the election requested
by this petition is [insert amount].
CIRCULATOR'S AFFIDAVIT
State of
Missouri
County of St.
Charles
)
)
I ____________________ [name of circulator, typed or printed],
being first duly sworn, says: I personally circulated this paper
and the following __________ persons:
Printed Name Address Signature
Date
1.
2.
etc.
each signed his or her name thereto in my presence; I believe
these signatures to be the genuine signatures of the persons
whose names they purport to be; [that each has had an
opportunity before signing to read the full text of the
ordinance [proposed] [sought to be reconsidered]]; that each
has stated his or her name and registered voting address
correctly, and that each signer is a registered voter of [Ward X
of for Council recall] the City of O'Fallon and qualified to vote
on this matter.
Section
105.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
105.340
100:16
Section 105.350. Number of Signatures.7 [Ord. No. 5612 §1,
8-12-2010]
CIRCULATOR'S AFFIDAVIT
Signature of Affiant (Person obtaining signatures)
Address of Affiant
Subscribed and sworn to before me this _____ day of __,
________.
Signature of Notary
Address of Notary Public (Seal)
My commission expires ___________________________
A. Initiative Petitions. Initiative petitions must be signed by registered,
qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least ten percent
(10%) of the total number of votes cast for the office of Mayor at the last
Mayoral election. If the petition prays for a special election and if it is
signed by registered, qualified voters of the City equal in number to at
least twenty percent (20%) of the number of qualified electors then
registered to vote within the City as of the date of issuance of the
approved petition form by the City Clerk as provided above, and if the
estimated cost to the City for placing the issue on the ballot is contained
on the petition, a special election shall be held as provided under State
law, in the Charter and in this Code.
B. Referendum Petitions. Referendum petitions must be signed by
registered, qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least seven
percent (7%) of the total number of votes cast for the office of Mayor at
the last mayoral election. If the petition prays for a special election and
if it is signed by registered, qualified voters of the City equal in number
to at least fourteen percent (14%) of the number of qualified electors
then registered to vote within the City as of the date of issuance of the
approved petition form by the City Clerk as provided above, and if the
estimated cost to the City for placing the issue on the ballot is contained
on the petition, a special election shall be held as provided under State
law, in the Charter and in this Code.
C. Recall Petitions. A recall petition shall be signed by registered, qualified
voters then qualified to vote for a successor to the official being recalled
equal to at least twenty percent (20%) of the total number of voters
voting in the last election for that office; provided however, that in any
7. Charter Reference—Also see City Charter Art. 9, Sec. 9.3(A).
Section
105.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
105.350
100:17
Section 105.360. Signing Petitions Illegally — Penalty.8 [Ord. No.
5612 §1, 8-12-2010]
Section 105.370. Time For Filing Petitions.9 [Ord. No. 5612 §1,
8-12-2010]
event there must be at least three hundred fifty (350) qualified
signatures in the case of officials elected by wards and at least one
thousand five hundred (1,500) qualified signatures in the case of
officials elected at large. If the petition prays for a special election and
if it is signed by registered, qualified voters of the City equal in number
to at least forty percent (40%) of the qualified electors then registered
to vote within the City for a successor to the official being recalled as
of the date of issuance of the approved petition form by the City Clerk
as provided above, and if the estimated cost to the City for placing the
issue on the ballot is contained on the petition, a special election shall
be held as provided under State law, in the Charter and in this Code.
A. Any person who signs any name other than his own to any petition, or
who knowingly signs his or her name more than once for the same
measure for the same election, or who knows he or she is not at the time
of signing or circulating the same a registered voter and a resident of
this City eligible to vote on the specified matter, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable as provided in
Section 100.010 of this Code of Ordinances.
B. Any person who knowingly accepts or offers money or anything of value
to another person in exchange for a signature on a petition is guilty of
an ordinance violation punishable as provided in Section 100.010 of this
Code of Ordinances.
A. Initiative petitions must be filed with the City Clerk no later than 4:00
P.M. on the ninetieth (90th) day after issuance of the appropriate
petition form to the petitioners' committee by the City Clerk.
B. Referendum petitions must be filed with the City Clerk no later than
4:00 P.M. on the sixtieth (60th) day after the date on which the City
Council voted to approve the ordinance sought to be reconsidered,
regardless of the date of approval of the ordinance by the Mayor.
C. Recall petitions for a member of the City Council must be filed with the
City Clerk no later than 4:00 P.M. on the sixtieth (60th) day after
issuance of the appropriate petition form to the petitioners' committee
by the City Clerk. Recall petitions for Mayor must be filed with the City
Clerk no later than 4:00 P.M. on the ninetieth (90th) day after issuance
of the appropriate petition form to the petitioners' committee by the
City Clerk.
8. State Law Reference—See §116.090, RSMo.
9. Charter Reference—Also see City Charter Art. 9, Sec. 9.4.
Section
105.350
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
105.380
100:18
Section 105.380. Procedure After Filing — Determination of
Sufficiency — Amendment.10 [Ord. No. 5612 §1, 8-12-2010]
A. The City Clerk shall review any petition when it is submitted. If a
petition appears to be in proper form and to have an adequate number
of discrete signatures at the time of filing, the City Clerk shall, within
five (5) working days after the petition is filed, submit the petition to the
election authority of the County for verification that it bears valid
signatures of qualified registered voters in the required number.
B. Immediately upon an initial determination of insufficiency by the City
Clerk or within five (5) working days of receipt of verification from the
County election authority, whichever comes first, the City Clerk shall
complete a certificate as to the petition's sufficiency, specifying, if it is
insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective or inadequate and
shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners'
committee by registered mail.
C. A petition which appears to have an adequate number of discrete
signatures at the time of filing but which is subsequently determined to
be insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures of
qualified registered voters may be amended once if the petitioners'
committee files a written notice of its intention to so amend with the
City Clerk within three (3) working days after receiving the Clerk's
certificate. The petitioners' committee may thereafter amend its
original petition by filing a supplementary petition with additional nonduplicative
signatures on additional petitions exactly like those
originally utilized no later than 4:00 P.M. on the tenth (10th) calendar
day after receiving the clerk's original certificate. Such supplementary
petition shall comply in all respects with the requirements for original
petitions.
D. The City Clerk shall review any amended petition when it is submitted.
If the amended petition appears to be in proper form and to have an
adequate number of discrete signatures at the time of filing, the City
Clerk shall, within five (5) working days after receipt, submit the
petition to the election authority of the County for verification that it
bears valid signatures of qualified registered voters in the required
number. Immediately upon an initial determination of insufficiency of
an amended petition by the City Clerk, or within five (5) working days of
receipt of verification from the County election authority, whichever
comes first, the City Clerk shall complete a certificate as to the
sufficiency of the petitions as amended and promptly send a copy of
such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail as in
the case of an original petition.
E. If a petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does
not elect to amend within the time required, or if an amended petition is
certified insufficient, the City Clerk shall promptly present this
10.Charter Reference—Also see City Charter Art. 9, Sec. 9.5(A).
Section
105.380
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
105.380
100:19
Section 105.390. Judicial Review of Clerk's Certification.11 [Ord. No.
5612 §1, 8-12-2010]
Section 105.400. Referendum — Suspension of Effect of
Ordinance.12 [Ord. No. 5612 §1, 8-12-2010]
Section 105.410. Council Actions On Petitions.13 [Ord. No. 5612 §1,
8-12-2010]
certificate to the City Council and the certificate shall then be a final
determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.
A. Any member of the petitioners' committee aggrieved by the final
certification of the City Clerk as to the inadequacy of a petition may file
a petition in the Circuit Court for St. Charles County for judicial review
of an administrative decision in accord with the provision of Chapter
536, RSMo., no later than fifteen (15) days after the date of the City
Clerk's final certification of inadequacy.
B. Any elected official who is the subject of a recall petition and is
aggrieved by the final certification of the City Clerk as to the adequacy
of a petition may file a petition in the Circuit Court for St. Charles
County for judicial review of an administrative decision in accord with
the provision of Chapter 536, RSMo., no later than fifteen (15) days
after the date of the City Clerk's final certification of adequacy. The
members of the petitioners' committee shall be joined as respondents in
any such review proceedings.
C. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court
review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same
purpose provided such subsequent petition is otherwise timely and in
order.
A. When a referendum petition is filed with the City Clerk, the ordinance
sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such
suspension shall terminate when:
1. There is a final administrative determination of insufficiency of the
petition (the filing of judicial review of an administrative
determination of insufficiency shall not further suspend the
ordinance from taking effect unless the court determines that
equity so requires); or
2. The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition; or
3. The City Council repeals the ordinance; or
4. Election results sustaining the ordinance have been certified.
11.Charter Reference—Also see City Charter Art. 9, Sec. 9.5(B).
12.Charter Reference—Also see City Charter Art. 9, Sec. 9.6.
13.Charter Reference—Also see City Charter Art. 9, Sec. 9.7 and Art. 9, Sec. 9.9(A).
Section
105.380
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
105.410
100:20
A. Public Hearing. Prior to any action being by the City Council in
response to an initiative or referendum petition, a public hearing shall
be held. At least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be published in an official paper or papers of general
circulation within the City.
B. Initiative Petitions. When an initiative petition has been determined
sufficient, the City Council shall promptly consider the proposed
initiative ordinance in the manner provided for other similar legislation
in the City Charter and this Code. If the City Council fails to adopt a
proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within
thirty (30) days after the date the petition was determined sufficient,
the proposed ordinance shall be submitted to the voters of the City at
an election to be held:
1. No later than the next available election for which due notice may
be given to the election authority as prescribed by State law
without a court order; or
2. If the petition calls for a special election and is subscribed by the
required number of qualified voters, at a special election to be held
not less than thirty (30) days thereafter on a date to be determined
by the City Council.
C. Referendum Petitions. When a referendum petition has been
determined sufficient, the City Council shall promptly reconsider the
referred ordinance by voting on its repeal pursuant to the following
question: "Shall Ordinance No. __________ as adopted by the City
Council on __________ be repealed as prayed in the referendum petition
submitted with respect to such ordinance?" If the City Council fails to
repeal the referred ordinance within thirty (30) days after the date the
petition was determined sufficient, the referred ordinance shall be
submitted to the voters of the City at an election to be held:
1. No later than the next available election for which due notice may
be given to the election authority as prescribed by State law
without a court order; or
2. If the petition calls for a special election and is subscribed by the
required number of qualified voters, at a special election to be held
not less than thirty (30) days thereafter on a date to be determined
by the City Council.
D. Recall Petitions. When a recall petition has been determined sufficient,
the City Council shall fix a date for holding the election at the next
legally available election day which is not less than thirty (30) days
thereafter or, if the petition calls for a special election and is subscribed
by the required number of qualified voters, at a special election to be
held not less than thirty (30) days thereafter on a date to be determined
by the City Council. If such office becomes vacant prior to the election,
such election shall be canceled and the vacancy shall be filled as
provided by law.
Section
105.410
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
105.415
100:21
Section 105.415. Submission To The Voters.14 [Ord. No. 5612 §1,
8-12-2010]
Section 105.420. Withdrawal of Petitions. [Ord. No. 5612 §1,
8-12-2010]
An initiative, referendum or recall petition may be withdrawn at any time
prior to 5:00 P.M. on the final day for withdrawal of a candidate or matter
by court order as prescribed by State law, by filing with the City Clerk
a request for withdrawal signed by at least two (2) members of the
petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request, the petition shall
have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be
terminated to the extent permitted by law and, in any event, null and void
in all respects.
A. Initiative Ballot. An initiative question shall be submitted to the voters
in substantially the following form:
"SHALL THE CITY OF O'FALLON, MISSOURI ADOPT AN ORDINANCE
TO
( )?"
(insert subject matter)
YES _____ NO _____
B. Referendum Ballot. A referendum question shall be submitted to the
voters in substantially the following form:
"SHALL ORDINANCE (_____________________), BE REPEALED?"
(insert Ordinance number and subject matter)
YES _____ NO _____
C. Recall Ballot. A recall question shall be submitted to the voters in
substantially the following form:
"SHALL (___________), (___________) BE REMOVED FROM OFFICE?"
(insert name) (insert title)
YES _____ NO _____
D. The subject matter description of initiative and referendum questions
shall be prepared by the City Clerk and shall contain no more than fifty
(50) words, excluding articles. Each shall be a true and impartial
statement of the purposes of the proposed or referred measure in
language neither intentionally argumentative nor likely to create
prejudice either for or against the measure.
14.Charter Reference—Also see City Charter Art. 9, Sec. 9.7(B) and Art. 9, Sec. 9.9(B). State
Law Reference—See §116.160.2, RSMo.
Section
105.415
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
105.430
100:22
Section 105.430. Results of Election. [Ord. No. 5612 §1, 8-12-2010]
A. Initiative. If the majority of the qualified voters voting on a proposed
initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon
certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in
the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the City
Council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the
one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to
the extent of such conflict.
B. Referendum. If a majority of the qualified voters on a referred
ordinance vote in favor of repeal of the ordinance, the ordinance shall
be considered repealed upon certification of the election results.
C. Recall. If a majority of the qualified voters voting in a recall election
shall vote in favor of removal of the official, then a vacancy shall exist
upon certification of the election results, regardless of a defect in the
recall petition. Such vacancy shall be filled as provided by law. If a
majority of the qualified voters voting in a recall election shall vote
against removal of the official, the elected official shall continue in
office. Any official who has been removed from office by recall shall be
ineligible to serve in the City in any capacity at any time during the
remainder of the term for which the official was originally elected.
Section
105.430
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
105.430
100:23
Chapter 110
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Cross References — As to oath of office, see §115.010.
Section
105.430
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
105.430
100:24
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 110.010. Elective Officers. [R.O. 2007 §110.010; Ord. No.
1184 §2, 1-17-1985]
The elective officers for which elections will be held in the City of O'Fallon
are the offices of Mayor and City Council.
Section 110.020. Appointment of Board and Commission Members.
[R.O. 2007 §110.030; Ord. No. 1184 §21, 1-17-1985; Ord. No. 5609
§1, 8-12-2010]
The Mayor with the advice, consent or direction of a majority of the City
Council shall appoint all members of committees, boards and non-elected
commissions. The Mayor shall, within forty-five (45) days of a vacancy
occurring on a board, committee, advisory organization or non-elected
commission, submit to the City Council, for approval, the names of the
applicants recommended to fill those vacancies. This list will be provided
to the City Council at least seven (7) days prior to a regularly scheduled
meeting. The Mayor shall, at the request of any City Council member,
provide a list of all applicants for those openings prior to that regularly
scheduled meeting.
Section 110.030. Appointment of City Committees. [R.O. 2007
§110.040; Ord. No. 1184 §22, 1-17-1985; Ord. No. 5773, 3-8-2012]
The Mayor with the advice, consent or direction of a majority of the City
Council shall appoint all members of committees, boards, and non-elected
commissions. The Mayor shall, within forty-five (45) days of a vacancy
occurring on a board, committee, advisory organization, or non-elected
commission, submit to the City Council for approval the names of the
applicants recommended to fill those vacancies. This list will be provided
to the City Council at least seven (7) days prior to a regularly scheduled
meeting. The Mayor shall, at the request of any City Council member,
provide a list of all applicants for those openings prior to that regularly
scheduled meeting.
Section 110.040. Compensation. [R.O. 2007 §110.050]
The compensation of the Mayor and City Council shall be as set by
ordinances by the Council from time to time.
Section
110.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.040
100:25

ARTICLE II
Mayor15
Section 110.050. Election, Term and Qualifications. [Ord. No. 5471
§1, 6-11-2009]
The Mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the City at the general
municipal election every four (4) years. The Mayor shall hold his or her
office for a term of four (4) years and until a successor is elected and
qualified. No person shall be elected to the office of Mayor unless he or she
is at least twenty-one (21) years of age, a citizen of the United States, and
a registered voter of the City at the time of and a resident thereof for two
(2) years immediately preceding the Mayoral election. No person shall be
elected who shall be at the time be in arrears for any unpaid City taxes, or
forfeiture or defalcation in office, or who has been convicted under the laws
of this State of a felony or under the laws of another jurisdiction of a crime
which, if committed within this State, would be a felony, or he or she pleads
guilty or nolo contendere (no contest) of such crime.
Section 110.051. Salary. [Ord. No. 5471 §1, 6-11-2009]
The salary of the Mayor shall be fixed by ordinance from time to time and
shall not be changed during the Mayor's term of office. The Mayor may
receive reasonable reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses as
provided by ordinance.
Section 110.052. Vacancy in Office, Forfeiture and Removal From
Office. [Ord. No. 5471 §1, 6-11-2009]
A. Vacancy. When any vacancy shall happen in the office of Mayor by
death, resignation, removal from the City, removal from office, refusal
to qualify or otherwise, nominations of a successor may be made by any
member of the City Council and selected with the consent of a majority
of the entire City Council. The City Council may adopt procedures to fill
any such vacancy consistent with this Section. The successor shall
serve until the next general municipal election, at which time a
successor shall be elected to serve the remainder of the unexpired
term. In the case of a temporary absence of the Mayor or disability to
perform the duties of his or her office, the President Pro Tempore of the
City Council shall perform the duties of Mayor until the Mayor shall
return or such disability be removed; and during such time the
President Pro Tempore of the City Council shall act as Mayor.
B. Forfeiture. A person holding the office of Mayor who is convicted of a
crime shall, upon conviction, forfeit such office if:
15.Editor's Note—Ord. no. 5471 §1, adopted June 11, 2009, repealed sections
110.050—110.070 and enacted new provisions set out herein. Former sections
110.050—110.070 derived from R.O. 2007 §§110.060—110.075; ord. no. 1184 §§14, 23,
1-17-85; ord. no. 3411 §1, 8-1-96.
Section
110.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.052
100:27
Section 110.053. Mayor's Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 5471 §1,
6-11-2009]
1. The Mayor is convicted under the laws of this State of a felony or
under the laws of another jurisdiction of a crime which, if
committed within this State, would be a felony, or the Mayor pleads
guilty or nolo contendere (no contest) of such a crime; or
2. The Mayor is convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere (no
contest) to a crime involving misconduct in office or dishonesty; or
3. The Missouri Constitution or a State Statute so provides.
C. Removal. The Mayor may, for cause shown, be removed from office by a
two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire City Council after being first given
opportunity, together with the Mayor's witnesses, to be heard before
the City Council sitting as a Board of Impeachment.
A. The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive of the City. The Mayor shall be
recognized as the head of City Government for all legal and ceremonial
purposes and by the Governor of Missouri for all purposes of military
law. The Mayor shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Preside—tie-breaking—calling special meetings. The Mayor shall
preside at meetings of the City Council, but shall have the right to
vote only in case of a tie. The Mayor may call special meetings of
the City Council as provided in Section 3.10(A) of the City Charter.
2. Veto authority—process. Every bill or resolution duly passed by the
City Council shall be presented to the Mayor for the Mayor's
approval. The Mayor shall either sign the same or, within ten (10)
days of the passage of such bill or resolution, return it to the City
Clerk with a written statement of the Mayor's reasons for
disapproval. The City Council shall cause the objections of the
Mayor to be entered at large upon the journal. The question of a bill
or resolution vetoed by the Mayor shall be reconsidered by the City
Council at the next regular meeting of the Council, which question
shall be in this form: "Shall the bill (or resolution) pass the
objections of the Mayor thereto notwithstanding?" The vote on this
question shall be taken by "ayes" and "nays" and the names entered
upon the journal, and if two-thirds (2/3) of the entire City Council
vote in the affirmative, the City Clerk shall certify the fact on the
roll, and the bill thus certified shall become an ordinance in the
same manner and with like effect as if it had received the approval
of the Mayor, and resolutions shall be deemed approved. If the
Mayor fails to so endorse any bill or resolution or fails to return the
same together with his or her reasons for disapproval in writing as
required within ten (10) days of its passage by the City Council,
such ordinance or resolution shall be deemed to be enacted without
the Mayor's signature, and the effective date of the ordinance or
Section
110.052
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
110.053
100:28
Section 110.054. Assistant To The Mayor. [Ord. No. 5471 §1,
6-11-2009; Ord. No. 5654 §1, 12-9-2010]
resolution shall be the date of original passage by the City Council
unless a later date is provided in the ordinance or resolution.
3. Enforce laws. The Mayor shall see that all laws, provisions of the
Charter and acts of the City Council subject to enforcement by the
Mayor, or by officers subject to the Mayor's direction and
supervision, are faithfully executed.
4. Budget. The Mayor shall be responsible for the preparation and
presentation of the budget consistent with the requirements of the
City Charter and the ordinances of the City.
5. Remit fines. The Mayor shall have power to remit fines and
forfeitures and to grant reprieves and pardons for offenses arising
under ordinances of the City; but this authority shall not be so
construed as to authorize the Mayor to remit any costs which may
have accrued to any officer of the City by reason of any prosecution
under the laws or ordinances of the City.
6. Other duties. The Mayor shall exercise the powers and perform the
duties prescribed by law, the City Charter or ordinance.
7. Review of the City Administrator. The Mayor shall, prior to the
submittal of the annual budget, review the performance of the City
Administrator and report to the City Council concerning the same.
8. Appointments. The Mayor with the advice, consent or direction of a
majority of the City Council shall appoint all members of
committees, boards and non-elected commissions. The Mayor shall,
within forty-five (45) days of a vacancy occurring on a board,
committee, advisory organization or non-elected commission,
submit to the City Council for approval the names of the applicants
recommended to fill those vacancies. This list will be provided to
the City Council at least seven (7) days prior to a regularly
scheduled meeting. The Mayor shall, at the request of any City
Council member, provide a list of all applicants for those openings
prior to that regularly scheduled meeting.
9. State of the City. The Mayor shall, in January of each year, present a
"State of the City" address, independent of any regular scheduled
meeting. Such address shall be held at such time and place to
assure maximum participation of the public and media.
A. The Mayor shall have authority to select and employ one (1) Executive
Assistant who shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
B. Subject to the Mayor's prerogative to assign specific duties and
responsibilities to the Executive Assistant, such duties and
Section
110.053
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.054
100:29
responsibilities shall be enumerated and provided to the Council, the
Executive Assistant to the Mayor may:
1. Assist in the accumulation and dissemination of information to and
from the Mayor.
2. Coordinate correspondence on behalf of the Mayor.
3. Deal with constituents and others having business with the Mayor.
4. Coordinate the Mayor's schedule, meetings, ceremonies and
events.
5. Act as liaison between the Mayor and City departments and outside
organizations.
6. Attend meetings, events and ceremonies as directed by the Mayor.
7. Provide other assistance and support to the Mayor as the Mayor
shall determine from time to time.
C. The Executive Assistant to the Mayor shall not have any authority to act
on, sign or otherwise execute documents or orders specifically
requiring the action of the Mayor nor shall the Executive Assistant
direct or interfere with the duties of employees who are subject to the
direction and supervision of the City Administrator.
D. Compensation and work schedule for the Mayor's Executive Assistant
shall be determined solely by the Mayor, subject to the limits of the
annual appropriation for expenses for operation of the Mayor's office.
E. The Executive Assistant to the Mayor is a personal, confidential
assistant and aide to the Mayor and shall be subject to appointment and
removal by the Mayor at will. Notwithstanding any other provision of
the Charter or City Code to the contrary, the Mayor may take into
account political affiliation when selecting any individual as an
Executive Assistant. Anything in this Code of Ordinances, the City's
personnel policies, the Employee Reference Guide or elsewhere to the
contrary notwithstanding, the Executive Assistant to the Mayor shall
not:
1. Be appointed by or subject to the direction of the City
Administrator.
2. Be subject to any internal posting or external advertising
requirements or testing or competitive examination requirements
which might otherwise be the norm for City employment in
accordance with either Section 6.2 of the Charter or otherwise,
unless the Mayor chooses to engage in any one (1) or more of such
processes.
3. Be subject to removal by the City Council, except for cause, by a
two-thirds (2/3) vote of the Council.
Section
110.054
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
110.054
100:30
Section 110.060. through Section 110.070. (Reserved)
4. Enjoy any right to internal administrative appeal or review by the
Personnel Committee of disciplinary action or termination of
employment.
Section
110.054
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.060
100:31

ARTICLE III
City Council
Section 110.080. City Council — Term of Office. [R.O. 2007
§110.080; Ord. No. 1184 §6, 1-17-1985; Ord. No. 5609 §2,
8-12-2010]
Section 110.090. Qualifications of Council Members — Prohibitions
On Other City Employment. [R.O. 2007 §110.090; Ord. No. 1184 §7,
1-17-1985; Ord. No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
Section 110.100. City Council Compensation. [R.O. 2007 §110.100;
Ord. No. 1184 §15, 1-17-1985; Ord. No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
The City Council shall have the power to fix the compensation of City
Council members by an ordinance. The salary of a City Council member
A. Number Of Wards. The City shall, by ordinance, divide the City into no
less than five (5) wards and two (2) Council members shall be elected
from each of such wards by the qualified voters thereof. Each ward shall
be compact in form and composed of adjoining territory. Populations of
wards shall be substantially equal.
B. Election By Wards. The City Council members shall be elected by the
qualified voters of their respective wards. The candidate receiving the
highest number of votes shall be elected.
C. Election. At each general municipal election at which terms of Council
members shall expire, City Council members shall be elected to fill the
positions of those whose terms expire.
D. Terms. City Council members from each ward shall be elected to serve
staggered three (3) year terms.
A. A City Council member shall be a registered voter of the City, shall have
been a resident of the territory comprising the ward for which he or she
has filed for at least one (1) year prior to his or her election and be
twenty-one (21) years of age by the date of the election. No person shall
be elected who shall be at the time be in arrears for any unpaid City
taxes or forfeiture or defalcation in office or who has been convicted
under the laws of this State of a felony or under the laws of another
jurisdiction of a crime which, if committed within this State, would be a
felony, or he or she pleads guilty or nolo contendere (no contest) of such
crime.
B. Except where authorized by law, no Council member shall hold any
other City office or City employment during the term for which he or
she was elected or appointed and no former City Council member shall
hold any appointive City office or City employment until one (1) year
after the expiration of the term for which the City Council member was
elected or appointed.
Section
110.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.100
100:33
shall not be changed during the time for which he or she was elected or
appointed. City Council members may receive reasonable reimbursement
for actual and necessary expenses as provided by ordinance. The use of City
resources not relating to City business must be fully reimbursed.
Section 110.101. Vacancies, Forfeiture of Office, Filling of
Vacancies. [Ord. No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
Section 110.102. Prohibitions Against Interference. [Ord. No. 5609
§2, 8-12-2010]
A. Vacancy. When any vacancy shall happen in the office of a City Council
member by death, resignation, removal from the City, removal from
office, refusal to qualify or otherwise, a successor to the vacant office
shall be selected by appointment by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of a majority of the remaining members of the City Council. The
City Council may adopt procedures to fill any such vacancy consistent
with this Section. The successor shall serve until the next general
municipal election, at which time a successor shall be elected to serve
the remainder of the unexpired term.
B. Forfeiture. A person holding the office of City Council member who is
convicted of a crime shall, upon conviction, forfeit such office if:
1. The City Council member is convicted under the laws of this State
of a felony or under the laws of another jurisdiction of a crime
which, if committed within this State, would be a felony or he/she
pleads guilty or nolo contendere (no contest) of such a crime; or
2. The City Council member is convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo
contendere (no contest) to a crime involving misconduct in office,
dishonesty; or
3. The Missouri Constitution or a State Statute so provides.
C. Removal. The Mayor may, with the consent of a majority of the entire
City Council, remove from office, for cause shown, any City Council
member, such Council member being first given opportunity, together
with his or her witnesses, to be heard before the City Council sitting as
a Board of Impeachment. Any City Council member may, in like manner,
for cause shown, be removed from office by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of
the entire City Council, independently of the Mayor's approval or
recommendation.
A. Appointments And Removals. Neither the City Council nor any of its
members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any
employees whom the City Administrator or any of his or her
subordinates are empowered to appoint or employ, but the City Council
as a whole may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the
City Administrator anything pertaining to appointment and removal of
such officers and employees.
Section
110.100
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
110.102
100:34
Section 110.103. Council Apportionment. [Ord. No. 5609 §2,
8-12-2010]
B. Interference With Administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries
and investigations as specifically provided in the City Charter, the City
Council or its members shall deal with City Officers and employees who
are subject to the direction and supervision of the City Administrator
solely through the City Administrator, and neither the City Council nor
its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either
publicly or privately.
A. Apportionment Commission. Within sixty (60) days after the population
of this State is reported to the President of the United States of America
for each decennial census of the United States, the Mayor shall, with
the advice and consent of a majority of the City Council members,
appoint an Apportionment Commission composed of one (1) member
from each of the wards existing in the City at the time of the
appointment of the Apportionment Commission. The Apportionment
Commission shall, at its first (1st) meeting, select one (1) of its
members to serve as Chairperson. No person who holds an elective or
appointive office of the City or State shall be eligible for appointment to
the Apportionment Commission. Members of the Commission shall not
be eligible for election as a Council member at the first (1st) election
held following reapportionment.
B. Commission Duties. Within six (6) months of their appointment, the
Apportionment Commission shall prepare a plan of wards, which plan
shall include a plan for the boundaries as well as the number of wards
and shall present that plan, together with a report explaining it, to the
Mayor and City Council. All necessary expenses of the Apportionment
Commission shall be paid by the City.
C. Council Hearing. Within forty-five (45) days after receiving the plan of
the Apportionment Commission, the City Council shall hold a public
hearing on the plan. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and
place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper or a paper
of general circulation in the City.
D. Adoption Of Ward Boundaries—Effective Date. The City Council shall
proceed by ordinance to adopt a plan of apportionment and divide the
City into at least five (5) wards having boundaries such that each ward
shall be compact in form and composed of adjoining territory and
substantially equal in population.
Section
110.102
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.103
100:35

ARTICLE IV
Meetings
Section 110.110. City Council Regular Meetings. [R.O. 2007
§110.110; Ord. No. 1184 §16, 1-17-1985; Ord. No. 4017 §1,
2-18-2000; Ord. No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
The City Council shall hold a regular meeting on the second (2nd) and
fourth (4th) Thursday of each month at the City building beginning at 7:30
P.M. Should the second (2nd) or fourth (4th) Thursday of any month fall on a
legal holiday, the regular meeting of the City Council of the City of O'Fallon
shall be rescheduled within that same month unless the Council by majority
vote cancels such meeting or reschedules such meeting to a date in the
following month.
Section 110.120. City Council Special Meetings. [R.O. 2007
§110.120; Ord. No. 1184 §17, 1-17-1985; Ord. No. 5609 §2,
8-12-2010]
Special meetings may be called from time to time to be held in the City
Hall of the City of O'Fallon or such other place as designated at the time
designated in the notice thereof; such special meetings may be called by
the Mayor or shall be called by the Mayor at the request of three (3)
Council members. Notice of the special meetings shall be given in person or
electronically or by mail at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time set
for the meeting to all Council members then in the City and shall be posted
at the location designated for meeting notices pursuant to the City's Open
Meetings and Records Policy. If notice is by mail, it shall be deposited in the
United States mail at least thirty-six (36) hours before the time set for the
meeting.
Section 110.130. Attendance At Meetings. [R.O. 2007 §110.130;
Ord. No. 1184 §18, 1-17-1985; Ord. No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
The Mayor and members of the City Council shall be required to attend
all regular and special meetings of the Council, unless leave of absence is
granted by the Council, or unless excused by the Mayor for illness or other
special reasons.
Section 110.135. Mayor To Preside At Meetings — President Pro
Tempore, Selection, Duties. [Ord. No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
The Mayor, as President of the City Council, shall preside over the meetings
of the City Council. At the first (1st) regular meeting of the City Council
after the election in each year, the City Council shall elect one (1) of its
members President Pro Tempore, who shall hold his or her office for the
term of one (1) year, and who, in the absence of the Mayor, shall preside
at meetings of the City Council, and who shall have all the powers and
perform all the duties of Mayor whenever the Mayor shall be absent from
the City or for any cause shall be unable to discharge the duties of the
Section
110.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.135
100:37
office; provided that in the absence of both the Mayor and the President
Pro Tempore, the City Council may select one (1) of its members present
to preside at its meeting who shall be designated as Acting President Pro
Tempore. The President Pro Tempore acting as the Presiding Officer shall
not cast a second (2nd) vote to break a tie vote.
Section 110.140. Mayor's Absence — Calling City Council To Order
— Quorum. [R.O. 2007 §110.140; Ord. No. 1184 §19, 1-17-1985; Ord.
No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
At the hour appointed, the Mayor, or in his/her absence the President Pro
Tempore or Acting President Pro Tempore of the City Council, shall call
the City Council to order, the Clerk shall call the roll of members and
announce whether or not a quorum is present. A simple majority of the
Council members shall constitute a quorum. If a quorum is not present, a
smaller number may adjourn the meeting from day to day until a quorum is
present.
Section 110.145. Agenda of Regular Meetings. [Ord. No. 6454,
3-22-2018; Ord. No. 6480, 7-12-2018]
A. Order. The order of events associated with all regular meetings of the
Council shall be substantially as follows:
1. Invocation;
2. Pledge of Allegiance;
3. Call to Order and Roll Call;
4. Approval or Amendment of the Agenda;
5. Presiding Officer's Report;
6. Citizen Comments;
7. Ward Reports;
8. City Administrator's Report;
9. Committee and Commission Reports;
10. Consent Agenda;
11. Old Business;
12. New Business;
13. Adjournment.
The City Council, by majority vote of the members present, may change the
order of business.
Section
110.135
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
110.145
100:38
Section 110.150. Committees. [Ord. No. 2029 §8, 6-4-1992; Ord. No.
5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
All special committees shall be appointed by the Presiding Officer, unless
otherwise directed by the City Council. The only standing committee of the
City Council shall be the committee of the whole. The Mayor shall be the
Presiding Officer of the committee of the whole and the rules of proceedings
in the City Council shall be observed in the committee of the whole as far as
the same may be applicable.
Section 110.160. Ordinances and Resolutions. [R.O. 2007 §110.240;
Ord. No. 2029 §10, 6-4-1992; Ord. No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
B. Establishment. The agenda shall be established by the City
Administrator in accord with Section 115.060; provided, however, that,
any item requested by the Mayor or any member of the City Council
shall be included on the agenda.
C. Consent Agenda. At the time of establishing the agenda, the Mayor may
include one (1) or more of the following items of business on the agenda
as being on the consent agenda:
1. Minutes of City Council Meetings;
2. Acceptance, Conveyance and Vacation of property interests;
3. Approval of Licenses;
4. Approval of Development Escrow Transactions, Storm Water
Agreements, and Similar Administrative Development Activities;
5. Approval of City Contracts, Purchases and Similar Administrative
Matters.
At the request of the Mayor or one (1) or more members of the City
Council an item of business shall be removed from the consent agenda and
considered separately.
The City Council, by a majority vote of the members present, may approve
and adopt the consent agenda by a single motion. Upon approval of the
consent agenda, each item thereon shall be deemed passed, approved and
adopted, as if considered individually.
A. Single Subject—Clear Title. No ordinance, except those making
appropriations of money and those codifying or revising existing
ordinances, shall contain more than one (1) subject which shall be
clearly expressed in its title. Ordinances making appropriations shall be
confined to the various subjects and accounts for which monies are
appropriated.
B. Preparation Of Ordinances. All ordinances shall be prepared or
approved by the City Attorney. All such ordinances shall be introduced
to the City Council in printed or written form.
Section
110.145
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.160
100:39
Section 110.165. Sponsorship of Ordinances. [Ord. No. 5609 §2,
8-12-2010]
C. Introduction For Passage Or Approval. Items shall be placed on a
Council agenda at the request of the Mayor or when requested by any
member of the City Council. Ordinances, resolutions and other matters
of subjects requiring action by the City Council should be introduced by
a member of the Council or the Mayor, except that the City
Administrator or City Attorney may present ordinances, resolutions and
other matters or subjects to the Council, and any member of the Council
or the Mayor may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such
ordinances, resolutions, matters or subjects be adopted; otherwise,
same shall not be considered.
D. Council members shall recuse themselves from taking action on any
bill, resolution, motion or other matter involving their own official
conduct or a conflict of their disclosed personal interest. Any recused
Council member shall not participate in the discussion and shall abstain
from voting on said item.
A. The identification of a sponsor for a bill shall only be preliminary and
presumptive until the initial agenda where that bill appears as an action
item is approved by the Council.
B. If a bill is added to an agenda as a result of a proposal brought to the
Council by a specific member or members, the proposed agenda shall
identify that member or those members as presumptive sponsors for
that legislation regardless of the subject matter of the bill or the
process by which it comes to the agenda.
C. If a bill concerns a unique or geographically isolated matter wholly
within one (1) ward, the agenda shall identify the members from that
ward as the presumptive sponsors for that bill.
D. If a bill is added to an agenda as an administrative matter or at the
request of City management, the agenda shall identify the Mayor as the
presumptive sponsor of that bill.
E. If a bill is added to an agenda following review or recommendation of a
City advisory body, the agenda shall identify that member or those
members who are Council appointee(s) or liaison to that advisory body
as presumptive sponsor(s) of that bill.
F. Any presumptive sponsor of a bill may decline to act as sponsor at any
time prior to the adoption of the agenda where that bill first appears as
an action item.
G. If a bill is a matter which requires definitive and final action by the
Council (e.g., because an applicant has complied with all appropriate
procedures and is entitled to a decision on the license, permit or other
matter applied for) and no member is willing to sponsor the bill, the
Section
110.160
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
110.165
100:40
Section 110.170. Style of Ordinances — Procedure To Enact. [Ord.
No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
sponsor shall be identified as the Council as a whole so that the matter
may be properly considered.
H. The rights and prerogatives of the sponsor of a bill may be exercised by
the sole sponsor, by either sponsor if there are two (2) sponsors or by a
majority of the sponsors if there are more than two (2).
I. A member wishing to be added as a sponsor of a given bill may do so
only:
1. With the consent of the presumptive sponsor(s) prior to the
approval of the initial agenda where that bill first appears as an
action item, or
2. With the consent of the sponsor(s) after approval of the initial
agenda where that bill first appears as an action item.
A. The style of the ordinances of the City shall be: "Be it ordained by the
Council of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, as follows:".
B. No ordinance shall be passed except by bill. All bills shall be numbered
consecutively and shall identify the sponsor(s) of that bill.
C. No bill shall become an ordinance unless on its final passage a majority
of the entire City Council shall vote in the affirmative for its passage.
Voting on all ordinances, amendments and resolutions other than
commendations and ceremonial resolutions shall be by roll call vote
called in a random order as determined by the City Clerk and the "ayes"
and "nays" shall be entered on the journal.
D. When a bill is reached in its order to be agreed to and read a second
(2nd) time and placed upon its final passage, it may, upon the request of
the sponsor thereof, be laid over informally and thereafter called up by
the sponsor at any time when otherwise in order. The prerogative of a
sponsor to layover a bill may be exercised by either sponsor if there are
fewer than three (3) sponsors or by concurrence of a majority of the
sponsors if there are more than three (3) sponsors. All bills laid over
informally and not taken up and disposed of at the same meeting shall
appear in order upon the agenda for the next following regular City
Council meeting. If a bill laid over informally is not taken up for further
consideration within three (3) regular City Council meetings after being
so laid over, it shall lie upon the table and be dropped from the agenda
of the City Council without further action of the City Council.
E. Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced to the Council in writing
and shall be read two (2) times prior to passage. The reading of a bill by
its title shall be deemed sufficient reading unless further reading is
called for. If further reading is called for, and no objection made, the bill
Section
110.165
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.170
100:41
Section 110.180. A Continuous Body. [R.O. 2007 §110.310; Ord. No.
2029 §17, 6-4-1992; Ord. No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
The City Council is considered to be a continuous body although its
members may and do change from time to time. Thus matters of a legislative
nature that have been lawfully begun by a preceding City Council can be
carried through to their completion by the succeeding Council and be made
effective. Except in cases where vested rights may be violated, or the rights
of other parties may have intervened, the City Council generally has the
right to rescind or repeal any of its acts or the acts of any prior Council.
Section 110.190. Parliamentary Procedure. [R.O. 2007 §110.320;
Ord. No. 1184 §24, 1-17-1985; Ord. No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
The Council hereby adopts Robert's Rules of Order, except when otherwise
provided for in the Charter or by ordinance, and any question arising
thereunder shall be decided by the Mayor, subject to appeal to the City
Council by any member.
Section 110.200. Manner of Addressing City Council — Time Limit.
[R.O. 2007 §110.190; Ord. No. 2029 §5, 6-4-1992; Ord. No. 5609 §2,
8-12-2010]
Persons interested in a bill or other item on a Council agenda shall be
afforded an opportunity to be heard before the City Council during a public
shall be read at length. If, however, objection be made, the question
shall be determined by the majority of the City Council.
F. Copies of a proposed ordinance shall be made available for public
inspection in the office of the City Clerk.
G. The vote on the final passage of a bill shall be taken after the second
(2nd) reading. The final vote on a bill shall not be taken at the same
meeting at which the bill is introduced. Unless waived or suspended as
hereinafter provided, at least ninety-six (96) hours shall intervene
between the convening of a City Council meeting at which a bill is first
introduced and the convening of a subsequent meeting at which the bill
shall be considered for final passage. Waiver or suspension of two (2)
meeting and time limitation requirements of this Section shall be
allowed unless three (3) or more Council members object.
H. No bill shall become an ordinance until it shall have been signed by the
officer presiding at the meeting of the Council at which it shall have
been passed. When so signed, it shall be delivered to the Mayor for his/
her approval and signature or his/her veto.
I. Every ordinance passed by the Council and subsequently approved by
the Mayor or passed over the Mayor's veto as provided by law shall take
effect from and after the date of its passage by the Council unless a
later effective date is expressly provided in the ordinance.
Section
110.170
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
110.200
100:42
comment portion of each meeting; provided however, that the Council may,
by a majority vote of the members then present, withdraw the opportunity
for public comment at a given meeting so long as no bill which has been
introduced shall be finally acted upon unless there shall have been at
least one (1) opportunity for public comment prior to such action. Each
person addressing the City Council shall step up in front of the designated
microphone, shall give his/her name and address in an audible tone or voice
for the records, and unless further time is granted by the Council, shall
limit his/her address to five (5) minutes. All remarks shall be germane to the
business of the City of O'Fallon and shall be addressed to the City Council as
a body and not to any individual member thereof. No person, other than the
City Council and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into
any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Council, without
the permission of the Presiding Officer. No question shall be asked a Council
member except through the Presiding Officer.
Section 110.210. Decorum Required. [R.O. 2007 §110.200; Ord. No.
2029 §6, 6-4-1992; Ord. No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
Section 110.220. Enforcement of Decorum. [R.O. 2007 §110.210;
Ord. No. 2029 §7, 6-4-1992; Ord. No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
The Chief of Police, or such member or members of the Police Department
as he/she may designate, shall be sergeant at arms of the City Council
meetings. However, said attendance and function shall be subject to the
discretion of the Presiding Officer of the City Council. As sergeant of arms,
said member or members of the Police Department shall carry out all
orders and instructions given by the Presiding Officer for the purpose of
maintaining order and decorum at the City Council meeting.
Section 110.230. Voting Procedure — Abstention. [R.O. 2007
§110.250; Ord. No. 2029 §11, 6-4-1992; Ord. No. 5609 §2,
8-12-2010]
A member of the City Council is under a duty to vote for or against every
bill presented. In the event the member of the City Council states that he/
A. By Council Members. While the City Council is in session, the members
must preserve order and decorum and a member shall neither by
conversation or otherwise delay or interrupt the proceedings or the
peace of the Council nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse
to obey the orders of the Council or its Presiding Officer, except as
otherwise herein provided.
B. By Others. Any person making personal attacks or slanderous remarks
about another, or who shall become boisterous or disturb the order of
the meeting while addressing the City Council or at any time during a
Council meeting, may be forthwith barred by the Presiding Officer from
further audience before the Council unless permission to continue is
granted by a majority vote of the Council.
Section
110.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.230
100:43
she is abstaining on a question, issue or motion to be voted on by the City
Council, such abstention shall be recorded as a vote with the majority of the
votes cast unless said member states that the basis for his/her abstention
from voting is that he/she is prohibited from voting on said question, issue
or motion as a result of a conflict of interest as defined and provided for in
the ordinances of the City and the Revised Statutes of Missouri.
Section 110.240. Change of Vote. [R.O. 2007 §110.260; Ord. No.
2029 §12, 6-4-1992; Ord. No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
A member of the City Council voting on any motion, issue or question shall
have the right to change his/her vote thereon at any time prior to the
declaration by the Presiding Officer of the Council of the final vote upon said
motion, question or issue. After such declaration by the Presiding Officer a
member shall be allowed to change his/her vote only pursuant to a motion
to reconsider.
Section 110.250. Motion To Reconsider. [R.O. 2007 §110.290(K);
Ord. No. 2029 §15, 6-4-1992; Ord. No. 5609 §2, 8-12-2010]
Upon the declaration of a vote by the Presiding Officer on any question,
issue, motion, bill, ordinance or resolution, any member who voted with
the majority may move for a reconsideration of the matter at the same
or the next succeeding meeting at the request of a member who voted
with the majority, provided that said question, issue, motion, ordinance or
resolution must be expressly placed upon the agenda for said succeeding
meeting, and, further provided, that the resolution or ordinance authorizing
or relating to any contract may be reconsidered at any time before the
final execution thereof. A motion to reconsider an ordinance or resolution
shall require the same number of votes for passage as is required to adopt
an ordinance or resolution. A motion to reconsider any other matter shall
require approval of the majority of those members present and voting
on said issue, including those votes deemed cast as provided in Section
110.230 above. After a motion for reconsideration has once been acted
upon, no other motion for reconsideration thereof shall be made without
the consent of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the City Council present.
The term "next succeeding meeting", as used herein, shall mean the next
succeeding regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council unless such
matter involved be expressly placed upon the agenda of a duly called special
meeting of the Council.
Section 110.260. Use of Eminent Domain For Other Than Public
Purposes. [Ord. No. 4890 §1, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 5609 §2,
8-12-2010]
The City Council of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, express their opposition
to, and their present intention not to use, eminent domain to take private
property for economic development purposes but instead to limit its use
for public uses including, but not limited to, acquisition of private property
for public parks, public streets, public roads, public highways, public
Section
110.230
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
110.260
100:44
sidewalks, public water system improvements, public sanitary sewer system
improvements, public stormwater system improvements, and the like.
Section
110.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.260
100:45
Chapter 115
CITY OFFICIALS
Section
110.260
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
110.260
100:46
Article I
General Provisions
Section 115.010. Officer's Oath — Bond.
Every officer of the City and his/her assistants, and every Council member,
before entering upon the duties of his/her office, shall take and subscribe
to an oath or affirmation before some court of record in the County, or the
City Clerk, that he/she possesses all the qualifications prescribed for his/
her office by law; that he/she will support the Constitution of the United
States, and of the State of Missouri, the provisions of all laws of this State
affecting Cities of this class, and the ordinances of the City, and faithfully
demean himself/herself in office; which official oath or affirmation shall be
filed with the City Clerk. Every officer of the corporation, when required
by law or ordinance, shall, within fifteen (15) days after his/her election
or appointment, and before entering upon the discharge of the duties of
his/her office, give bond to the City in such sum and with such sureties as
shall be designated by ordinance, conditioned for the faithful performance
of his/her duty, and that he/she will pay over all moneys belonging to the
City, as provided by law, that may come into his/her hands. If any person
elected or appointed to any office shall fail to take and subscribe such oath
or affirmation, or to give bond as herein required, his/her office shall be
deemed vacant. For any breach of condition of any such bond, suit may be
instituted thereon by the City, or by any person in the name of the City for
the use of such person.
Section
115.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.010
100:47

Article II
Officers Generally
Section 115.020. City Clerk. [R.O. 2007 §115.040; Ord. No. 1184
§28, 1-17-1985]
The City Clerk shall be elected by the City Council to serve at the will of
the Council or until a successor be elected and qualified; and the City Clerk
shall be subject to all laws of the State of Missouri and ordinances of the
City of O'Fallon. The person appointed as the City Clerk shall be placed by
the City Administrator in a salary range which takes into consideration all
duties, including those of City Clerk, performed by this employee. In case of
a tie the Mayor shall have a vote to decide the election.
Section
115.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.020
100:49

Article III
City Administrator16
Section 115.030. City Charter. [Ord. No. 5528 §1, 11-17-2009]
Article 5 of the O'Fallon City Charter contains the following provisions with
respect to the office of City Administrator which are hereby made a part of
this Code of Ordinances:
Article 5. City Administrator
Section 5.1. Appointment, Qualifications, Residency, and Compensation
A. Appointment. There shall be a City Administrator nominated by the
Mayor, with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council. The
person appointed by the City Council shall serve at the pleasure of the
City Council.
B. Qualifications. The City Administrator shall be selected solely on the
basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special
reference to his or her actual experience and knowledge of accepted
practice in respect to the duties of the office and such further
qualifications that may be required by ordinance or by this Charter.
C. Residency. At the time of appointment, the City Administrator need
not be a resident of the City or the State. The City Administrator
shall be a resident within six (6) months after appointment, unless
the City Administrator is granted an extension by a majority vote of
the City Council. The City Administrator must remain a resident of
the City as long as the City Administrator is acting in the capacity of
City Administrator. The City Administrator must be at least twenty-one
(21) years of age and must devote full time to the City Administrator's
duties as City Administrator.
D. Compensation. The City Administrator shall receive such
compensation as the City Council shall fix from time to time by
ordinance.
Section 5.2. Removal
The City Administrator may be removed by executive order of the Mayor
after receiving the consent of a majority of the entire City Council or by a
two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire City Council on its own initiative.
Section 5.3. Powers and Duties
16.Editor;s Note—Ord. No. 5528 §1, Adopted November 12, 2009, Repealed Sections
115.030—115.110 And Enacted New Provisions Set Out Herein. Former Sections
115.030—115.110 Derived From R.O. 2007 §§115.050—115.130; Ord. No. 1961 §§1—9,
8-21-91; Ord. No. 5199 §1, 6-28-07.
Section
115.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.030
100:51
The City Administrator, subordinate to the Mayor, shall be the chief
administrative officer of the City. The City Administrator shall be
responsible to the Mayor and the City Council for the administration of all
City affairs placed in his charge by or under this Charter. In order to carry
out these duties, the City Administrator shall have the following powers
and duties:
A. Appointment and Removal of City Employees. The City Administrator
may employ and, when the City Administrator deems it necessary
for the good of the City, suspend or remove any City employees.
The Mayor and City Council shall be notified upon the removal of
any Managing Director citing the reason(s) and/or circumstances for
such removal. The City Administrator may authorize any employee
who is subject to the City Administrator's direction and supervision to
exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that employee's
department, office or agency.
B. Administration of Departments. The City Administrator shall direct
and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and
agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or
by law.
C. Attend City Council Meetings. The City Administrator shall attend
all meetings of the City Council unless excused by the City Council.
When the City Council considers personnel matters relating to the
City Administrator, they may excuse the City Administrator from
attendance. The City Administrator shall have the right to take part in
discussions at meetings of the City Council but shall have no power to
vote. The City Administrator shall receive notice of all meetings.
D. Enforcement Of Laws. The City Administrator shall see that all laws,
provisions of this Charter and acts of the City Council, subject to
enforcement by the City Administrator or by officers subject to the City
Administrator's direction and supervision, are faithfully enforced.
E. Budget And Capital Program. The City Administrator shall prepare
and submit a recommended Annual Budget and a Capital Improvement
Program of not less than five (5) years, to the Mayor and City Council
as requested and subject to review by the Mayor and City Council on
an annual basis prior to the budgeting process.
F. Finance And Administrative Report. The City Administrator shall
submit to the Mayor and City Council and make available to the public
a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the
City as of the end of each fiscal year.
G. Other Reports. The City Administrator shall make such other reports
as the Mayor and City Council may require concerning the operations
of City departments, offices and agencies subject to the City
Administrator's direction and supervision.
Section
115.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
115.030
100:52
H. Report Of Financial Condition of City. The City Administrator shall
keep the Mayor and City Council fully apprised as to the financial
condition and future needs of the City and make recommendations to
the Mayor and City Council concerning the affairs of the City as the
City Administrator deems desirable.
I. Other Duties. The City Administrator shall perform such other duties
as are specified in this Charter or may be required by the City Council
that is not inconsistent with this Charter.
Section 5.4. Performance Review
The City Administrator shall receive a performance review from the Mayor
at least once a year. Each performance review shall be made a part of the
confidential personnel file of the City Administrator.
Section 115.040. Additional Charter Provisions Relating To The
Office of City Administrator. [Ord. No. 5528 §1, 11-17-2009]
Section 3.5 of Article 3 of the O'Fallon City Charter contains the following
provisions which relate to the office of City Administrator which are hereby
made a part of this Code of Ordinances:
Section 3.5. Prohibitions
B. Appointments And Removals. Neither the City Council nor any of its
members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal
of any employees whom the City Administrator or any of his or her
subordinates are empowered to appoint or employ, but the City
Council as a whole may express its views and fully and freely discuss
with the City Administrator anything pertaining to appointment and
removal of such officers and employees.
C. Interference With Administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries
and investigations under Section 3.8 of this Article, the City Council
or its members shall deal with City Officers and employees who are
subject to the direction and supervision of the City Administrator
solely through the City Administrator and neither the City Council nor
its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either
publicly or privately.
Section 115.050. Additional Qualifications For Appointment To The
Office of City Administrator. [Ord. No. 5528 §1, 11-17-2009]
The person appointed to the office of City Administrator shall be at least
twenty-one (21) years of age and shall be a graduate of an accredited
university or college, having majored in Public Administration, Engineering,
Municipal Administration, Financial Administration or Public Relations
fields or an equivalent combination of experience and training which
provides the required knowledge, skills and abilities as the Mayor and
Council may determine to be appropriate to properly discharge the duties
of the office.
Section
115.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.060
100:53
Section 115.060. Additional Duties of The City Administrator. [Ord.
No. 5528 §1, 11-17-2009]
A. Purchasing. The City Administrator shall designate an appropriate
person to be the Purchasing Agent for the City of O'Fallon and all
purchases shall be made under his/her direction and supervision and all
such purchases shall be made in accordance with the "Purchasing
Ordinance" approved by the City Council.
B. Personnel System. The City Administrator shall act as the Personnel
Officer of the City and shall recommend an appropriate position
classification system and pay plan to the Mayor and City Council. The
City Administrator, after consultation with department heads, shall
approve advancements and appropriate pay increases within the
approved pay plans and position classification system.
C. Policy Formulation. The City Administrator shall recommend to the
Mayor and the City Council adoption of such measures as he/she may
deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the City
or for the improvement of administrative services for the City.
D. City Council Agenda. The City Administrator shall submit to the Mayor
and City Council a proposed agenda for each regular Council meeting
at least forty-eight (48) hours before the time of the regular Council
meeting. In accord with Section 3.10(B) of the City Charter, items shall
be placed on the agenda by the City Administrator at the request of the
Mayor or when requested by any member of the City Council.
E. Boards, Commissions And Committees. The City Administrator shall
work with all boards, commissions and committees of the City to help
coordinate the work of each. The City Administrator may assign City
personnel to assist such bodies on his/her behalf.
F. Bid Specifications. The City Administrator shall supervise the
preparation of all bid specifications for services and equipment and
receive sealed bids for presentation to the City Council.
G. State And Federal Aid Programs. The City Administrator shall
coordinate Federal and State programs which may have application to
the City of O'Fallon.
H. Public Education. The City Administrator shall be responsible for
keeping the public informed in the purposes and methods of City
Government through all available news media.
I. Record Keeping. The City Administrator or his/her designated
representative shall keep full and accurate records of all actions taken
in the course of his/her duties and shall safely and properly keep all
records and paper belonging to the City of O'Fallon and entrusted to
his/her care. All such records shall be and remain the property of the
City of O'Fallon and be open to inspection by the Mayor and City
Council at all times.
Section
115.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
115.060
100:54
Section 115.070. Additional Powers of The City Administrator. [Ord.
No. 5528 §1, 11-17-2009]
Section 115.080. Bond. [Ord. No. 5528 §1, 11-17-2009]
The City Administrator, before entering upon the duties of his/her office,
shall file with the City a bond in the amount of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00); such bond shall be approved by the City Council and such
bond shall insure the City of O'Fallon for the faithful and honest
performance of his/her duties for the City of O'Fallon and for rendering a
full and proper account to the City of O'Fallon for funds and property which
shall come into the possession or control of the City Administrator. The
cost of such bond shall be paid by the City of O'Fallon; however, should the
City Administrator be covered by a blanket bond to the same extent, such
individual bond shall not be required.
J. Miscellaneous. In addition to the foregoing duties, the City
Administrator shall perform any and all other duties or functions
prescribed by the Mayor and City Council.
A. City Property. The City Administrator shall have responsibility for all
real and personal property of the City of O'Fallon. He/she shall have
responsibility for all inventories of such property and for the upkeep of
all such property. Personal property may be sold by the City
Administrator only with approval of the City Council. Real property may
be sold only with the approval of the City Council by resolution or
ordinance.
B. Set Administrative Policies. The City Administrator shall have the
power to prescribe such rules and regulations as he/she shall deem
necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies
subject to his/her authority.
C. Coordinate Departments. Except as otherwise provided by City Charter
and ordinances or State law, the City Administrator shall have the
power to coordinate the work of all the departments of the City and
shall have the power to overrule actions taken by such departments and
supersede such actions when the City Administrator deems it prudent
or necessary. The City Administrator shall also have authority to assign
the employees of the City to any department where they are needed for
the most effective discharge of the functions of City Government
whenever and for however long the City Administrator deems it
necessary.
D. Investigate And Report. The City Administrator shall have the power to
investigate and to examine or inquire into the affairs or operation of any
department of the City under his/her jurisdiction and shall report on
any condition or fact concerning the City Government requested by the
Mayor or City Council.
Section
115.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.090
100:55
Section 115.090. Interference By Members of The City Council.
[Ord. No. 5528 §1, 11-17-2009]
No member of the City Council shall directly interfere with the conduct
of any department or duties of employees subordinate to the City
Administrator except at the express direction of the City Council or with the
approval of the City Administrator.
Section 115.100. through Section 115.190. (Reserved)
Section
115.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
115.100
100:56
Article IV
Legal Department
DIVISION 1
City Attorney
Section 115.200. City Attorney. [Ord. No. 5472 §1, 6-11-2009]
The Mayor, with the consent and approval of the majority of the entire City
Council, may appoint a City Attorney who shall be licensed to practice law
in the State of Missouri. The City Attorney need not be a resident or voter
of the City.
Section 115.210. Term of Office. [Ord. No. 5472 §1, 6-11-2009]
The City Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council and
may be removed by the Mayor with the consent of a majority of the entire
City Council or may be removed by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire City
Council, independently of the Mayor's approval or recommendation.
Section 115.220. Selection — Review. [Ord. No. 5472 §1, 6-11-2009]
Anything in this Code of Ordinances, the City's personnel policies, the
employee reference guide or elsewhere to the contrary notwithstanding,
appointment of the City Attorney shall not be subject to any internal posting
or external advertising requirements or testing or competitive examination
requirements which might otherwise be the norm for City employment in
accordance with either Section 6.2 of the Charter or otherwise, nor enjoy
any right to internal administrative appeal or review by the Personnel
Committee of disciplinary action or termination of employment.
Section 115.230. Special Counsel — Supervision. [Ord. No. 5472 §1,
6-11-2009]
Additional special counsel may be employed from time to time or for special
purposes with the approval of the City Council. The City Attorney may
utilize and delegate assignments to other attorneys with whom the City
Attorney is affiliated without specific authorization from the Mayor or City
Council, provided however, that such work shall be supervised and subject
to review and approval by the City Attorney.
Section 115.240. Vacancy. [Ord. No. 5472 §1, 6-11-2009]
If a vacancy occurs in the office of City Attorney, the Mayor shall appoint
a suitable person to discharge the duties of such office until the first (1st)
regular meeting of the City Council thereafter, at which time such vacancy
shall be permanently filled.
Section 115.250. Duties. [Ord. No. 5472 §1, 6-11-2009]
Section
115.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.250
100:57
Section 115.260. Compensation. [Ord. No. 5472 §1, 6-11-2009]
The City Attorney's compensation shall by ordinance from time to time.
Section 115.270. through Section 115.290. (Reserved)
A. The City Attorney shall represent the City in all legal matters and
actions and shall:
1. Except as may be otherwise provided in this Code, represent the
City in all legal matters and proceedings in which the City is a party
or interested or in which City Officers are parties in their official
capacity;
2. Advise the Mayor, the Council, any committee or member thereof
and the City Administrator, department heads and all other City
Officers and agencies as to legal questions affecting City interests;
3. Approve as to form all ordinances, contracts, deeds, bonds and
other documents to be signed in the name of, or made to or with,
the City;
4. Attend Council meetings as directed by the Council; and
5. Perform any other duties as the Council may direct.
Section
115.250
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
115.270
100:58
DIVISION 2
Prosecuting Attorney
Section 115.300. Prosecuting Attorney. [Ord. No. 5472 §1,
6-11-2009]
The Mayor, with the consent and approval of the majority of the entire
City Council, may appoint a municipal Prosecuting Attorney who shall be
licensed to practice law in the State of Missouri. The Prosecuting Attorney
need not be a resident or voter of the City.
Section 115.310. Term of Office. [Ord. No. 5472 §1, 6-11-2009]
The Prosecuting Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and
Council and may be removed by the Mayor with the consent of a majority
of the entire City Council or may be removed by a two-thirds (2/3) vote
of the entire City Council, independently of the Mayor's approval or
recommendation.
Section 115.320. Selection — Review. [Ord. No. 5472 §1, 6-11-2009]
Anything in this Code of Ordinances, the City's personnel policies, the
employee reference guide or elsewhere to the contrary notwithstanding,
appointment of the Prosecuting Attorney shall not be subject to any internal
posting or external advertising requirements or testing or competitive
examination requirements which might otherwise be the norm for City
employment in accordance with either Section 6.2 of the Charter or
otherwise, nor enjoy any right to internal administrative appeal or review
by the Personnel Committee of disciplinary action or termination of
employment.
Section 115.330. Special Counsel — Supervision. [Ord. No. 5472 §1,
6-11-2009]
Additional special counsel may be employed from time to time or for special
purposes with the approval of the City Council. The Prosecuting Attorney
may utilize and delegate assignments to other attorneys with whom the
Prosecuting Attorney is affiliated without specific authorization from the
Mayor or City Council, provided however, that such work shall be
supervised and subject to review and approval by the Prosecuting Attorney.
Section 115.340. Vacancy. [Ord. No. 5472 §1, 6-11-2009]
If a vacancy occurs in the office of Prosecuting Attorney, the Mayor shall
appoint a suitable person to discharge the duties of such office until the
first (1st) regular meeting of the City Council thereafter, at which time such
vacancy shall be permanently filled.
Section
115.300
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.350
100:59
Section 115.350. Duties. [Ord. No. 5472 §1, 6-11-2009]
It shall be the duty of the Prosecuting Attorney to prosecute the violations
of tile City's ordinances before the Municipal Judge or before any Circuit
Judge hearing violations of the City's ordinances.
Section 115.360. Compensation. [Ord. No. 5472 §1, 6-11-2009]
The City Attorney's compensation shall be fixed by ordinance from time to
time. The compensation of such attorney shall not be contingent upon the
number of cases tried, the number of guilty verdicts reached or the amount
of fines imposed or collected.
Section
115.350
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
115.360
100:60
Chapter 120
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
Section
115.360
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.360
100:61

ARTICLE I
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
Section 120.010. Composition and Qualifications of Members. [R.O.
2007 §120.010; Ord. No. 685 §1, 3-1-1979; Ord. No. 4908 §1,
9-26-2005; Ord. No. 5782 §1, 4-12-2012]
There is hereby established the O'Fallon Parks and Recreation Advisory
Board, the members of which shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the City Council and shall consist of eight (8) members. The
eight (8) members will be comprised of one (1) appointed from each ward
and the remaining appointments designated at large. Members appointed
to the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board must be citizens chosen with
reference to their fitness for such office. No member of the City Government
shall be a member of said Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
Section 120.020. Members — Term, Removal and Vacancies. [R.O.
2007 §120.020; Ord. No. 685 §2, 3-1-1979; Ord. No. 880 §2,
12-3-1981; Ord. No. 4908 §2, 9-26-2005; Ord. No. 5782 §1,
4-12-2012]
Section 120.030. Officers — Rules and Powers. [R.O. 2007 §120.030;
Ord. No. 685 §3, 3-1-1979; Ord. No. 4908 §3, 9-26-2005; Ord. No.
5782 §1, 4-12-2012]
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall, immediately after the
appointment, meet and organize by the election of one (1) member as
Chairman, a Vice Chairman and Secretary. The Parks and Recreation
A. Members of the O'Fallon Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall
hold office from the first (1st) of May following their appointment. They
shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, except that those
appointed at the first (1st) meeting shall cast lots for their respective
terms, three (3) members to serve three (3) years, three (3) members to
serve two (2) years, and two (2) members to serve one (1) year.
Annually the Mayor shall appoint three (3) members who shall hold
office for three (3) years and until their successors are appointed.
B. The Mayor may, by and with the consent of the City Council, remove any
member of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board for misconduct or
neglect of duty.
C. Vacancies occasioned by removal, resignation or otherwise shall be
reported to the City Council by the Mayor, and shall be filled in like
manner as original appointments for the balance of the unexpired term.
No member shall receive compensation as such.
D. It is hereby declared the policy of the City Council that one (1) to (2)
member(s) of the City Council chosen by the Council from time to time
shall attend Parks and Recreation Advisory Board meetings to act as a
non-voting liaison.
Section
120.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.030
100:63
Advisory Board may make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for
its own guidance and proceedings as may be expedient.
Section 120.040. Duties and Responsibilities. [R.O. 2007 §120.040;
Ord. No. 685 §4, 3-1-1979; Ord. No. 4908 §4, 9-26-2005; Ord. No.
5782 §1, 4-12-2012]
A. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board is intended primarily to offer
to the Mayor and City Council both a user's special focus and a citizen's
perspective to augment City staff expertise on matters dealing with
parks and recreation activities as the Mayor and Council allocate funds
and set City priorities. To that end and in that context the Board shall
have the following duties and responsibilities:
1. To generally advise City staff and the Mayor and Council on all
aspects of the City's parks and recreation activities as requested.
2. Consider and make recommendations on the acquisition,
renovation, upgrade, replacement, demolition or deacquisition of
parks and recreation facilities of the City.
3. Coordinate public engagement on, and make a recommendation to
the Mayor and City Council regarding adoption of, the City's Parks
and Recreation Master Plan and such updates or revisions thereto
as may be appropriate from time to time.
4. Consider and make recommendations regarding the array of
programming offered at the City's parks and other recreation
facilities.
5. To serve as a resource to evaluate and make recommendations to
City staff and the Mayor and Council with respect to such proposals
touching upon park and recreation issues as may be referred to the
Board from time to time.
6. To receive and consider public comment and suggestions on park
and recreation matters, and to assist in disseminating to residents
and the public the City's perspective and judgment with respect to
such matters.
7. To perform such other duties and undertake such other
assignments as may be requested by the Mayor and City Council.
Section
120.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
120.040
100:64
ARTICLE II
Veterans Commission
Section 120.050. Appointment of Commission Members. [R.O. 2007
§120.120; Ord. No. 4440 §1, 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 4724 §1,
9-17-2004]
The City of O'Fallon, Missouri, Veterans Commission is hereby established.
Such Commission shall consist of eleven (11) members appointed by the
Mayor with the consent and approval of the majority of the members of
the City Council. Members of the Commission shall serve a two (2) year
term. The Commission shall designate one (1) member of the Commission to
serve as Chairperson, who shall preside at meetings of the Commission and
who shall execute the duties normally conferred by parliamentary order in
addition to those prescribed by this Article. Commission members shall be
residents of St. Charles County and six (6) of the members shall have served
in the armed forces of the United States. The remaining members shall have
had no prior military service.
Section 120.060. Establishing Powers and Duties. [R.O. 2007
§120.130; Ord. No. 4440 §2, 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 4724 §2,
9-17-2004]
Section 120.070. Appointment of A Liaison From City Council. [R.O.
2007 §120.140; Ord. No. 4440 §3, 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 4724 §3,
9-17-2004]
The Mayor shall select one (1) member of the City Council to serve as the
liaison with the Veterans Commission.
A. The Veterans Commission shall have all the powers and duties as set
forth below:
1. The Veterans Commission shall oversee the planning for any event
in association with any of the Veterans' associated days or
locations. The Commission will interact with the Veterans'
organizations in the local area and the City of O'Fallon.
2. The Veterans Commission shall make recommendations to the City
Council, and the City Administration for the preservation and
upkeep of the City's war memorials including, but not limited to,
the Veterans' Memorial Walk.
3. The Veterans Commission shall attend to any other matter deemed
appropriate by the City Council concerning veterans' affairs.
Section
120.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.070
100:65

ARTICLE III
Cultural Arts Commission
Section 120.080. Purpose, Scope And Application. [Ord. No. 6298
§ 1, 1-12-2017]
Section 120.090. Definitions. [Ord. No. 6298 § 1, 1-12-2017]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases in this Article shall be
interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common
usage and so as to give this Article its most reasonable application. For
the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them by this Section.
ARTIST — An individual generally recognized by critics and peers as a
professional practitioner of the visual, performing or language arts, based
on his or her body of work, educational background, experience, exhibition
history, publication and/or creation of artworks. For commissioning and
acquisition purposes, an artist cannot be a City employee, a current
member of the Cultural Arts Commission or a former member of the
Cultural Arts Commission who served within the past year, or any person or
firm under contract with the City.
ARTWORK — An aesthetic creation of permanent or temporary medium or
combination of media resulting from the skill and creativity of an artist or
artists.
COMMISSION — The O'Fallon Cultural Arts Commission.
COMMISSIONERS — Members of the O'Fallon Cultural Arts Commission.
PUBLIC ART — Artwork commissioned or acquired by or on behalf of the
City for public display or artwork sponsored by the City and brought to the
City for temporary display.
PUBLIC ART PROJECT PLAN — A document that guides the planning and
execution of a specific public art project and sets out the basic framework
of the project including: (i) goals and location; (ii) budget and funding;
A. The purpose and function of this Article is to promote the educational,
cultural, economic, and general welfare of the community by
establishing a process for the City to obtain funding for Artwork and to
commission, acquire and/or publicly display Artwork on a permanent or
temporary basis.
B. The provisions in this Article shall not apply to artwork proposed by
other persons and entities for installation and display on private
property.
C. All Artwork commissioned or acquired by the City shall be the property
of the City.
D. Only the City, upon approval of the City Council, may install, maintain
and display Artwork on City property.
Section
120.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.090
100:67
(iii) timeline; (iv) the artist selection process and community engagement
process; (v) a marketing, promotion or education plan; (vi) a list of internal
and external stakeholders; and (vii) possible collaboration with other
entities.
Section 120.100. Establishment Of Commission. [Ord. No. 6298 § 1,
1-12-2017]
There is hereby established an advisory board known as the Cultural Arts
Commission for the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
Section 120.110. Members — Appointments — Qualifications —
Terms Of Office — Liaisons. [Ord. No. 6298 § 1, 1-12-2017]
Section 120.120. Powers And Duties. [Ord. No. 6298 § 1, 1-12-2017]
A. The Cultural Arts Commission shall consist of not less than five (5) and
no more than eight (8) members. At least five (5) members shall be
residents of the City. If the Commission consists of more than five (5)
members, the remaining members may either be residents or be a nonresident
with expertise in the field of art or the display thereof.
B. Each appointed member of the Commission shall have one (1) vote on
all matters before the Commission.
C. The City Council shall make every reasonable effort to appoint persons
to the Commission from the various wards and areas of the City and
persons with a history of professional or volunteer experience in the
visual or performing arts and an interest in contributing to the
development of O'Fallon's Art and Culture Program.
D. On establishment of the Commission, the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council, shall appoint the members of the
Commission with staggered terms ranging from one (1) year to three
(3) years. Thereafter, all members shall be appointed for terms of three
(3) years each by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council.
E. Members shall serve without compensation.
F. In addition to a member of the City Council who shall serve as the
Council liaison with the Cultural Arts Commission, the Convention and
Visitors Bureau and the Parks and Recreation Board may each appoint
one (1) of their members to serve as liaisons to the Cultural Arts
Commission. Such liaisons may offer information and recommendations
to the Commission, but shall not have a vote on any matter before the
Commission.
A. The O'Fallon Cultural Arts Commission shall have the following
advisory and recommending powers and duties:
Section
120.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
120.120
100:68
Section 120.130. through Section 120.190. (Reserved)
1. Recommend fund raising efforts to the City Council and, upon
approval by the City Council, conduct fund raising efforts and
solicitation of funds for the purpose of commissioning, acquiring,
maintaining and publicly displaying Artwork by the City;
2. Make recommendations to the City Council with regard to
standards for suitable public art pieces to be commissioned,
acquired or displayed by the City by utilizing recognized criteria
and community standards;
3. Research available Public Art and Artists and make
recommendations to the City Council, when necessary concerning
the commission or acquisition of specific Public Art or the
arrangement for the temporary display of Artwork belonging to
others;
4. Locate and recommend appropriate sites for the display of
Artwork, taking into consideration such factors as availability of
the site, visibility of the site, impact on property and persons in the
near vicinity of the site, accessibility to the site, ease of
maintenance of the sites, requisite approval by appropriate
government agencies and other similar factors;
5. For each Public Art recommendation to the City Council, prepare a
Public Art Project Plan and provide such Plan to the City Council as
part of the Commission's recommendation;
6. Assist the City in promoting the art displayed on sites within the
City and educating the public about the art;
7. Encourage and promote the use of art by others for the purpose of
education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the City; and
8. Serve as advocates for art and culture in O'Fallon.
Section
120.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.130
100:69

ARTICLE IV
Public Works Advisory Committee17
Section 120.200. Creation. [Ord. No. 6111 §§1, 3, 6-11-2015]
There is hereby created a Public Works Advisory Committee for the City of
O'Fallon, Missouri.
Section 120.210. Members; Appointment; Term of Office; Removal.
[Ord. No. 6111 §§1, 3, 6-11-2015]
A. The Public Works Advisory Committee shall consist of two (2) classes of
members: citizen members and ex officio members. Ex officio members
shall be entitled to attend all meetings and participate in all discussion
and debate but shall not have the right to vote.
B. There shall be a maximum of twelve (12) citizen members appointed by
the Mayor with the consent of a majority of the City Council. All citizen
members shall be residents of the City of O'Fallon. Five (5) citizen
members shall be appointed such that each Ward has one (1) resident
representative. Other citizen members shall be appointed at large.
C. The ex officio members shall be:
1. One (1) member of the City Council selected by the Council.
2. The Director of the Public Works Department, or the Director's
designee from time to time.
3. The City Engineer, or the Engineer's designee from time to time.
4. The Director of Water and Sewer operations, or the Director's
designee from time to time.
5. The Manager of the Environmental Services Department, or the
Manager's designee from time to time.
D. Except as otherwise provided below, citizen members of the Committee
shall hold office for a term of two (2) years. The terms of office for those
citizen members initially appointed shall be staggered such that half of
the citizen members shall be appointed for an initial term of one (1)
year and half of the citizen members shall be appointed for an initial
term of two (2) years. Thereafter all citizen members shall be appointed
for a term of two (2) years. The City Council member shall serve a term
of one (1) year. The Director of Community Development, the City
Engineer, Director of Water and Sewer Operations and the Manager of
17.Editor's Note: Ord. no. 5467 §1, adopted June 11, 2009, repealed sections
120.200—120.240 and enacted new provisions set out herein. Former sections
120.200—120.240 derived from ord. no. 5101 §1, 11-9-2006; ord. no. 5365 §1, 9-11-2008.
Subsequently, the public works commission established pursuant to Article IV, sections
120.200—120.230, which derived from ord. no. 5467 §1, 3, 6-11-2009 and ord. no. 5591 §1,
5-13-2010, was dissolved and said sections were replaced 6-11-2015 with the regulations
set out herein by §1 of ord. no. 6111.
Section
120.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.210
100:71
Section 120.220. Meetings. [Ord. No. 6111 §§1, 3, 6-11-2015]
Section 120.230. Powers and Duties —— Limitations. [Ord. No.
6111 §§1, 3, 6-11-2015]
the Environmental Services Division shall serve terms coinciding with
such office. Designees of the Director and Traffic Engineer shall serve
at the pleasure of the official designating them.
E. The terms of all citizen members and the Council member shall expire
on April 30 of the appropriate year and when a successor is appointed
and qualified.
F. Vacancies occasioned by removal, resignation or otherwise, shall be
filled in like manner as original appointments and shall be for the
balance of the vacant term.
G. The citizen members of the Committee shall select one of the citizen
members of the Committee as its Chairman. The Chairman shall be
appointed for a term of one (1) year to expire on April 30 and when a
successor is appointed and duly qualified. The Chairman shall preside
at all meetings of the Committee.
H. A quorum of the Committee shall consist of a majority of the citizen
members.
I. The Mayor may, with the consent of a majority of the City Council,
remove any citizen or Council Committee member from membership on
the Committee at will, and any such member may also be so removed by
a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the City Council independently of the Mayor's
approval or recommendation.
J. No Committee member shall receive compensation for performing the
duties of the office.
A. Regular meetings of the Committee shall be held monthly. The
Committee may meet in special meetings at such additional times as
may be set by the Chairman. The Chairman may also cancel a regularly
scheduled meeting due to lack of a quorum or business. Meetings
cancelled due to lack of a quorum may be rescheduled by the Chairman
as necessary.
B. All meetings of the Committee shall be open to the public unless
otherwise authorized by law.
C. The Committee may appoint various of its members as standing or ad
hoc subcommittees to address specific matters under consideration by
the Committee or to focus on a particular aspect of the Committee's
purview, for the purpose of assisting the whole Committee in the
discharge of its duties.
Section
120.210
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
120.230
100:72
A. The Public Works Advisory Committee shall have the authority and
responsibility to do the following:
1. To identify and analyze best practices and innovative approaches in
public works, traffic, community development, ecological and
environmental protection and enhancement, recycling, green
initiatives, and utility matters and advise the Mayor, City Council,
City Administrator and Department of Public Works regarding such
issues within the City.
2. To study, assess and render advice on plans and programs of the
City related to the development, construction and maintenance of:
a. City buildings and physical facilities;
b. Streets and roadways;
c. Snow and ice removal plans, programs and equipment;
d. Storm water planning, systems and facilities; and
e. Water and sanitary sewer systems and facilities owned by or
serving the City.
3. Identify locations with high accident rates or which pose special
dangers or enforcement problems and consider design or
regulatory measures which might remedy such problems.
4. Serve as a forum to consider citizen suggestions, complaints,
concerns or observations relating to city facilities, traffic safety or
similar items in the realm of the Public Works Department.
5. Consider, evaluate and make recommendations regarding
continuation and improvement of City efforts, initiatives, programs,
regulations and opportunities relating to ecological and
environmental protection and enhancement.
6. Consider, evaluate and make recommendations as to policies
regarding operation, maintenance and construction of City
facilities to further the reduction of greenhouse gases, conserve
natural resources, promote renewable resources and encourage
recycling.
7. Suggest and promote efforts to provide "green" education and
outreach programs.
8. Consider, evaluate and make recommendations regarding
regulations and code requirements pertaining to "green" building
design and construction.
9. Other matters in support and furtherance of the "green" initiatives
contained in the 2015 O'Fallon Comprehensive Plan.
Section
120.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.230
100:73
Section 120.240. through Section 120.290. (Reserved)
B. Nothing contained in this Article shall give the Committee any power,
either directly or indirectly, to exercise any authority, direction or
control over the Public Works Department or any City Department,
Agency, Division or any one or more employees.
C. Nothing contained in this Article shall give the Committee the authority
to make any changes to any ordinances, policies, practices or
procedures of the City. The Committee's role shall be limited to offering
such advice and/or insight to the City's elected and appointed officials
as it believes would be beneficial to the efficient and effective conduct
of the City's activities within the realm of the duties assigned to the
Committee above.
Section
120.230
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
120.240
100:74
ARTICLE V
Senior Resident Advisory Committee
Section 120.300. Creation and Composition. [Ord. No. 5112 §1,
12-14-2006; Ord. No. 5591 §2, 5-13-2010; Ord. No. 6588, 6-27-2019]
There is hereby created a Senior Resident Advisory Committee for the City
of O'Fallon, Missouri, to consist of eight (8) citizen members appointed by
the Mayor with the consent of the City Council and one (1) member of the
City Council selected by the Council. All members shall be residents of the
City of O'Fallon. The Mayor, or the Mayor's designee from time to time, shall
be an ex officio member of the Committee and shall be entitled to be present
and participate in all meetings of the Committee but shall have no right to
vote in the deliberations of the Committee.
Section 120.310. Members — Term, Removal and Vacancies. [Ord.
No. 5112 §1, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 5591 §2, 5-13-2010]
Section 120.320. Chairman. [Ord. No. 5112 §1, 12-14-2006]
The Committee shall designate one (1) of the citizen members of the
Committee as its Chairman. The Chairman shall be appointed for a term
A. Initially, four (4) citizen members of the O'Fallon Senior Resident
Advisory Committee shall serve for a term of two (2) years, and the
remaining four (4) citizen members shall serve for a term of one (1)
year, with successor terms of two (2) years.
B. The terms of the original members appointed to the Committee shall be
decided amongst themselves or by a drawing of term. All original
members and committee members thereafter may be reappointed if in
good standing and approved by the Council.
C. The City Council member shall serve a term of one (1) year.
D. The terms of all members shall expire on April thirtieth (30th) of the
appropriate year of their term and when a successor is appointed and
qualified. Members may be reappointed by the Mayor with the consent
of the majority of the Council.
E. The Mayor may, with the consent of a majority of all the members
serving on the Council, remove any member from office at will, and any
such member may also be so removed by a two-thirds (?) vote of all the
members serving on the Council, independently of the Mayor's approval
or recommendation.
F. Vacancies occasioned by removal, resignation or otherwise shall be
filled in like manner as original appointments for the balance of the
vacant term.
G. No Committee member shall receive compensation for performing the
duties of the office.
Section
120.300
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.320
100:75
of one (1) year to expire on April thirtieth (30th) and until a successor is
appointed and duly qualified. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of
the Committee.
Section 120.330. Meetings. [Ord. No. 5112 §1, 12-14-2006; Ord. No.
6466, 5-10-2018]
Section 120.340. Powers and Duties — Limitations. [Ord. No. 5112
§1, 12-14-2006]
Section 120.350. through Section 120.390. (Reserved)
A. Regular meetings of the Committee shall be held quarterly. The
Committee may meet in special meetings at such additional times as
may be set by the Chairman or the majority of the Committee. The
Chairman may also cancel a regularly scheduled meeting due to lack of
a quorum or business. Meetings canceled due to lack of a quorum may
be rescheduled by the Chairman as necessary.
B. All meetings of the Committee shall be open to the public unless
otherwise authorized by law.
A. The Senior Resident Advisory Committee shall have the authority and
responsibility to do the following:
1. To advise the Mayor, City Council and City Administrator regarding
senior citizen issues within the City.
2. To study, assess and render advice on plans and programs of the
City related to senior City residents and to bring forth issues and
concerns to better service these residents to the elected officials.
B. Nothing contained in this Article shall give the Committee any power,
either directly or indirectly, to exercise any authority, direction or
control over City property, monies or any employee thereof.
C. Nothing contained in this Article shall give the Committee the authority
to make any changes to any ordinances, policies, practices or
procedures of the City.
Section
120.320
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
120.350
100:76
ARTICLE VI
Historic Preservation Commission
Section 120.400. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 5955 §1,
1-23-201418]
Section 120.410. Definitions. [Ord. No. 5955 §1, 1-23-2014]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases in this Article shall be
interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common
usage and so as to give this Article its most reasonable application. For
the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them by this Section:
AREA — A specific geographic division of the City of O'Fallon.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established pursuant to Section
400.690 et seq., of Article XVII of Chapter 400, Zoning Code.
A. The purpose of this Article is to promote the educational, cultural,
economic, and general welfare of the community by:
1. Providing a mechanism to identify and encourage the preservation
of distinctive historic, archaeological and architectural
characteristics of O'Fallon which represent elements of the City's
cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural history;
2. Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of
the past as represented in O'Fallon landmarks and Historic
Districts;
3. Encouraging the conservation and improving the value of property
designated as landmarks or within Historic Districts;
4. Promoting economic benefits to encourage business and residential
owners to locate and invest in historically significant properties;
5. Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the City to home
buyers, tourists, visitors, and shoppers, and thereby supporting
and promoting business, commerce and industry, and providing
economic benefit to the City;
6. Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration, and
rehabilitation of the historic structures, areas and neighborhoods;
7. Promoting the use of Historic Districts and landmarks for the
education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the City;
8. Promoting the identification, evaluation, protection and
interpretation of archaeological resources within the City.
18.Editor's Note: Section 1 of this ordinance superseded Former Art. VI, Historic
Preservation Commission, as adopted by Ord. No. 5818 § 1, 10-11-2012.
Section
120.400
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.410
100:77
COMMISSIONERS — Members of the O'Fallon Historical Preservation
Commission.
CULTURAL RESOURCES — Districts, sites, structures, objects and
evidence of some importance to a culture, a subculture, or a community for
scientific, engineering, art, tradition, religious or other reasons, significant
in providing resource and environmental data necessary for the study and
interpretation of past ways of life and for interpreting human behavior.
DESIGN GUIDELINE — A standard of appropriate activity that will preserve
the historic, architectural, scenic or aesthetic character of a landmark or
Historic District.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE — The architectural character
and general composition of the exterior of a structure, including but not
limited to the kind, color and texture of the building material and the
type, design and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and
appurtenant elements.
HISTORIC DISTRICT (HD) — An area designated as an "HD" Historic
District by ordinance of the City Council which may include individual
landmarks as well as other properties or structures which, while not of such
historic and/or architectural significance to be designated as landmarks,
nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics and historical
significance of the Historic District.
HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE — Character, interest or value as part of the
development, heritage, or culture of the community, County, State or
country; as the location of an important local, County, State or national
event; or through identification with a person or persons who made an
important contribution to the development of the community, County, State
or country.
LANDMARK — A property or structure designated as a landmark by
ordinance of the City Council, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein,
which is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, interpretation and
preservation because of its historic, architectural or archaeological
significance to the City of O'Fallon.
OWNER OF RECORD — The person, corporation or other legal entity listed
as owner on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds.
SITE — The traditional, documented or legendary location of an event,
occurrence, action or structure significant in the life or lives of a person,
persons, groups, or tribe, or any place with evidence of past human activity.
Sites include, but are not limited to, cemeteries, burial grounds, occupation
and work areas, evidence of farming or hunting and gathering, battlefields,
settlements, estates, gardens, groves, river crossings, routes and trails,
caves, quarries, mines or significant trees or other plant life.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including, but without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, buildings, fences, gazebos,
Section
120.410
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
120.410
100:78
advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts, radio and
television antennas and towers, and swimming pools.
SURVEY — The systematic gathering of information on the architectural,
historic, scenic, and archaeological significance of buildings, sites,
structures, areas, or landscapes, through visual assessment in the field and
historical research for the purpose of identifying landmarks or districts
worthy of preservation.
Section 120.420. Establishment of Commission. [Ord. No. 5955 §1,
1-23-2014]
There is hereby established a Historic Preservation Commission for the City
of O'Fallon, Missouri.
Section 120.430. Members — Appointments — Qualifications —
Terms of Office. [Ord. No. 5955 §1, 1-23-2014]
A. The O'Fallon Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of eight (8)
voting members, one (1) from each Ward and three (3) at large, and up
to three (3) non-voting members.
B. All voting members of the Commission shall be residents of the City of
O'Fallon.
C. Non-voting members shall be individuals who are subject matter
experts in historic preservation, but may or may not be residents of the
City of O'Fallon.
D. The City Council shall make every reasonable effort to appoint persons
with a demonstrated interest in the history and preservation of the City
of O'Fallon. To the extent available in the community, the O'Fallon
Historic Preservation Commission shall include professional members
representing such disciplines as architecture, law, real estate
brokerage, banking, history, or other fields related to historic
preservation.
E. On establishment of the Commission, the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council, shall appoint eight (8) members, three (3)
of which shall be appointed to serve for three (3) years, three (3) of
which shall be appointed to serve for two (2) years, and two (2) of which
shall be appointed to serve for one (1) year from the date of
appointment. Thereafter, all voting members shall be appointed for
terms of three (3) years each. The three non-voting members shall be
appointed in the same manner, one (1) for three (3) years, one (1) for
two (2) years, and one (1) for one (1) year. Thereafter, all non-voting
members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years each. Any
vacancy on the Historic Preservation Commission shall be filled in the
same manner as original appointments to the Commission and in
accordance with the City's Charter. Any person appointed to fill a
vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term for which he or she is
appointed.
Section
120.410
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.440
100:79
Section 120.440. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 5955 §1, 1-23-2014]
A. The O'Fallon Historic Preservation Commission shall have the following
powers and duties:
1. To adopt its own procedural regulations, provided such regulations
are consistent with this Article, all other ordinances and the
Charter of the City, and the Revised Statutes of the State of
Missouri.
2. To conduct an ongoing survey for the identification of historically,
archaeologically and architecturally significant properties,
structures, sites and areas that exemplify the cultural, social,
economic, political, or architectural history of the nation, State or
City; and to maintain the research information in an inventory
accessible to the public.
3. To investigate and recommend to the City Council the adoption of
ordinances designating properties or structures having special
cultural, historic, archaeological, community or architectural value
as landmarks.
4. To investigate and recommend to the City Council the adoption of
ordinances designating areas as having special cultural, historic,
archaeological, community or architectural value as Historic
Districts.
5. To keep a register of all properties and structures which have been
designated as landmarks or Historic Districts, including all
information required for each designation.
6. To confer recognition upon the owners of landmarks and property
or structures within Historic Districts by means of certificates,
plaques, or markers.
7. To advise and assist owners of landmarks and property or
structures within Historic Districts on physical and financial
aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, and
on procedures for inclusion on the National Register of Historic
Places.
8. To hold hearings on each proposed nomination of a landmark or
Historic District and on the guidelines developed for each
nomination.
9. To recommend to the City Council nomination of landmarks and
Historic Districts to the O'Fallon Historic Register, and to the
National Register of Historic Places, and to review and comment on
any nominations to the National Register of Historic Places.
10. To inform and educate the citizens of the City of O'Fallon
concerning the historic, archaeological and architectural heritage
of the City by recommending publication or sponsorship of maps,
Section
120.440
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
120.440
100:80
newsletters, brochures, pamphlets, programs and seminars by the
City, the O'Fallon Historic Preservation Commission, or other
appropriate parties.
11. To develop and make available to concerned property owners and
to the public specific recommended design guidelines based on the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards of Rehabilitation for the
alteration or construction of landmarks or property and structures
within Historic Districts.
12. To make recommendations to the City Council regarding
acceptance and use of such gifts, grants, and money as may be
offered to the City for the purposes of this Article, including
recommendations regarding the publication of maps and brochures
or acquisition of relevant consulting services, or performing other
functions for the purpose of achieving the purposes of this Article.
13. To recommend the retention of such specialists or consultants or
appointment of such citizen advisory committees as may be
required from time to time.
14. To offer testimony before all boards and commissions, including the
City Planning and Zoning Commission and the Board of
Adjustment, on any matter affecting historically, archaeologically,
culturally and architecturally significant property, structures, sites
and areas.
15. To make recommendations to the City Council concerning
budgetary appropriations to further the general purposes of this
Article.
16. To develop a preservation component in the Comprehensive Plan of
the City of O'Fallon and to recommend it to the Planning and
Zoning Commission and to the City Council.
17. To recommend to the City Planning and Zoning Commission and
the City Council any regulatory amendments appropriate for the
protection and continued use of landmarks or property, sites and
structures within Historic Districts.
18. To undertake an ongoing survey and research effort in the City of
O'Fallon to identify neighborhoods, areas, sites, structures, and
objects that have historic, cultural, archaeological, architectural or
aesthetic importance, interest, or value.
19. To develop a plan and schedule for conducting a comprehensive
survey of the City of O'Fallon to identify significant resources. As
part of the survey, the O'Fallon Historic Preservation Commission
shall review and evaluate any prior surveys and studies by any unit
of government or private organization and compile appropriate
descriptions, facts, and photographs.
Section
120.440
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.440
100:81
Section 120.450. Nomination of Landmarks and Historic Districts.
[Ord. No. 5955 §1, 1-23-2014]
20. To hold four meetings per year at regular intervals or more
frequently as required in order to carry out its functions.
21. To comply with the requirements of the Missouri Sunshine Law19
that are applicable to the Commission and to comply with the City's
requirements pertaining to open meetings and records as set forth
in Chapter 140 of this Municipal Code.
A. General. Nominations may be made to the O'Fallon Historic
Preservation Commission on a form prepared by it and may be
submitted by a member of the O'Fallon Historic Preservation
Commission, owner of record of the nominated property or structure, or
the City Council. Nominations shall be turned in to the City Clerk, who
will within seven (7) days of receipt mail a notification of intent to
nominate to the owner of record of the nominated property. Forms and
criteria for nomination will be available in the City Clerk's department.
B. Objection By Owner Of Record.
1. In the case of an individual property or group of commonly owned
parcels, any owner of record of such nominated property or
structure may file an objection to such nomination. In the case of an
area nominated as a Historic District, one or more owners of record
of not less than fifty percent (50%) of the number of nominated lots
of record within the proposed district may file an objection to such
nomination.
2. Any objection shall be filed with the City Clerk and must be filed
within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice of intent.
C. Criteria For Consideration Of Nomination. The O'Fallon Historic
Preservation Commission shall, upon such investigation as it deems
necessary, make a determination as to whether a nominated property,
structure, site, area or district meets one (1) or more of the following
criteria:
1. Its character, interest, or value as part of the development,
heritage, or cultural characteristics of the community, County,
State or country;
2. Its overall setting and harmony as a collection of buildings,
structures, objects where the overall collection forms a unit;
3. Its potential to be returned to an accurate historic appearance
regardless of alterations or insensitive treatment that can be
demonstrated to be reversible;
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 610, RSMo.
Section
120.440
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
120.450
100:82
4. Its location as a site of a significant local, County, State, or national
event;
5. Its identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the development of the community, County, State, or
country;
6. Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
type valuable for the study of a period, type, method of
construction, or use of indigenous materials;
7. Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer,
architect, or landscape architect whose individual work has
influenced the development of the community, County, State, or
country;
8. Its embodiment of elements of design, detailing, materials, or
craftsmanship that render it architecturally significant;
9. Its embodiment of design elements that make it structurally or
architecturally innovative;
10. Its unique location or singular physical characteristic that make it
an established or familiar visual feature of the neighborhood,
community, or City;
11. Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian
structure, including, but not limited to, farmhouses, gas stations, or
other commercial structures, with a high level of integrity or
architectural significance;
12. Its suitability for preservation or restoration; and
13. Its potential to yield information important to history and
prehistory. Any structure, property, or area that meets one (1) or
more of the above criteria shall also have sufficient integrity of
location, design, materials, and workmanship to make it worthy of
preservation or restoration.
D. Hearing. Upon receipt of a completed nomination of a landmark or
Historic District, and following the time period for owners of record to
file objection, the O'Fallon Historic Preservation Commission shall
schedule a hearing to solicit input and comment on the proposed
nomination.
E. Report And Recommendation Of The O'Fallon Historic Preservation
Commission.
1. The O'Fallon Historic Preservation Commission shall within fortyfive
(45) days from receipt of a completed nomination in proper
form adopt by resolution a recommendation that the nominated
landmark or Historic District does or does not meet the criteria for
designation in Section 120.450(C) of this Article. In the event that a
Section
120.450
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.450
100:83
proper objection has been filed with regard to the nomination,
an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the entire
membership of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be
required to recommend designation as a landmark or Historic
District. The Commission's resolution shall be accompanied by a
report to the City Council containing the following information:
a. Explanation of the significance or lack of significance of the
nominated landmark or Historic District as it relates to the
criteria for designation;
b. Explanation of the integrity or lack of integrity of the
nominated landmark or Historic District;
c. In the case of a nominated landmark found to meet the criteria
for designation:
(1) The significant exterior architectural features of the
nominated landmark that should be protected;
(2) The types of construction, alteration, demolition, and
removal that should be discouraged;
(3) Archaeological significance and recommendations for
interpretation and protection.
d. In the case of a nominated Historic District found to meet the
criteria for designation:
(1) The types of significant exterior architectural features of
the structures within the nominated Historic District that
should be protected;
(2) The types of alterations and demolitions that should be
discouraged;
(3) The type and significance of historic and prehistoric
archaeological sites within the nominated Historic
District.
e. The relationship of the nominated landmark or Historic District
to the ongoing effort of the O'Fallon Historic Preservation
Commission to identify and nominate all potential cultural
resources that meet the criteria for designation.
f. A map showing the location of the nominated landmark and/or
the boundaries of the nominated Historic District.
2. The recommendations and report of the O'Fallon Historic
Preservation Commission shall be sent to the City Council and shall
be available to the public in the City Clerk's office.
F. Action By The City Council.
Section
120.450
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
120.450
100:84
1. The City Council shall consider the nomination following receipt of
a report and recommendation from the O'Fallon Historic
Preservation Commission. There shall be an opportunity for public
comment on the nomination, and oral or written information
concerning the significance of the nominated landmark or Historic
District may be offered by any person concerning the nomination.
The O'Fallon Historic Preservation Commission may present expert
assessment or present its own information regarding the
compliance of the nominated landmark or Historic District with the
criteria for consideration of a nomination set forth in Section
120.450(C) of this Article. The owner of any nominated landmark or
of any property within a nominated Historic District shall also be
allowed reasonable opportunity to offer information regarding
significance.
2. The City Council may thereafter take action to either reject the
recommendation or designate the landmark or Historic District by
an ordinance. In the event that a proper objection has been filed
with regard to the nomination, an affirmative vote of at least twothirds
(2/3) of the entire membership of the City Council shall be
required to designate a landmark or Historic District. Any
ordinance shall include a statement explaining the reasons for the
action of the City Council. In addition:
a. In the case of a nominated landmark, the ordinance shall
include:
(1) The significant exterior architectural features of the
nominated landmark that should be protected; and
(2) The types of construction, alteration, demolition, and
removal that should be discouraged; and
(3) The archaeological significance and recommendations for
interpretation and protection; and
b. In the case of a nominated Historic District found to meet the
criteria for designation:
(1) The types of significant exterior architectural features of
the structures within the nominated Historic District that
should be protected; and
(2) The types of alterations and demolitions that should be
discouraged; and
(3) The type and significance of historic and prehistoric
archaeological sites within the nominated Historic District
and recommendations for interpretation and protection.
3. The City Clerk shall provide written notification of the action of the
City Council by regular mail to the nominator and the owner(s) of
Section
120.450
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.450
100:85
Section 120.460. Certificate of Appropriateness Required for
Demolition of Designated Landmark or Permanent Removal of
Significant Exterior Architectural Feature. [Ord. No. 5955 §1,
1-23-2014]
record of the nominated landmark or of all property within a
nominated Historic District. The notice shall include a copy of
the designation ordinance passed by the City Council. A copy of
each such ordinance shall also be sent to the O'Fallon Historic
Preservation Commission. The City Clerk shall also file a certified
copy of the ordinance with the St. Charles County Recorder of
Deeds.
4. The Council may also take such action as it may deem appropriate
and to which the property owner may agree, to provide suitable
signage or other recognition that the subject property has been so
designated.
A. General. No person shall demolish a designated landmark, or portion
thereof, or shall permanently remove a significant exterior
architectural feature without obtaining a certificate of appropriateness
for such demolition or removal. A "significant exterior architectural
feature" shall mean an element which was described in the ordinance
designating the landmark and which was a basis for the designation
decision. No building permit, demolition permit or other governmental
permit or approval shall be issued by the City until a certificate of
appropriateness has been issued by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
B. Application For Certificate Of Appropriateness. Applications for a
certificate of appropriateness shall include accompanying plans and
specifications affecting the significance of a designated landmark and,
in the case of demolition, showing the contemplated use of the property.
Applications shall be on forms approved by the Historic Preservation
Commission and shall contain such other information as deemed
necessary by the Commission.
C. Action On Application. The Commission shall send written notice of the
date and time that the application will be discussed and considered by
the Commission to the applicant at least five (5) days prior to such
meeting. The Commission shall hear comment from the applicant and
other interested parties. The Commission shall review the application
for a certificate of appropriateness and issue or deny the permit within
forty-five (45) days of receipt of the application. Written notice of the
approval or denial of the application for a certificate of appropriateness
shall be provided to the applicant within seven (7) days following the
determination and shall be accompanied by a certificate of
appropriateness in the case of an approval.
D. Standards. In considering an application for a certificate of
appropriateness for demolition or permanent removal of a significant
Section
120.450
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
120.460
100:86
Section 120.470. Other Work and Alterations to a Designated
Landmark. [Ord. No. 5955 §1, 1-23-2014]
All other work and alterations which do not result in demolition of a
landmark, or portion thereof, and do not result in removal of a significant
exterior architectural feature is permitted without further action or
approval of the Commission; provided, however, that the owner or
contractor is required to obtain all building permits, site plan approvals and
other permits and approval which are necessary under this Code.
Section 120.480. Design Review Assistance to Owners of
Designated Properties. [Ord. No. 5955 §1, 1-23-2014]
exterior architectural feature, the Commission shall be guided in
principal by the Secretary of the Interior's Standards, any design
guidelines in the ordinance designating the landmark and design
guidelines promulgated by the Commission.
E. Denial And Appeal. A denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be
accompanied by a statement of the reasons for the denial. The
Commission shall make recommendations to the applicant concerning
changes, if any, in the proposed action that would cause the
Commission to reconsider its denial and shall confer with the applicant
and attempt to resolve as quickly as possible the differences between
the applicant and the Commission. The applicant may resubmit an
amended application or reapply for a certificate of appropriateness that
takes into consideration the recommendation of the Commission. If the
Commission denies a certificate of appropriateness for the proposed
demolition or removal, the applicant may file with the City Clerk a
written appeal to the City Council. The appeal shall state all reasons
why the applicant believes the Commission's decision is in error. The
City Council may reverse the Commission's decision and grant the
certificate of appropriateness or may affirm the Commission's decision.
F. Expiration Of Certificate Of Appropriateness. A certificate of
appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced
within six (6) months of date of issuance. Certificates of
Appropriateness shall be issued for a period of eighteen (18) months
and are renewable. If the project is not completed according to the
guidelines provided in the certificate of appropriateness, the project
shall be deemed in violation of this Chapter.
A. The Historic Preservation Commission may provide to owners of
property successfully designated as a landmark non-monetary
assistance in the form of advice and review of plans for exterior
alterations, repairs, and any other improvements which will change the
exterior appearance of the property.
B. Any owner of property designated as a landmark may submit to the
Commission a request for design review and recommendations. The
request may be submitted in the form of a letter or on such forms as
Section
120.460
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.480
100:87
prepared by the Commission. The owner of designated property shall
not be required to comply with the Commission's advice and
recommendations; instead, compliance is strictly voluntary.
C. In providing advice and recommendations to such owners of designated
properties, the Commission shall consider:
1. Whether the planned alterations, repairs and improvements
adversely affect the property's character, interest, or value as part
of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the
community, County, State or country;
2. Whether the planned alterations, repairs and improvements
comply with the recommended design guidelines adopted by the
Commission;
3. The potential for the alterations, repairs and improvements to
return the property to an accurate historic appearance;
4. Any distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type valuable
for the study of a period, type, method of construction, or use of
indigenous materials;
5. The inclusion or preservation of elements of design, detailing,
materials, or craftsmanship that render the property
architecturally significant;
6. The inclusion or preservation of design elements that make the
property structurally or architecturally innovative;
7. Whether the planned alterations, repairs and improvements will
change the property's character or interest to such an extent so as
to affect the property's eligibility for continued designation as a
landmark.
D. Following the submission of a request for advice and recommendations,
the Commission shall review the proposed plans and drawings and
provide advice and recommendations to the property owner within
forty-five (45) days of the date of submission of the request. The
Commission's advice and recommendations shall be provided to the
property owner in writing.
E. In the event that the Commission finds that the planned alterations,
repairs and improvements will change the property's character or
interest to such an extent so as to affect the property's eligibility for
continued designation as a landmark, the property owner may appeal to
the City Council for the Council's advice and recommendations
regarding the proposed alterations, repairs and improvements. No
other advice or recommendations given by the Historic Preservation
Commission shall be appealable to the City Council or any other body or
court for the reason that compliance with such advice and
recommendations by the property owner is voluntary and not required.
Section
120.480
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
120.480
100:88
Section 120.490. (Reserved)
F. Request for City Council review and recommendations shall be
submitted to the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the
Commission's advice and recommendations.
G. The City Council may appoint one (1) or more of its members to review
the matter and prepare advice and recommendations which shall be
approved by the City Council as part of its consent agenda and,
thereafter, provided to the property owner in writing.
Section
120.480
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.490
100:89

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)20
Section 120.500. through Section 120.510. (Reserved)
20.Editor's Note: The advisory green council established pursuant to Article VII, sections
120.500 —120.510, which derived from ord. no. 5525 §1, 11-12-2009, 5591 §3, 5-13-2010
and ord. no. 5781 §1, 4-12-2012, was dissolved 6-11-2015 and said code article and
sections were repealed without replacement by §2 of ord. no. 6111.
Section
120.500
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.500
100:91
Chapter 125
CODE OF ETHICS
Section
120.500
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
120.500
100:92
ARTICLE I
Conflict of Interest
Section 125.010. Declaration of Policy. [R.O. 2007 §125.010; Ord.
No. 4113 §2, 8-29-2000; Ord. No. 4403 §2, 8-22-2002; Ord. No. 4717
§2, 8-30-2004; Ord. No. 4894 §2, 8-29-2005; Ord. No. 5055 §2,
9-8-2006; Ord. No. 5357 §2, 8-14-2008; Ord. No. 5512 §2, 10-8-2009;
Ord. No. 5611 §2, 8-12-2010; Ord. No. 5806 §2, 8-23-2012; Ord. No.
5932 §2, 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 6028 §2, 9-11-2014; Ord. No. 6127 §2,
8-27-2015; Ord. No. 6256 § 2, 9-22-2016; Ord. No. 6377 § 2,
8-24-2017; Ord. No. 6491, 8-23-2018; Ord. No. 6599, 8-22-2019]
The proper operation of municipal government requires that public officials
and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people;
that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of
the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal
gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government.
In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a procedure for
disclosure by certain officials and employees of private financial and other
interest in matters affecting the City.
Section 125.020. Conflicts of Interest. [R.O. 2007 §125.020; Ord.
No. 4113 §3, 8-29-2000; Ord. No. 4403 §3, 8-22-2002; Ord. No. 4717
§3, 8-30-2004; Ord. No. 4894 §3, 8-29-2005; Ord. No. 5055 §3,
9-8-2006; Ord. No. 5357 §3, 8-14-2008; Ord. No. 5512 §3, 10-8-2009;
Ord. No. 5611 §3, 8-12-2010; Ord. No. 5806 §3, 8-23-2012; Ord. No.
5932 §3, 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 6028 §3, 9-11-2014; Ord. No. 6127 §3,
8-27-2015; Ord. No. 6256 § 3, 9-22-2016; Ord. No. 6377 § 3,
8-24-2017; Ord. No. 6491, 8-23-2018; Ord. No. 6599, 8-22-2019]
The Mayor or any member of the City Council who has a substantial
personal or private interest, as defined by State law, in any bill, shall
disclose on the records of the City Council the nature of his/her interest and
shall disqualify himself/herself from voting on any matters relating to this
interest.
Section 125.030. Required Financial Interest Statements. [R.O.
2007 §125.030; Ord. No. 4113 §4, 8-29-2000; Ord. No. 4403 §4,
8-22-2002; Ord. No. 4717 §4, 8-30-2004; Ord. No. 4894 §4,
8-29-2005; Ord. No. 5055 §4, 9-8-2006; Ord. No. 5357 §4, 8-14-2008;
Ord. No. 5512 §4, 10-8-2009; Ord. No. 5611 §4, 8-12-2010; Ord. No.
5806 §4, 8-23-2012; Ord. No. 5932 §4, 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 6028 §4,
9-11-2014; Ord. No. 6127 §4, 8-27-2015; Ord. No. 6256 § 4,
9-22-2016; Ord. No. 6377 § 4, 8-24-2017; Ord. No. 6491, 8-23-2018;
Ord. No. 6599, 8-22-2019]
A. Each elected official, the Chief Administrative Officer and the Chief
Purchasing Officer and each official or employee of the City who is
authorized by the City to promulgate rules and regulations with the
force of law, or to vote on the adoption of rules and regulations with the
Section
125.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.030
100:93
Section 125.040. Prohibited Actions. [R.O. 2007 §125.040; Ord. No.
4113 §5, 8-29-2000; Ord. No. 4403 §§5—6, 8-22-2002; Ord. No. 4717
§5, 8-30-2004; Ord. No. 4894 §5, 8-29-2005; Ord. No. 5055 §5,
force of law, shall disclose the following information by May 1 if any
such transactions were engaged in during the previous calendar year:
1. For such person, and all persons within the first degree of
consanguinity or affinity of such person, the date and the identities
of the parties to each transaction with a total value in excess of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), if any, that such person had with the
City, other than compensation received as an employee or payment
of any tax, fee or penalty due to the City, and other than transfers
for no consideration to the City; and
2. The date and the identities of the parties to each transaction known
to the person with a total value in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00), if any, that any business entity in which such person had
a substantial interest had with the City, other than payment of any
tax, fee or penalty due to the City or transactions involving
payment for providing utility service to the City, and other than
transfers for no consideration to the City.
3. The Chief Administrative Officer and the Chief Purchasing Officer
also shall disclose by May 1 for the previous calendar year the
following information:
a. The name and address of each of the employers of such person
from whom income of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
more was received during the year covered by the statement;
b. The name and address of each sole proprietorship that he/she
owned; the name, address and the general nature of the
business conducted of each general partnership and joint
venture in which he/she was a partner or participant; the name
and address of each partner or coparticipant for each
partnership or joint venture unless such names and addresses
are filed by the partnership or joint venture with the Secretary
of State; the name, address and general nature of the business
conducted of any closely held corporation or limited
partnership in which the person owned ten percent (10%) or
more of any class of the outstanding stock or limited
partnership units; and the name of any publicly traded
corporation or limited partnership that is listed on a regulated
stock exchange or automated quotation system in which the
person owned two percent (2%) or more of any class of
outstanding stock, limited partnership units or other equity
interests;
c. The name and address of each corporation for which such
person served in the capacity of a director, officer or receiver.
Section
125.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
125.040
100:94
9-8-2006; Ord. No. 5357 §5, 8-14-2008; Ord. No. 5512 §5, 10-8-2009;
Ord. No. 5611 §5, 8-12-2010; Ord. No. 5806 §5, 8-23-2012; Ord. No.
5932 §5, 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 6028 §5, 9-11-2014; Ord. No. 6127 §5,
8-27-2015; Ord. No. 6256 § 5, 9-22-2016; Ord. No. 6377 § 5,
8-24-2017; Ord. No. 6491, 8-23-2018; Ord. No. 6599, 8-22-2019]
A. No City official or employee subject to Section 125.030 shall:
1. Act or refrain from acting in any capacity in which he/she is
lawfully empowered to act as such an official or employee by
reason of any payment, offer to pay, promise to pay, or receipt of
anything of actual pecuniary value paid or payable, or received or
receivable, to himself/herself or any third person, including any gift
or campaign contribution, made or received in relationship to or as
a condition of the performance of an official act, other than
compensation paid by the City;
2. Use confidential information obtained in the course of or by reason
of his/her employment or official capacity in any manner with intent
to result in financial gain for himself/herself, his/her spouse, his/her
dependent children in his/her custody, or any business with which
he/she is associated;
3. Disclose confidential information obtained in the course of or by
reason of his/her employment or official capacity in any manner
with intent to result in financial gain for himself/herself or any
other person;
4. Favorably act on any matter that is so specially designed so as to
provide a special monetary benefit to such person or his/her spouse
or dependent children, including but not limited to increases in
retirement benefits, whether received from the State of Missouri or
any third party by reason of such act. For the purposes of this
Chapter, "special monetary benefit" means being materially
affected in a substantially different manner or degree from the
manner or degree in which the public in general will be affected or,
if the matter affects only a special class of person, then affected in a
substantially different manner or degree than the manner or
degree in which such class will be affected. In all such matters such
persons must recuse themselves from acting;
5. Use his/her decision-making authority for the purpose of obtaining
a financial gain which materially enriches himself/herself, his/her
spouse or dependent children by acting or refraining from acting
for the purpose of coercing or extorting from another anything of
actual pecuniary value;
6. Perform any service for the City for receipt or payment of any
compensation, other than of the compensation provided for the
performance of his/her official duties, in excess of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per transaction or one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) per annum, except on transactions made
Section
125.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.040
100:95
pursuant to an award on a contract let or sale made after public
notice and competitive bidding, provided that the bid or offer is the
lowest received;
7. Sell, rent or lease any property to the City in excess of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per transaction or one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) per annum unless the transaction is made
pursuant to an award on a contract let or sale made after public
notice and in the case of property other than real property,
competitive bidding, provided that the bid or offer accepted is the
lowest received;
8. Participate in any matter, directly or indirectly, in which he/she
attempts to influence any decision of the City when he/she knows
the result of the decision may be the acceptance of the
performance of a service or the sale, rental, or lease of any
property to the City for consideration in excess of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) value per transaction or one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) value per annum to him/her, his/her
spouse, to a dependent child in his/her custody or to any business
with which he/she is associated unless the transaction is made
pursuant to an award on a contract let or sale made after public
notice and in the case of property other than real property,
competitive bidding, provided that the bid or offer accepted is the
lowest received;
9. Perform any service during the time of his/her office or employment
for any consideration from any person, firm or corporation, other
than the compensation provided for the performance of his/her
official duties, by which service he/she attempts to influence a
decision of the City or employee over which he/she has supervisory
power;
10. Perform any service for consideration during one (1) year after
termination of his/her office or employment, by which performance
he/she attempts to influence a decision of the City, except that this
provision shall not be construed to prohibit any person from
performing such service and receiving compensation therefor, in
any adversary proceeding or in the preparation or filing of any
public document;
11. Perform any service for any consideration for any person, firm, or
corporation after termination of his/her office or employment in
relation to any case, decision, proceeding or application with
respect to which he/she was directly concerned or in which he/she
personally participated during the period of his/her service or
employment.
B. No sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, or corporation in
which any person subject to this Chapter is the sole proprietor, a
partner having more than a ten percent (10%) partnership interest, or a
Section
125.040
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
125.040
100:96
coparticipant or owner of in excess of ten percent (10%) of the
outstanding shares of any class of stock, shall:
1. Perform any service for the City for any consideration in excess of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) per transaction or one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per annum unless the transaction is
made pursuant to an award on a contract let after public notice and
competitive bidding, provided that the bid or offer accepted is the
lowest received;
2. Sell, rent or lease any property to the City where the consideration
is in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per transaction or one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per annum unless the
transaction is made pursuant to an award on a contract let or a sale
made after public notice and in the case of property other than real
property, competitive bidding, provided that the bid or offer
accepted is the lowest received.
C. No employee or elected official of the City who is empowered to adopt a
rule or regulation, other than rules and regulations governing the
internal affairs of the City, or who is empowered to fix any rate, adopt
zoning or land use planning regulations or votes on the adoption of any
such rule, regulation, rate or plan, shall:
1. Attempt to influence the decision or participate, directly or
indirectly, in the decision of the City when he/she knows the results
of such decisions may be the adoption of rates or zoning plans by
the City which may result in a direct financial gain or loss to him/
her, to his/her spouse or a dependent child in his/her custody or to
any business with which he/she is associated;
2. Perform any service, during the time of his/her employment, for any
person, firm or corporation for compensation other than the
compensation provided for the performance of his/her official
duties, if by the performance of the service he/she attempts to
influence the decision of the City;
3. Perform for one (1) year after termination of his/her employment
any service for compensation for any person, firm or corporation to
influence the decision or action of the City; provided, however, that
he/she may, after termination of his/her office or employment,
perform such service for consideration in any adversary proceeding
or in the preparation or filing of any public document or conference
thereon unless he/she participated directly in that matter or in the
receipt or analysis of that document while he/she was with the City;
4. No person subject to this Chapter or any business with which such
person is associated shall knowingly perform any service for, or
sell, rent or lease any property to any person, firm or corporation
which has participated in any proceeding in which the person
adopted, participated in the adoption or voted on the adoption of
any rate or zoning plan or the granting or revocation of any license
Section
125.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.040
100:97
Section 125.050. Financial Interest Statement — Form — When and
Where Filed. [R.O. 2007 §125.050; Ord. No. 4717 §6, 8-30-2004;
Ord. No. 4894 §6, 8-29-2005; Ord. No. 5055 §6, 9-8-2006; Ord. No.
5357 §6, 8-14-2008; Ord. No. 5512 §6, 10-8-2009; Ord. No. 5611 §6,
8-12-2010; Ord. No. 5806 §6, 8-23-2012; Ord. No. 5932 §6,
9-12-2013; Ord. No. 6028 §6, 9-11-2014; Ord. No. 6127 §6,
8-27-2015; Ord. No. 6256 § 69-22-2016; Ord. No. 6377 § 6,
8-24-2017; Ord. No. 6491, 8-23-2018; Ord. No. 6599, 8-22-2019]
during the preceding year and received therefor in excess of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per transaction or one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per annum except on transactions
pursuant to an award on a contract let or sale made after public
notice and in the case of property other than real property,
competitive bidding, provided that the bid or offer accepted is the
lowest received.
A. Each financial interest statement to be completed shall be on the form
provided for by law, as amended from time to time.
1. Time Of Filing. Each candidate for elective office shall file a
financial interest statement no later than the forty-fifth (45th) day
after the first day for filing for the election at which he/she seeks
nomination or election, and the statement shall be for the twelve
(12) months prior to the closing date, except that in the event an
individual does not become a candidate until later than the fortyfifth
(45th) day after the last day for filing for election, the
statement shall be filed within ten (10) days of his/her becoming a
candidate. The appropriate election authority shall provide to the
candidate at the time of filing for election written notice of the
candidate's obligation to file a financial interest statement. An
individual required to file a financial interest statement because of
the individual's candidacy for office prior to an election is also
required to amend such statement no later than the close of
business on Monday prior to the general election to reflect any
changes in financial interest during the interim. Every other person
required to file a financial interest statement shall file the
statement annually not later than the first day of May, and the
statement shall cover the calendar year ending the immediately
preceding December 31. Provided that any member of the City
Council may supplement the financial interest statement to report
additional interests acquired after December 31 of the covered
year until the date of filing of the financial interest statement. The
deadline for filing any required statement shall be 5:00 P.M. of the
last day designated for filing the statement. When the last day of
filing falls on a Saturday or Sunday or on an official State holiday,
the deadline for filing is extended to 5:00 P.M. on the next day
which is not a Saturday, Sunday or official State holiday.
Section
125.040
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
125.050
100:98
2. Place Of Filing. The financial interest statement shall be filed with
the City Clerk and with the State through the Ethics Commission.
3. Public Record. Each financial interest statement shall be available
for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk during normal
business hours.
4. Penalties. Any person required by this Chapter to file a financial
interest statement who fails to file such statement by the times
required shall, if such person receives any compensation or other
remuneration from public funds for his/her services, not be paid
such compensation or receive such remuneration until he/she has
filed a financial interest statement as required herein.
Section
125.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.050
100:99

ARTICLE II
Code of Conduct For City Officials
Section 125.060. Relatives of Public Officials Not To Be Appointed
or Employed — When. [R.O. 2007 §125.060; Ord. No. 3027 §1,
5-20-1993]
Elected or appointed officials of the City of O'Fallon shall not name or
appoint to public office or employment, by virtue of his/her office or
employment, any relative within the fourth (4th) degree by consanguinity or
affinity.
Section
125.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.060
100:101
Chapter 130
MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
125.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
125.060
100:102
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 130.010. Court Established.
There is hereby established in the City of O'Fallon a Municipal Court to
be known as the "O'Fallon Municipal Court, a Division of the 11th Judicial
Circuit Court of the State of Missouri". In the event a Police Court existed
prior to the establishment of a Municipal Court, this Court is a continuation
of the Police Court of the City as previously established and is termed herein
"The Municipal Court".
Section 130.020. Jurisdiction.
Violations of municipal ordinances shall be heard and determined only
before divisions of the Circuit Court as hereinafter provided in this Chapter.
"Heard and determined", for purposes of this Chapter, shall mean any
process under which the court in question retains the final authority to
make factual determinations pertaining to allegations of a municipal
ordinance violation.
Section 130.030. Selection of Municipal Judge.
The Judge of the City's Municipal Court shall be known as a Municipal Judge
of the 11th Judicial Circuit Court and shall be selected by appointment to
the position by the Mayor with approval of a majority of the members of the
City Council for a term as specified herein.
Section 130.040. Municipal Judge — Term of Office.
The Municipal Judge shall hold his/her office for a period of at least two
(2) years. If for any reason a Municipal Judge vacates his/her office, his/her
successor shall complete that term of office, even if the same be for less
than two (2) years.
Section 130.050. Municipal Judge — Vacation of Office.
Section 130.060. Municipal Judge — Qualifications For Office.
A. The Municipal Judge shall vacate his/her office under the following
conditions:
1. Upon removal from office by the State Commission on the
Retirement, Removal and Discipline of Judges as provided in
Missouri Supreme Court Rule 12;
2. Upon attaining his/her seventy-fifth (75th) birthday; or
3. If he/she should lose his/her license to practice law within the State
of Missouri/ or if he/she should fail to complete the course of
instruction as required by Section 130.060, Subsection (1) hereof.
Section
130.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.060
100:103
Section 130.070. Superintending Authority.
The Municipal Court of the City shall be subject to the rules of the Circuit
Court of which it is a part and to the rules of the State Supreme Court. The
Municipal Court shall be subject to the general administrative authority of
the Presiding Judge of the Circuit Court, and the Judge and Court personnel
of said Court shall obey his/her directives.
Section 130.080. Payments To Treasurer.21 [Ord. No. 5728 §1,
9-8-2011; Ord. No. 5728A §1, 9-8-2011]
The Municipal Judge shall cause the Court Administrator, within the first ten
(10) days of every month, to pay to the Municipal Treasurer the full amount
of all fines and costs collected during the preceding month, if not previously
paid to the Municipal Treasurer.
Section 130.090. Docket and Court Records.
The Municipal Judge shall be a conservator of the peace. He/she shall keep
a docket in which he/she shall enter every case commenced before him/her
and the proceedings therein and he/she shall keep such other records as
may be required. Such docket and records shall be records of the Circuit
Court of St. Charles County. The Municipal Judge shall deliver said docket,
records and all books and papers pertaining to his/her office to his/her
successor in office or to the Presiding Judge of the Circuit.
Section 130.100. Municipal Judge — Powers and Duties Generally.
A. The Municipal Judge shall possess the following qualifications before
he/she shall take office:
1. He/she must be a licensed attorney, qualified to practice law within
the State of Missouri or within six (6) months after selection for the
position, each Municipal Judge who is not licensed to practice law
in this State shall satisfactorily complete the course of instruction
for Municipal Judges prescribed by the Supreme Court.
2. He/she need not reside within the City.
3. He/she must be a resident of the State of Missouri.
4. He/she must be between the ages of twenty-one (21) and seventyfive
(75) years.
5. He/she may serve as a Municipal Judge for any other municipality.
6. He/she may not hold any other office within the City Government.
7. The Municipal Judge shall be considered holding a part-time
position and as such may accept other employment.
21.Editor's Note—Ord. no. 5728A, adopted September 8, 2011, repealed section 130.080
"report to city council" in its entirety and enacted new provisions set out herein.
Section
130.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
130.100
100:104
Section 130.110. Compensation.
The Municipal Judge for the City of O'Fallon shall be paid a sum as fixed by
ordinance from time to time.
Section 130.115. Prosecutions Based On Information Only,
Proceedings.
All prosecutions for the violation of municipal ordinances shall be instituted
by information and may be based upon a complaint. Proceedings shall be in
accordance with the supreme court rules governing practice and procedure
in proceedings before Municipal Judges.
Section 130.120. Violations Bureau.
Should the Municipal Judge determine that there shall be a Violations
Bureau, the City shall provide all expenses incident to the operation of the
same.
Section 130.130. When Person Charged May Elect To Appear At
Bureau. [R.O. 2007 §370.010]
A. The Municipal Judge shall be and is hereby authorized to:
1. Establish a Violations Bureau as provided for in the Missouri Rules
of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic Courts and
Section 479.050, RSMo.
2. Administer oaths and enforce due obedience to all orders, rules and
judgments made by him/her and may fine and imprison for
contempt committed before him/her while holding Court in the
same manner and to the same extent as a Circuit Judge.
3. Stay execution of any fine or sentence, suspend any fine or
sentence, and make such other orders as the Municipal Judge
deems necessary relative to any matter that may be pending in the
Municipal Court.
4. Make and adopt such rules of practice and procedure as are
necessary to implement and carry out the provisions of this
Chapter, and to make and adopt such rules of practice and
procedure as are necessary to hear and decide matters pending
before the Municipal Court, and to implement and carry out the
provisions of the Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in
Municipal and Traffic Courts.
5. The Municipal Judge shall have such other powers, duties and
privileges as are or may be prescribed by the laws of this State, this
Code or other ordinances of this City.
A. Any person charged with an offense for which payment of a fine may be
made to the Violations Bureau shall have the option of paying such fine
Section
130.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.130
100:105
Section 130.140. Duties of Violations Bureau. [R.O. 2007 §370.020]
Section 130.150. Issuance and Execution of Warrants.
All warrants issued by a Municipal Judge shall be directed to the City
Marshal, Chief of Police or any other Police Officer of the municipality or to
the Sheriff of the County. The warrants shall be executed by the Marshal,
Chief of Police, Police Officer or Sheriff at any place within the limits of the
County and not elsewhere, unless the warrants are endorsed in the manner
provided for warrants in criminal cases and, when so endorsed, shall be
served in other Counties as provided for in warrants in criminal cases.
Section 130.160. Arrests Without Warrants.
The City Marshal, Chief of Police or other Police Officer of the City may,
without a warrant, make arrest of any person who commits an offense in his/
her presence, but such officer shall, before the trial, file a written complaint
with the Judge hearing violations of municipal ordinances.
Section 130.170. Jury Trials.
Any person charged with a violation of a municipal ordinance of this City
shall be entitled to a trial by jury as in prosecutions for misdemeanors
before an Associate Circuit Court Judge. Whenever a defendant accused of
a violation of a municipal ordinance has a right to and demands such trial
by jury, the Municipal Court shall certify the case to the Presiding Judge of
the Circuit Court for reassignment.
within the time specified in the notice of arrest at the Violations Bureau
upon entering a plea of guilty and upon waiving appearance in court; or
may have the option of depositing required lawful bail, and upon a plea
of not guilty shall be entitled to a trial as authorized by law.
B. The payment of a fine to the Bureau shall be deemed an
acknowledgement of conviction of the alleged offense, and the Bureau,
upon accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator
acknowledging payment thereof.
A. The following duties are hereby imposed upon the Violations Bureau in
reference to traffic offenses:
1. It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts, and represent in
court such violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty,
waive court appearance, and give power of attorney;
2. It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail from the persons
who must or wish to be heard in court, enter the time of their
appearance on the court docket, and notify the arresting Officer
and witnesses, if any, to be present.
Section
130.130
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
130.180
100:106
Section 130.180. Duties of The City's Prosecuting Attorney.
It shall be the duty of an attorney designated by the City to prosecute the
violations of the City's ordinances before the Municipal Judge or before
any Circuit Judge hearing violations of the City's ordinances. The salary
or fees of the attorney and his/her necessary expenses incurred in such
prosecutions shall be paid by the City. The compensation of such attorney
shall not be contingent upon the number of cases tried, the number of guilty
verdicts reached, or the amount of fines imposed or collected.
Section 130.190. Summoning of Witnesses.
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Judge to summon all persons whose
testimony may be deemed essential as witnesses at the trial and to enforce
their attendance by attachment, if necessary. The fees of witnesses shall be
the same as those fixed for witnesses in trials before Associate Circuit Court
Judges and shall be taxed as other costs in the case. When a trial shall be
continued by a Municipal Judge, it shall not be necessary to summon any
witnesses who may be present at the continuance, but the Municipal Judge
shall orally notify such witnesses as either party may require to attend
before him/her on the day set for trial to testify in the case and enter the
names of such witnesses on his/her docket, which oral notice shall be valid
as a summons.
Section 130.200. Transfer of Complaint To Associate Circuit Judge.
If, in the progress of any trial before the Municipal Judge, it shall appear
to the Judge that the accused ought to be put upon trial for an offense
against the criminal laws of the State and not cognizable before him/her
as Municipal Judge, he/she shall immediately stop all further proceedings
before him/her as Municipal Judge and cause the complaint to be made
before some Associate Circuit Court Judge of the County.
Section 130.210. Jailing of Defendants.
If, in the opinion of the Municipal Judge, the City has no suitable and safe
place of confinement, the Municipal Judge may commit the defendant to the
County Jail, and it shall be the duty of the Sheriff, if space for the prisoner is
available in the County Jail, upon receipt of a warrant of commitment from
the Judge to receive and safely keep such prisoner until discharged by due
process of law. The municipality shall pay the board of such prisoner at the
same rate as may now or hereafter be allowed by law to such Sheriff for the
keeping of other prisoners in his/her custody. The same shall be taxed as
cost.
Section 130.220. Parole and Probation.
A. Any Judge hearing violations of municipal ordinances may, when in his/
her judgment it may seem advisable, grant a parole or probation to any
person who shall plead guilty or who shall be convicted after a trial
before such Judge. When a person is placed on probation, he/she shall
Section
130.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.220
100:107
Section 130.230. Right of Appeal.
In any case tried before the Municipal Judge, except where there has been
a plea of guilty or where the case has been tried with a jury, the defendant
shall have a right of trial de novo before a Circuit Court Judge or upon
assignment before an Associate Circuit Court Judge. An application for a
trial de novo shall be filed within ten (10) days after judgment and shall be
filed in such form and perfected in such manner as provided by Supreme
Court rule.
Section 130.240. Appeal From Jury Verdicts.
In any case tried with a jury before an Associate Circuit Judge, a record of
the proceedings shall be made, and appeals may be had upon that record to
the appropriate Appellate Court.
Section 130.250. Breach of Recognizance.
In the case of a breach of any recognizance entered into before a Municipal
Judge or an Associate Circuit Court Judge hearing a municipal ordinance
violation case, the same shall be deemed forfeited and the Judge shall cause
be given a certificate explicitly stating the conditions on which he/she
is being released.
B. In addition to such other authority as exists to order conditions of
probation, the Court may order conditions which the Court believes will
serve to compensate the victim of the crime, any dependent of the
victim, or society in general. Such conditions may include, but need not
be limited to:
1. Restitution to the victim or any dependent of the victim in an
amount to be determined by the Judge; and
2. The performance of a designated amount of free work for a public
or charitable purpose or purposes as determined by the Judge.
C. A person may refuse probation conditioned on the performance of free
work. If he/she does so, the Court shall decide the extent or duration of
sentence or other disposition to be imposed and render judgment
accordingly. Any County, City, person, organization or agency or
employee of a County, City, organization or agency charged with the
supervision of such free work or who benefits from its performance
shall be immune from any suit by the person placed on parole or
probation or any person deriving a cause of action from him/her if such
cause of action arises from such supervision of performance, except for
intentional torts or gross negligence. The services performed by the
probationer or parolee shall not be deemed employment within the
meaning of the provisions of Chapter 288, RSMo.
D. The Court may modify or enlarge the conditions of probation at any
time prior to the expiration or termination of the probation term.
Section
130.220
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
130.250
100:108
the same to be prosecuted against the principal and surety, or either of
them, in the name of the municipality as plaintiff. Such action shall be
prosecuted before a Circuit Court Judge or Associate Circuit Court Judge,
and in the event of cases caused to be prosecuted by a Municipal Judge,
such shall be on the transcript of the proceedings before the Municipal
Judge. All monies recovered in such actions shall be paid over to Municipal
Treasury to the General Revenue Fund of the municipality.
Section 130.260. Disqualification of Municipal Judge From Hearing
A Particular Case.
A Municipal Judge shall be disqualified to hear any case in which he/she is in
any way interested or, if before the trial is commenced, the defendant or the
prosecutor files an affidavit that the defendant or the municipality, as the
case may be, cannot have a fair and impartial trial by reason of the interest
or prejudice of the Judge. Neither the defendant nor the municipality shall
be entitled to file more than one (1) affidavit or disqualification in the same
case.
Section 130.270. Absence of Judge—Procedure.
If a Municipal Judge be absent, sick or disqualified from acting pursuant to
the general administrative authority of the Presiding Judge of the Circuit
Court over the Municipal Divisions within the circuit contained in Section
478.240, RSMo., a special Municipal Judge may be designated in
accordance with the provisions of Section 479.230, RSMo., until such
absence or disqualification shall cease.
Section 130.280. Failure To Appear in Municipal Court.
A. A person commits the offense of failure to appear in Municipal Court if:
1. He/she has been issued a summons for a violation of any ordinance
of the City of O'Fallon and fails to appear before the Judge of the
Municipal Court at the time and on the date on which he/she was
summoned, or at the time or on the date to which the case was
continued;
2. He/she has been released upon recognition of bond and fails to
appear before the Judge of the Municipal Court at the time and on
the date on which he/she was summoned, or at the time or on the
date to which the case was continued;
3. He/she has been placed on Court supervised probation and fails to
appear before the Judge of the Municipal Court at the time
specified by said Judge as a condition of the probation.
B. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the exercise of the Municipal
Court of its power to punish for contempt.
Section
130.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.290
100:109
Section 130.290. Court Administrator — Office Established —
Authorization By Supreme Court Rule.
Section 130.300. Bond.
Within fifteen (15) days after appointment and before entering upon the
discharge of the above-described duties of office, the Court Administrator
shall give bond to the City in an amount approved by the City Administrator
conditioned upon the faithful performance of said duties and the said Court
Administrator will pay over all monies belonging to the City, as provided by
law, that may come into the Court Administrator's hands.
Section 130.310. Contempt of Court. [R.O. 2007 §130.200; Ord. No.
1184 §53, 1-17-1985]
A. There is hereby established the office of Court Administrator for the
City of O'Fallon Municipal Division of the St. Charles County Circuit
Court.
B. The Supreme Court Rules in Section 37.06 define "Clerk" as any duly
appointed Court Clerk or Court Administrator or any Deputy or Division
Court Clerk serving courts to which Rule 37 applies.
A. Any person appearing before the Municipal Court of the City of
O'Fallon, which is a Division of the Circuit Court of St. Charles County,
shall be subject to punishment for contempt of Court for any of the
following acts constituting contempt:
1. Disorderly or insolent behavior committed during its session in its
immediate view and presence, and directly tending to interrupt its
proceeding, or to impair the respect due its authority.
2. Any breach of peace, noise or other disturbance directly tending to
interrupt its proceedings.
3. Willful disobedience or resistance of any process or order lawfully
issued or made by it.
4. Failure to appear or failure to satisfy Court judgment. Contempt
committed in the immediate view and presence of the Court may be
punished summarily; in other cases the party charged shall be
notified of the accusation and have a reasonable time to make his/
her defense.
Section
130.290
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
130.310
100:110
ARTICLE II
Fines and Court Costs
Section 130.320. Installment Payment of Fine.
When a fine is assessed for violation of an ordinance, it shall be within the
discretion of the Judge assessing the fine to provide for the payment of the
fine on an installment basis under such terms and conditions as he/she may
deem appropriate.
Section 130.330. Assessed Costs and Surcharges. [R.O. 2007
§130.190; Ord. No. 1184 §52, 1-17-1985; Ord. No. 1630 §1, 9-1-1988;
Ord. No. 2042 §2, 7-3-1992; Ord. No. 3475 §1, 12-17-1996; Ord. No.
3956 §1, 9-21-1999; Ord. No. 4330 §1, 1-29-2002; Ord. No. 4757 §1,
12-13-2004; Ord. No. 5047 §1, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 5910 §1,
7-25-2013]
A. Definitions. The following words and phrases, as used in this Chapter,
shall have the following respective meanings:
COURT COSTS — The cost, not to exceed twelve dollars ($12.00)
as described in and limited by Section 488.012(6), RSMo., which is
assessed to each defendant who pleads guilty, or is found guilty, in
each proceeding filed in the Municipal Court for the violation of the
ordinances of the City and which is payable to the City.
SURCHARGES — Amounts payable to the State of Missouri or other
entities or payable to the City for specific designated purposes that
are assessed to each defendant who pleads guilty, or is found guilty,
in each proceeding filed in the Municipal Court for the violation of the
ordinances of the City.
B. Court Costs. In addition to any fine that may be imposed by the
Municipal Judge, there shall be assessed court costs in the amount of
twelve dollars ($12.00) in all cases.
C. Surcharges. The following surcharges shall be collected in all cases:
1. A surcharge in the amount of three dollars ($3.00), described in
Section 488.5336 RSMo., which shall be distributed as follows:
a. Two dollars ($2.00) of the three dollars ($3.00) shall be
transmitted monthly to the Treasurer of the City to be used to
pay for Police Officer training as provided by Sections 590.100
to 590.180, RSMo. The City shall not retain for training
purposes more than one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) of such funds for each certified Law Enforcement
Officer or candidate for certification employed by the City. Any
excess funds shall be transmitted quarterly to the City's
General Fund.
Section
130.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.330
100:111
b. One dollar ($1.00) of the three dollars ($3.00) shall be sent to
the State Treasury to the credit of the Peace Officer Standards
and Training Commission Fund created by Section 590.178,
RSMo.
2. A surcharge in the amount of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50)
imposed by Section 595.045, RSMo. for purposes of the Crime
Victims' Compensation Fund established by the State of Missouri.
Such surcharge shall be collected by the Clerk of the Court. All
sums collected pursuant to this Subsection shall be distributed as
follows:
a. Ninety-five percent (95%) of such sums shall be forwarded to
the State of Missouri for deposit to the Crime Victims'
Compensation Fund as provided in Section 595.045, RSMo.
b. Five percent (5%) of such sums shall be paid to the City as
reimbursement for the costs of collection of such Stateimposed
charge.
3. A surcharge in the sum of two dollars ($2.00) authorized by Section
488.607, RSMo. for the purpose of providing operating expenses
for shelters for battered persons, as defined in Sections 455.200 to
455.230, RSMo. Such cost shall be collected by the Clerk of the
Court and disbursed by the City to such shelters that meet the
requirements and qualifications of Sections 455.200 to 455.230,
RSMo.
4. A surcharge in the sum of two dollars ($2.00) authorized by Section
488.5026, RSMo., which shall be collected by the Clerk of the Court
and deposited into the Inmate Security Fund. All funds within the
Inmate Security Fund shall be utilized to develop, install and
maintain a biometric verification system to ensure that inmates can
be properly identified and tracked within the City's detention
system, and to pay for any expenses related to custody and housing
and other expenses for prisoners, all in accord with Section
488.5026, RSMo.
D. Miscellaneous Charges and Reimbursements. The following types of
miscellaneous charges and reimbursements may be imposed by order
of the Municipal Judge:
1. Actual charges assessed against the City by other law enforcement
agencies or correctional facilities for apprehension or confinement
of defendants.
2. Charges for mileage, in the same amount as provided to the Sheriff
in criminal violations, for each mile and fraction thereof the officer
must travel (both directions) in order to serve any warrant or
commitment or order of this Court.
Section
130.330
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
130.330
100:112
3. Charge for letter of notice of failure to appear in Court in an
amount not to exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00).
4. Other charges, such as for the issuance of a warrant, a
commitment, or a summons, as provided by the Associate Circuit
Judge in criminal prosecutions.
5. Other charges, such as for recall of a warrant, imposed by the
Municipal Judge of the City of O'Fallon.
6. All appeal costs from Municipal Court to the Circuit Court.
7. Expert witness fees for experts required by the City. "Expert
witnesses" are witnesses who testify relative to matters outside the
scope of general knowledge and possess special skills and
knowledge.
E. Alcohol and Drug-Related Traffic Offenses - Reimbursement to the City.
Upon a plea of guilty or a finding of guilty of violating the provisions of
Section 577.010 or 577.012, RSMo. or violations of O'Fallon ordinances
involving alcohol or drug-related traffic offenses, the Municipal Court
may, in addition to the imposition of any penalties provided by law,
order the defendant to wholly or partially reimburse the O'Fallon Police
Department that made the arrest for the costs associated with such
arrest. Such costs shall include the reasonable cost of making the
arrest, including the cost of any chemical test made under this Chapter
to determine the alcohol or drug content of the person's blood, and the
costs of processing, charging, booking and holding such person in
custody.
F. Judicial Waiver of Court Costs and Surcharges. Nothing in this Section
shall be construed to prohibit or limit the authority of the Municipal
Judge to waive court costs and surcharges in whole or in part.
Section
130.330
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.330
100:113

ARTICLE III
Administrative Search Warrants
Section 130.340. Warrants — Arrest — Search. [Ord. No. 5191 §1,
6-14-2007]
A. Procedures Governing Arrest Warrants. All warrants issued by a
Municipal Judge shall be directed to the Chief of Police or any other
Police Officer of the municipality or to the Sheriff of the County. The
warrant shall be executed by the Chief of Police, Police Officer or
Sheriff any place within the limits of the County and not elsewhere
unless the warrants are endorsed in the manner provided for warrants
in criminal cases and, when so endorsed, shall be served in other
Counties as provided for in warrants in criminal cases. The Chief of
Police or other Police Officer of the City may, without a warrant, make
arrest of any person who commits an offense in his/her presence, but
such officer shall, before the trial, file a written complaint with the
judge hearing violations of municipal ordinances.
B. Procedures Governing Administrative Warrants.
1. Administrative warrant defined—who may issue, execute.
a. An "administrative warrant" is a written order of the Municipal
Judge permitting the entry of City Officials on or into private
property to enforce the City's housing, zoning, health and
safety regulations when government entry on or into such
private property is otherwise authorized by Missouri law. A
warrant may issue only in conformance with this Section and
only for the enforcement of the City's housing, zoning, health
and safety regulations, specifically:
(1) To abate such physical conditions on private property
constituting a public nuisance or otherwise in violation of a
specified regulation as provided herein,
(2) To inspect private property to determine or prove the
existence of physical conditions in violation of such a
specified regulation, and
(3) To seize, photograph, copy or record evidence of the
violation of such a specified regulation.
b. The Municipal Judge having original and exclusive jurisdiction
to determine violations against the ordinances of the
municipality may issue an administrative warrant when:
(1) The property to be entered is located within the City, and
(2) The owner or occupant of the property to be entered
(a) Has refused to allow same after official request by the
City, or
Section
130.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.340
100:115
(b) Is not available, after reasonable investigation and
effort, to consent to such entry or inspection, and
(3) The City establishes probable cause to determine that a
public nuisance or other violation of a specified regulation
as provided herein may exist.
c. Any such warrant shall be directed to the Chief of Police or any
other Police Officer of the City and shall be executed by the
Chief of Police or said Police Officer, in conjunction with the
appropriate Code Enforcement Officer or other appropriate
official, within the City limits and not elsewhere.
2. Who may apply for warrant—contents of application.
a. Any Code Enforcement Officer, Police Officer or attorney of the
City may make application to the Municipal Judge for the
issuance of an administrative warrant.
b. The application shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) State the time and date of the making of the application;
(3) Identify the property to be entered, inspected or seized in
sufficient detail and particularity that the officer executing
the warrant can readily ascertain it;
(4) State that the owner or occupant of the property:
(a) Has been requested by the City to allow such action
and has refused to allow such action, or
(b) Is not available, after reasonable investigation and
effort, to consent to such entry or inspection, and in
such case the application shall include details of the
City's investigation and effort to request such consent;
(5) State facts sufficient to show probable cause for the
issuance of a warrant to enter the private property,
including the specification of the housing, zoning, health
or safety regulation sought to be enforced;
(6) Be verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant; and
(7) Be signed by the applicant and filed in the Municipal
Court.
c. The application may be supplemented by a written affidavit
verified by oath or affirmation. Such affidavit shall be
considered in determining whether there is probable cause for
the issuance of a warrant and in filling out any deficiencies in
the description of the property or place to be entered. Oral
Section
130.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
130.340
100:116
testimony shall not be considered. The application may be
submitted by facsimile or other electronic means.
3. Hearing and procedure—contents of warrant—execution and
return.
a. Hearing and procedure.
(1) The Municipal Judge shall determine whether probable
cause exists to enter the private property for the purposes
noted herein.
(2) In doing so the Municipal Judge shall determine whether
the action to be taken by the City is reasonable in light of
the facts stated. The Municipal Judge shall consider the
goals of the ordinance or Code Section sought to be
enforced and such other factors as may be appropriate,
including, but not limited to, the known or suspected
violation of any relevant City ordinance or Code Section,
the passage of time since the property's last inspection,
and the law, Statute or ordinance authorizing government
entry onto private property. The standard for issuing a
warrant need not be limited to actual knowledge of an
existing violation of a City ordinance or Code Section.
(3) If it appears from the application and any supporting
affidavit that there is probable cause to enter the private
property for the enforcement of the City's housing, zoning,
health and safety regulations, a warrant shall immediately
be issued.
(4) The warrant shall issue in the form of an original and two
(2) copies, and the application, any supporting affidavit
and one (1) copy of the warrant as issued shall be retained
in the records of the Municipal Court.
b. Contents of warrant. The warrant shall:
(1) Be in writing and in the name of the City;
(2) Be directed to any Police Officer in the City;
(3) State the time and date the warrant was issued;
(4) Identify the property to be entered in sufficient detail and
particularity that the officer executing the warrant can
readily ascertain it;
(5) Command that the described property be entered for one
(1) or more specified enforcement purposes as provided
herein, identify the regulation sought to be enforced, and
direct that any evidence of any suspected property
violations be seized, recorded or photographed, and a
Section
130.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.340
100:117
description of such property be returned, within ten days
after filing of the application, to the Clerk of the Municipal
Court to be dealt with according to law;
(6) Be signed by the judge, with his/her title of office
indicated.
c. Execution and return.
(1) A warrant issued under this Article shall be executed only
by a City Police Officer, provided however, that one (1) or
more designated City Officials shall accompany the officer,
and the warrant shall be executed in the following manner:
(a) The warrant may be issued by facsimile or other
electronic means.
(b) The warrant shall be executed by conducting the
private property entry as commanded and shall be
executed as soon as practicable and in a reasonable
manner.
(c) The officer shall give the owner or occupant of the
property entered a copy of the warrant.
(d) If any property is seized incident to the entry, the
officer shall give the person from whose possession it
was taken, if the person is present, an itemized receipt
for the property taken. If no such person is present, or
if no such person is ascertainable, the officer shall
leave the receipt at the site of the entry in a
conspicuous place.
(i) A copy of the itemized receipt of any property
taken shall be delivered to an attorney for the City
within two (2) working days of the execution of
the warrant.
(ii) The disposition of property seized pursuant to a
warrant under this Section shall be in accordance
with an applicable City ordinance or Code
Section, but in the absence of same, then with
Section 542.301, RSMo.
(e) The officer may summon as many persons as he/she
deems necessary to assist him/her in executing the
warrant.
(f) An officer executing an invalid warrant, the invalidity
of which is not apparent on its face, may use such
force as he/she would be justified in using if the
warrant were valid.
Section
130.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
130.340
100:118
(g) A warrant shall expire if it is not executed and the
required return made within ten (10) days after the
date of the making of the application.
(2) After execution of the warrant, the warrant, with a return
thereon signed by the officer executing the warrant, shall
be delivered to the Municipal Court in the following
manner:
(a) The return shall show the date and manner of
execution and the name of the possessor and of the
owner, when not the same person, if known, of the
property entered.
(b) The return shall be accompanied by any photographs,
copies or recordings made, and by any property
seized, along with a copy of the itemized receipt of
such property required by this Section; provided
however, that seized property may be disposed of as
provided herein, and in such a case a description of
the property seized shall accompany the return.
(3) The Court Administrator, upon request, shall deliver a
copy of the return to the possessor and the owner, when
not the same person, of the property entered or seized.
4. Warrant invalid, when. A warrant shall be deemed invalid:
a. If it was not issued by the Municipal Judge;
b. If it was issued without a written application having been filed
and verified;
c. If it was issued without sufficient probable cause in light of the
goals of the ordinance to be enforced and such other factors as
provided in Subsection (B)(3)(c)(1)(b) hereof;
d. If it was not issued with respect to property in the City;
e. If it does not describe the property or places to be entered,
inspected or seized with sufficient certainty;
f. If it is not signed by the judge who issued it; or
g. If it was not executed and the required return made within ten
(10) days after the date of the making of the application.
Section
130.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.340
100:119
Chapter 135
FINANCE
Cross Reference — As to utilities taxes, see ch. 630 of this Code.
Note — Ord. no. 5437 §1, adopted March 12, 2009, enacted an "investment
policy" to guide policy for investment of city funds. This policy is on file in
the city offices.
Note – The Financial Policies of the City of O’Fallon, as previously adopted
by Ord. No. 6132 were amended on 10-27-2016 by Ord. No. 6265.
Additionally, Policy No. 800 of the Financial Policies, entitled “Purchasing”
was amended by the addition of Section 13, Design-Build, on 6-22-2017 by
Ord. No. 6354.
Section
130.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
130.340
100:120
ARTICLE I
Department of Finance
Section 135.010. Creation of Department. [R.O. 2007 §135.010;
Ord. No. 572 §2, 4-19-1977]
There is hereby created and established the Department of Finance for the
City of O'Fallon and also the position of Director of Finance to head such
department.
Section 135.020. Bond. [R.O. 2007 §135.070; Ord. No. 572 §8,
4-19-1977]
The Director of Finance, before entering upon the duties of office, shall
be successfully bonded by the City in the amount of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00); such bond shall be approved by the City Council and such
bond shall insure the City of O'Fallon for the faithful and honest
performance of the duties of the City of O'Fallon and for rendering a full
and proper account to the City of O'Fallon for funds and property which
shall come into the possession or control of the Director of Finance. The
cost of such bond shall be paid by the City of O'Fallon. Should the Director
of Finance be covered by a blanket bond to the same extent, such individual
bond shall not be required.
Section
135.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.020
100:121

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)22
Section 135.030. through Section 135.120. (Reserved)
22.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Purchasing Policy, comprised of Sections 135.030 through
135.120, derived from R.O. 2007 §§135.275 – 135.347 and Ord. No. 4438 §§1 – 2,
12-16-2002, was repealed 4-12-2012 by §1 of Ord. No. 5780.
Section
135.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.030
100:123

ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 135.125. Levy and Collection of Special Assessments.
A. In planning the construction of any public improvement, including, but
not limited to, the construction or repair of sewers and sewer systems,
sidewalks, sidewalk curbing, guttering, squares, streets, roads and
public ways, the City Council may determine whether the public
improvement will benefit particular real property and, if so, whether
the public improvement is to be financed by special assessment of the
real property benefitted thereby.
B. If the City Council proposes to specially assess benefitted property
owners, it shall cause plans and specifications for the project, together
with an estimate of the total cost for the projects, including elements
referenced elsewhere in this Section and design, engineering, property
acquisition, construction, a reasonable construction contingency, the
value of the time of City personnel involved in the project, and an
amount not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total estimated cost
of the improvement to be used for payment of related fees and other
expenses, and an estimate of the portion of the total cost to be assessed
against each property to be benefitted by the project, to be prepared
and filed with the City Clerk, and shall cause notice of the filing thereof
to be published in a newspaper circulated in the County. A public
hearing shall be had before the City Council upon the request of three
(3) or more such benefitted property owners, at which hearing citizens
may express their assent or objection to such project.
C. When any public improvements to be paid for in whole or in part by
special assessment are completed, the City Administrator shall cause to
be computed the entire cost and expense thereof, including any cost or
expense incurred by the City. The Council shall levy and assess such
cost and expense, or the part determined by the City Council to be paid
by special assessment, as a special tax.
D. The Council shall, by ordinance, direct the issuance of such special tax
bills. The tax bills so authorized shall thereupon become a lien upon the
lot, tract or parcel of land described in said tax bill. Liability for and the
extent, duration and priority of said special assessments and liens shall
be governed by Sections 88.812 and 177.021, RSMo., 2000.
E. Special tax bills shall be prima facie evidence of what they contain and
of their own validity, and no mere informality or clerical mistake in any
of the proceedings shall be a defense. All special tax bills issued by the
City shall be assignable.
F. The costs and expenses that the City may levy special assessments for
shall include, but are not limited to, design, engineering, property
acquisition, excavation, construction, demolition, purchase of materials
and labor, grading, paving, curbing, trenching, repair and any other
Section
135.125
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.125
100:125
Section 135.130. Contractors Encouraged To Employ Local
Residents. [R.O 2007 §135.890; Ord. No. 2069 §§3—6, 9-15-1992;
Ord. No. 5690 §1, 3-24-2011]
costs and expenses associated with the public improvement. The
special tax bills may bear interest not to exceed ten percent (10%) per
annum; all the tax bills shall become due and payable sixty (60) days
after the date of issue thereof, except in the case of tax bills payable in
installments.
G. The City may levy special assessments upon any privately or publiclyowned
property benefitted by public improvements which relate to the
erection, construction and maintenance of sewers and sewer systems,
and of sidewalks, guttering, curbing and paving of the streets and alleys
adjoining and abutting the real estate of any general or special purpose
political subdivision, district, or other public body or entity created or
authorized by the Constitution or laws of the State of Missouri,
including those subject to the provisions of Section 177.021, RSMo.,
2000, and property owned by any railroad, and may issue special tax
bills to the owner(s) of said property for the collection of said special
assessments, and the owners thereof shall be subject to payment for
and the lien of the special tax bills issued by the City on the same basis
as any privately owned property, and the owner of the same shall be
subject to suit in default of the payment of such special tax bill.
However, no property held for public use shall be sold to enforce any
such lien, and the judgment upon any such tax bill shall be the same as
an ordinary judgment against the owner of such property for the
recovery of money on contracts, and its collection shall be enforced in
the same manner as it now or may hereafter be provided by law for the
collection of judgment against the owners of such public property.
H. Roads, Streets And Other Public Ways. In the construction or
improvement of any sewer and sewer system, sidewalk, square, public
road, street or other way, it shall be presumed that the property
benefitted by such improvement is that property which adjoins and can
reasonably have access to or make use of the sewer or sewer system,
sidewalk, square, road, street or other facility to be constructed or
improved. The costs and expenses for the construction or improvement
to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment shall be
apportioned among the benefitted owners in proportion to the number
of feet of frontage owned by each such benefitted owner.
A. All business entities contracting with the City of O'Fallon for
construction, repairs, maintenance and service projects funded with tax
revenues of the City of O'Fallon are encouraged and urged, to the
extent possible, to employ residents of the City of O'Fallon to work on
such projects, and are further encouraged to urge their subcontractors
to employ City of O'Fallon residents to work on such projects.
B. The City of O'Fallon will encourage all contractors and subcontractors
on City funded projects to implement the policy recommendation of the
Section
135.125
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
135.130
100:126
Federal Committee on Apprenticeship, United States Department of
Labor, Employment and Training Administration, and shall include the
following language in bid specifications issued by the City:
The City seeks to ensure that the highest quality workmanship will
be performed on its projects and to do so, encourages bidders to
use workmen on the project who have satisfactorily completed
apprenticeship programs developed and operated in accordance with
the policy recommendation, dated January 28, 1992, of the Federal
Committee on Apprenticeship, U.S. Department of Labor, Employment
and Training Administration, Office of Workbased Learning, Bureau
of Apprenticeship and Training (the "Policy Recommendation"). All
bidders are required to certify in their bids the percentage of their
workmen for the project which have satisfactorily completed such a
program for the type of work they will be performing.23
23.Editor's Note: Former Section 135.140, Surplus Property Disposal, and Section 135.145,
Sale or Lease of City-Owned Real Estate, which immediately followed, derived from R.O.
2007 §135.800, Ord. No. 4438 §§1 – 2, 12-16-2002, and Ord. No. 5426 §1, 2-12-2009, were
repealed 4-12-2012 by §1 of Ord. No. 5780. Former Section 135.150, Financial Policies and
Procedures Manual, which immediately followed, enacted 3-13-2008 by §1 of Ord. No.
5300, as amended by Ord. No. 5780 §2, 4-12-2012 and Ord. No. 6016 §§1 – 2, 8-14-2014,
was repealed 9-10-2015 by §1 of Ord. No. 6132. Section 2 of Ord. No. 6132 also adopted
Financial Policies for the City, which are on file at the City’s offices. See note regarding
Financial Policies and amendments thereto at the beginning of this Chapter.
Section
135.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.130
100:127
Chapter 140
OPEN MEETINGS AND RECORDS
Section
135.130
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
135.130
100:128
ARTICLE I
Generally
Section 140.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 5110 §1, 12-14-2006]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
CLOSED MEETING, CLOSED RECORD, CLOSED VOTE — Any meeting,
record or vote closed to the public.
COPYING — If requested by a member of the public, copies provided
as detailed in the provisions of this Chapter, if duplication equipment is
available.
PUBLIC BUSINESS — All matters which relate in any way to the
performance of the City's functions or the conduct of its business.
PUBLIC GOVERNMENTAL BODY — Any legislative, administrative,
governmental entity created by the Constitution or Statutes of this State,
by order or ordinance of the City, judicial entities when operating in an
administrative capacity or by executive order, including:
PUBLIC MEETING — Any meeting of a public governmental body subject
to Article I of this Chapter at which any public business is discussed,
decided or public policy formulated, whether such meeting is conducted in
person or by means of communication equipment, including, but not limited
to, conference call, video conference, Internet chat or Internet message
board. The term "public meeting" shall not include an informal gathering of
members of a public governmental body for ministerial or social purposes
when there is no intent to avoid the purposes of this Chapter, but the
term shall include a public vote of all or a majority of the members of a
public governmental body, by electronic communication or any other means,
conducted in lieu of holding a public meeting with the members of the
public governmental body gathered at one (1) location in order to conduct
public business.
Any advisory committee or commission appointed by the Mayor or City
Council;
1.
Any other legislative or administrative governmental deliberative body
under the direction of three (3) or more elected or appointed members
having rulemaking or quasi-judicial power;
2.
Any committee appointed by or at the direction of any of the entities
and which is authorized to report to any of the above named entities,
any advisory committee appointed by or at the direction of any of the
named entities for the specific purpose of recommending, directly to
the City Council or the City Administrator and/or Clerk, policy or policy
revisions or expenditures of public funds. The custodian of the records
of any public governmental body shall maintain a list of the policy
advisory committees described in this Subsection; and
3.
4. Any quasi-public governmental body.
Section
140.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.010
100:129
PUBLIC RECORD — Any record, whether written or electronically stored,
retained by or of any public governmental body including any report, survey,
memorandum or other document or study prepared for the public
governmental body by a consultant or other professional service paid for in
whole or in part by public funds, including records created or maintained by
private contractors under an agreement with a public governmental body
or on behalf of a public governmental body. The term "public record" shall
not include any internal memorandum or letter received or prepared by or
on behalf of a member of a public governmental body consisting of advice,
opinions and recommendations in connection with the deliberative decisionmaking
process of said body unless such records are retained by the public
governmental body or presented at a public meeting. Any document or
study prepared for a public governmental body by a consultant or other
professional service as described in this Chapter shall be retained by the
public governmental body in the same manner as any other public record.
PUBLIC VOTE — Any vote, whether conducted in person, by telephone or
by any other electronic means, cast at any public meeting of any public
governmental body.
QUASI-PUBLIC GOVERNMENTAL BODY — Any person, corporation or
partnership organized or authorized to do business in the State of Missouri
pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 352, 353 or 355, RSMo., or
unincorporated association which either:
Section 140.020. Meetings — Notice, Access and Minutes. [Ord. No.
5110 §1, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 5758 §1, 12-8-2011]
Has as its primary purpose to enter into contracts with public
governmental bodies, or to engage primarily in activities carried out
pursuant to an agreement or agreements with public governmental
bodies; or
1.
Performs a public function, as evidenced by a statutorily based capacity,
to confer or otherwise advance, through approval, recommendation or
other means, the allocation or issuance of tax credits, tax abatement,
public debt, tax exempt debt, rights of eminent domain, or the
contracting of lease-back agreements on structures whose annualized
payments commit public tax revenues; or any association that directly
accepts the appropriation of money from a public governmental body,
but only to the extent that a meeting, record or vote relates to such
appropriation.
2.
A. All public meetings shall be open to the public and public votes and
public records shall be open to the public for inspection and
duplication.
B. Each public governmental body shall give notice of the time, date and
place of each meeting and its tentative agenda in a manner reasonably
calculated to advise the public of the matters to be considered and if the
meeting will be conducted by telephone or other electronic means, the
notice of the meeting shall identify the mode by which the meeting will
Section
140.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
140.020
100:130
be conducted and the designated location where the public may
observe and attend the meeting. If a public body plans to meet by
Internet chat, Internet message board or other computer link, it shall
post a notice of the meeting on its website in addition to its principal
office and shall notify the public how to access that meeting.
Reasonable notice shall include making available copies of the notice to
any representative of the news media who requests notice of meetings
of a particular public governmental body concurrent with the notice
being made available to the members of the particular governmental
body and posting the notice on a bulletin board at City Hall or other
prominent place which is easily accessible to the public and clearly
designated for that purpose at the City Hall.
C. The notice shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours, exclusive of
weekends and holidays when the City Hall is closed, prior to the
commencement of any meeting of any governmental body unless for
good cause such notice is impossible or impractical, in which case as
much notice as is reasonably possible shall be given; provided however,
that for any public meeting where a vote of the City Council is required
to implement a tax increase, or with respect to a retail development
project when the City Council votes to utilize the power of eminent
domain, create a transportation development district or a community
improvement district, or approve a redevelopment plan that pledges
public funds as financing for the project or plan, the City Council shall
give notice conforming with all the requirements of law at least four (4)
days before the City Council may vote on such issues, exclusive of
weekends and holidays when the facility is closed, and provided further
that the exception above and in Subsection (E) below concerning
shorter reasonable notice periods if required notice is impossible or
impractical shall not apply to meetings requiring four (4) days' notice.
D. Each meeting shall be held at a place reasonably accessible to the
public and of sufficient size to accommodate the anticipated attendance
by members of the public and at a time reasonably convenient to the
public, unless for good cause such a place or time is impossible or
impractical. Every reasonable effort shall be made to grant special
access to the meeting to handicapped or disabled individuals.
E. When it is necessary to hold a meeting on less than twenty-four hours'
notice, or at a place that is not reasonably accessible to the public, or at
a time that is not reasonably convenient to the public, the nature of the
good cause justifying that departure from the normal requirements
shall be stated in the minutes.
F. A public body shall allow for the recording by audiotape, videotape or
other electronic means of any open meeting. A public body may
establish guidelines regarding the manner in which such recording is
conducted so as to minimize disruption to the meeting. No audio
recording of any meeting, record or vote closed pursuant to the
provisions of Section 610.021, RSMo., shall be allowed without
permission of the public body; any person who violates this provision
Section
140.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.020
100:131
Section 140.030. Votes. [Ord. No. 5110 §1, 12-14-2006]
All votes shall be recorded, and when a roll call is taken, as to attribute
each "aye" and "nay" vote, or abstinence if not voting, to the name of the
individual member of the public governmental body. Votes taken during a
closed meeting shall be taken by roll call. All votes taken by roll call in
meetings of a public governmental body consisting of members who are
all elected, except for the Missouri General Assembly and any committee
established by a public governmental body, shall be cast by members of the
public governmental body who are physically present and in attendance at
the meeting. When it is necessary to take votes by roll call in a meeting
of the public governmental body, due to an emergency of the public body,
with a quorum of the members of the public body physically present and
in attendance and less than a quorum of the members of the public
governmental body participating via telephone, facsimile, Internet or any
other voice or electronic means, the nature of the emergency of the public
body justifying that departure from the normal requirements shall be stated
in the minutes. Where such emergency exists, the votes taken shall be
regarded as if all members were physically present and in attendance at the
meeting.
Section 140.040. Custodian of Records. [Ord. No. 5110 §1,
12-14-2006]
shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and punished by imprisonment
for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, a fine not to exceed three
hundred dollars ($300.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment.
G. A formally constituted subunit of a parent governmental body may
conduct a meeting without notice as required by this Section during a
lawful meeting of the parent governmental body, a recess in that
meeting or immediately following that meeting, if the meeting of the
subunit is publicly announced at the parent meeting and the subject of
the meeting reasonably coincides with the subjects discussed or acted
upon by the parent governmental body.
H. A journal or minutes of open and closed meetings shall be taken and
retained by the public governmental body including, but not limited to,
a record of any votes taken at such meeting. The minutes shall include
the date, time, place, members present, members absent and a record
of any votes taken.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the City Clerk shall be the
general custodian of records and shall thereby be responsible for the
maintenance of all City records not entrusted to the care of another
official of the City. The Chief of Police shall be the custodian of all Police
Department records and particularly all closed records of the Police
Department. The Clerk of the Municipal Court, acting on behalf of the
judge, shall be custodian of all Municipal Court records and particularly
of all closed court records.
Section
140.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
140.040
100:132
Section 140.050. Public Access To Records. [Ord. No. 5110 §1,
12-14-2006]
B. Each custodian may designate deputy custodians in operating
departments of the City and such other departments or offices as the
custodian may determine. Deputy custodians shall conduct matters
relating to public records and meetings in accord with the policies
enumerated in this Article.
A. Except as otherwise provided by law, the City shall provide access to
and, upon request, furnish copies of the City's public records subject to
the provisions of Section 140.060 of this Chapter relating to copying
fees. No person shall remove original public records from the City Hall
or from the office of the custodian of records without written
permission of the custodian. No public governmental body shall grant
to any person or entity, whether by contract, license or otherwise, the
exclusive right to access and disseminate any public record unless the
granting of such right is necessary to facilitate coordination with, or
uniformity among, industry regulators having similar authority.
B. The custodian of records may require persons seeking access to public
records to submit such request in writing and/or on a form designated
by the custodian for such purpose. Such written request shall be
sufficiently particular to reasonably apprise the custodian of the
records sought.
C. Each request for access to a public record shall be acted upon as soon
as possible but in no event later than the end of the third (3rd) business
day following the date the request is received by the custodian of
records of the City. If records are requested in a certain format, the
public body shall provide the records in the requested format, if such
format is available. If access to the public record is not granted
immediately, the custodian shall give a detailed explanation of the
cause for further delay and the place and earliest time and date that the
record will be available for inspection. This period for document
production may exceed three (3) days for reasonable cause.
D. If a request for access is denied, the custodian of records shall, upon
request, provide a written statement of the grounds for such denial.
Such statement shall cite the specific provision of law under which
access is denied and shall be furnished to the requestor no later than
the end of the third (3rd) business day following the date that the
request for the statement is received.
E. Any member of a public governmental body who transmits any message
relating to public business by electronic means shall also concurrently
transmit that message to either the member's public office computer or
the custodian of records in the same format. The provisions of this
Subsection shall only apply to messages sent to other members of that
body so that, when counting the sender, a majority of the body's
members are copied. Any such message received by the custodian or at
Section
140.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.050
100:133
Section 140.060. Copying Fees. [Ord. No. 5110 §1, 12-14-2006]
the member's office computer shall be a public record, subject,
however, to the exceptions for closed records as provided by law.
A. Fees for copying public records shall not exceed ten cents ($0.10) per
page for a paper copy not larger than nine (9) by fourteen (14) inches,
plus an hourly fee for duplicating time not to exceed the average hourly
rate of pay for clerical staff of the City. Research time required for
fulfilling records requests may be charged at the actual cost of research
time. Based on the scope of the request, the City shall produce the
copies using employees of the City that result in the lowest amount of
charges for search, research and duplication time. Prior to producing
copies of the requested records, the person requesting the records may
request the City to provide an estimate of the cost to the person
requesting the records. The custodian shall receive or may require
payment prior to duplicating documents.
B. Fees for providing access to public records maintained on computer
facilities, recording tapes or disks, videotapes or films, pictures, maps,
slides, graphics, illustrations or similar audio or visual items or devices
and for paper copies larger than nine (9) by fourteen (14) inches shall
include only the cost of copies, staff time, which shall not exceed the
average hourly rate of pay for staff of the City required for making
copies and programming, if necessary, and the cost of the disk or tape
or other medium used for the duplication. Fees for maps, blueprints or
plats that require special expertise to duplicate may include the actual
rate of compensation for the trained personnel required to duplicate
such maps, blueprints or plats. If programming is required beyond the
customary and usual level to comply with a request for records or
information, the fees for compliance may include the actual costs of
such programming.
Section
140.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
140.060
100:134
ARTICLE II
Closed Meetings, Records and Votes
Section 140.070. Closed Meetings, Records and Votes Policy —
Generally. [Ord. No. 5110 §1, 12-14-2006]
A. All meetings, records and votes are open to the public, except that any
meeting, record, minutes or vote relating to one (1) or more of the
following matters, as well as other materials designated elsewhere in
this Article, shall be closed unless the public governmental body votes
to make them public:
1. Legal actions, causes of action or litigation involving a public
governmental body and any confidential or privileged
communications between a public governmental body or its
representatives and its attorneys. However, any minutes, vote or
settlement agreement relating to legal actions, causes of action, or
litigation involving a public governmental body or any agent or
entity representing its interests or acting on its behalf or with its
authority, including any insurance company acting on behalf of a
public governmental body as its insured, shall be made public upon
final disposition of the matter voted upon or upon the signing by
the parties of the settlement agreement, unless prior to final
disposition, the settlement agreement is ordered closed by a court
after a written finding that the adverse impact to a plaintiff or
plaintiffs to the action clearly outweighs the public policy
considerations of Section 610.011, RSMo., however, the amount of
any monies paid by, or on behalf of, the public governmental body
shall be disclosed; provided however, in matters involving the
exercise of the power of eminent domain, the vote shall be
announced or become public immediately following the action on
the motion to authorize institution of such a legal action. Legal
work product shall be considered a closed record.
2. Leasing, purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental
body where public knowledge of the transaction might adversely
affect the legal consideration therefor. However, any minutes or
vote or public record approving a contract relating to the leasing,
purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental body shall
be made public upon execution of the lease, purchase or sale of the
real estate.
3. Hiring, firing, disciplining or promoting of particular employees by
a public governmental body when personal information about the
employee is discussed or recorded. However, any vote on a final
decision, when taken by a public governmental body, to hire, fire,
promote or discipline an employee of a public governmental body
shall be made available with a record of how each member voted to
the public within seventy-two (72) hours of the close of the meeting
where such action occurs; provided however, that any employee so
affected shall be entitled to prompt notice of such decision during
Section
140.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.070
100:135
the seventy-two (72) hour period before such decision is made
available to the public. As used in this Subsection, the term
"personal information" means information relating to the
performance or merit of individual employees.
4. Non-judicial mental or physical health proceedings involving
identifiable persons, including medical, psychiatric, psychological,
or alcoholism or drug dependency diagnosis or treatment.
5. Testing and examination materials, before the test or examination
is given or, if it is to be given again, before so given again.
6. Welfare cases of identifiable individuals.
7. Preparation, including any discussions or work product, on behalf
of a public governmental body or its representatives for
negotiations with employee groups.
8. Software codes for electronic data processing and documentation
thereof.
9. Specifications for competitive bidding, until either the
specifications are officially approved by the public governmental
body or the specifications are published for bid.
10. Sealed bids and related documents, until the bids are opened; and
sealed proposals and related documents or any documents related
to a negotiated contract until a contract is executed, or all
proposals are rejected.
11. Individually identifiable personnel records, performance ratings or
records pertaining to employees or applicants for employment,
except that this exemption shall not apply to the names, positions,
salaries and lengths of service of officers and employees of public
agencies once they are employed as such. It is the policy of the City
that no information relating to present or past employees other
than names, positions, salaries and lengths of service shall be
provided to any person or agency other than as may be required in
response to a subpoena lawfully issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction, or as otherwise may be required by law.
12. Records which are protected from disclosure by law.
13. Meetings and public records relating to scientific and technological
innovations in which the owner has a proprietary interest.
14. Records relating to municipal hotlines established for the reporting
of abuse and wrongdoing.
15. Confidential or privileged communications between a public
governmental body and its auditor, including all auditor work
product; however, all final audit reports issued by the auditor are to
be considered open records pursuant to this Chapter.
Section
140.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
140.070
100:136
16. Operational guidelines and policies developed, adopted or
maintained by any public agency responsible for law enforcement,
public safety, first response or public health for use in responding
to or preventing any critical incident which is or appears to be
terrorist in nature and which has the potential to endanger
individual or public safety or health. Nothing in this exception shall
be deemed to close information regarding expenditures, purchases
or contracts made by an agency in implementing these guidelines
or policies. When seeking to close information pursuant to this
exception, the agency shall affirmatively state in writing that
disclosure would impair its ability to protect the safety or health of
persons and shall in the same writing state that the public interest
in non-disclosure outweighs the public interest in disclosure of the
records. This exception shall expire and be of no further force or
effect on December 31, 2008.
17. Existing or proposed security systems and structural plans of real
property owned or leased by a public governmental body and
information that is voluntarily submitted by a non-public entity
owning or operating an infrastructure to any public governmental
body for use by that body to devise plans for protection of that
infrastructure, the public disclosure of which would threaten public
safety.
a. Records related to the procurement of or expenditures relating
to security systems purchased with public funds shall be open;
b. When seeking to close information pursuant to this exception,
the public governmental body shall affirmatively state in
writing that disclosure would impair the public governmental
body's ability to protect the security or safety of persons or real
property and shall in the same writing state that the public
interest in non-disclosure outweighs the public interest in
disclosure of the records;
c. Records that are voluntarily submitted by a non-public entity
shall be reviewed by the receiving agency within ninety (90)
days of submission to determine if retention of the document is
necessary in furtherance of a State security interest. If
retention is not necessary, the documents shall be returned to
the non-public governmental body or destroyed;
d. This exception shall expire and be of no further force or effect
on December 31, 2008.
18. Records that identify the configuration of components or the
operation of a computer, computer system, computer network or
telecommunications network and would allow unauthorized access
to or unlawful disruption of a computer, computer system,
computer network or telecommunications network of a public
governmental body. This exception shall not be used to limit or
Section
140.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.070
100:137
Section 140.080. Records Pertaining To Internal Investigations.
[Ord. No. 5110 §1, 12-14-2006]
In order to allow the fullest cooperation by employees and members of
the public in investigation of matters wherein an employee of the City is
alleged to have engaged in any form of misconduct, all files, records and
documents relating to investigations of allegations of misconduct by City
employees will be considered to be personnel records and shall be closed
records under the custody of the respective department head.
Section 140.090. Records Pertaining To Medical Condition or
History. [Ord. No. 5110 §1, 12-14-2006]
deny access to otherwise public records in a file, document, data
file or database containing public records. Records related to the
procurement of or expenditures relating to such computer,
computer system, computer network or telecommunications
network, including the amount of monies paid by, or on behalf of,
a public governmental body for such computer, computer system,
computer network or telecommunications network, shall be open.
19. Credit card numbers, personal identification numbers, digital
certificates, physical and virtual keys, access codes or
authorization codes that are used to protect the security of
electronic transactions between a public governmental body and a
person or entity doing business with a public governmental body.
Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to close the record of a
person or entity using a credit card held in the name of a public
governmental body or any record of a transaction made by a person
using a credit card or other method of payment for which
reimbursement is made by a public governmental body.
A. All information obtained by the City regarding medical examinations,
medical condition or medical history of City employees or job
applicants, if retained by the City, shall be collected and maintained on
separate forms and in separate medical files and shall be treated as
closed and confidential records, except that:
1. Supervisors and managers may be informed regarding necessary
restrictions on the work duties of employees and necessary
accommodations;
2. First aid and safety personnel may be informed, when appropriate,
if the information reflects the existence of a disability which might
require emergency treatment; or
3. Government officials investigating compliance with State or
Federal law pertaining to treatment of persons with disabilities
may be allowed access to such records.
Section
140.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
140.100
100:138
Section 140.100. Records Containing Confidential, Proprietary or
Private Information. [Ord. No. 5110 §1, 12-14-2006]
A. In order to protect reasonable expectations of privacy on the part of
persons having dealings with the City, City records containing
information or entries of a personal, confidential, private or proprietary
nature, including, but not limited to, income, sales data, financial
circumstances, household and family relationships, social security
numbers, dates of birth, insurance information and other information
which reasonable persons generally regard as private and not a
customary subject for public discourse, which information or entries
have been provided to the City by one complying with regulations
requiring the disclosure of such information, shall be excised from
copies of City records disclosed or provided to members of the public
other than those persons to whom the information of entries pertain.
Persons desiring access to information or entries excised from such
records may file a supplementary written request with the custodian of
records for disclosure of material to be specified in the request, which
request should state:
1. Whether or not the requesting party has informed persons to whom
the requested information pertains of the request; and
2. All reasons why the requesting party believes disclosure by the City
of the specified information is in the public interest.
B. The custodian of records may afford all interested parties, including the
persons to whom the information pertains, a reasonable time within
which to comment on the requested disclosure prior to acting further
on the request. If an interested person objects to the disclosure of the
requested information, the custodian of records may conduct a hearing
at which all interested parties may be heard. At such hearing the
custodian shall consider, among such other factors as may be
reasonable and relevant:
1. The requirements and intent of State law, City ordinances and this
policy;
2. The legitimate expectations of privacy on the part of interested
parties;
3. The personal, confidential, private or proprietary nature of the
information at issue;
4. Whether the information was obtained by the City under
compulsion of law or was freely and voluntarily provided by the
persons objecting to the disclosure; and
5. The public purposes to be served by disclosure of the requested
information.
Section
140.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.100
100:139
Section 140.110. Segregation of Exempt Records. [Ord. No. 5110
§1, 12-14-2006]
If a public record contains material which is not exempt from disclosure,
as well as material which is exempt from disclosure, the custodian shall
separate the exempt and non-exempt material and make the non-exempt
material available for examination and copying in accord with the policies
provided herein. When designing a public record the custodian shall, to
the extent practicable, facilitate a separation of exempt from non-exempt
information. If the separation is readily apparent to a person requesting to
inspect or receive copies of the form, the custodian shall generally describe
the material exempted unless that description would reveal the contents of
the exempt information and thus defeat the purpose of the exemption.
Section 140.120. Closed Meetings and Votes — Notice and Minutes.
[Ord. No. 5110 §1, 12-14-2006]
If the custodian of records determines that disclosure is legally
required or would otherwise serve the best interests of the public
and that such requirements or purpose outweigh the legitimate
concerns or interests of the persons to whom the information
pertains, the custodian shall provide the requested information to
the requesting party.
C. In addition to or in lieu of the hearing described above, the custodian of
records may afford all interested parties a reasonable opportunity to
seek judicial review of or relief from the proposed disclosure. The
custodian may also utilize the procedures for judicial determination
and/or opinion solicitation provided in Section 140.130 below.
A. A public governmental body proposing to hold a closed meeting or vote
may do so by either:
1. Giving notice of same pursuant to Section 140.020 above along
with reference to the specific exception allowing such a closed
meeting under State law; or
2. Upon an affirmative public vote of the majority of a quorum of the
public governmental body. The vote of each member of the public
governmental body on the question of closing a public meeting or
vote and the specific reason for closing that public meeting or vote
by reference to the specific exception allowing such a closed
meeting under State law shall be announced publicly at an open
meeting of the governmental body and entered into the minutes.
B. If a vote is taken at a closed meeting, minutes of the closed meeting,
sufficient to reflect the vote pursuant to Section 140.020 above, shall be
recorded.
C. Any meeting or vote closed pursuant to Section 610.021, RSMo., shall
be closed only to the extent necessary for the specific reason
Section
140.100
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
140.120
100:140
Section 140.130. Procedures For Resolving Question of Public
Accessibility. [Ord. No. 5110 §1, 12-14-2006]
The City, or any of its public governmental bodies, or the custodian of
records, when in doubt about the legality of closing a particular meeting,
record or vote, may bring suit at the expense of the City in the Circuit Court
of the County of St. Charles to ascertain the propriety of any such action or
seek a formal opinion of the Attorney General or of the City Attorney. In such
events, the proposed closed meeting or public access to the record or vote
shall be deferred for a reasonable time pending the outcome of the actions
so taken.
Section 140.135. Breach of Confidentiality of Closed Matters. [Ord.
No. 5110 §1, 12-14-2006]
announced to justify the closed meeting or vote. Public governmental
bodies shall not discuss any business in a closed meeting, record or
vote which does not directly relate to the specific reason announced to
justify the closed meeting or vote. Public governmental bodies holding
a closed meeting shall close only an existing portion of the meeting
facility necessary to house the members of the public governmental
body in the closed session, allowing members of the public to remain
to attend any subsequent open session held by the public governmental
body following the closed session.
D. In the event any member of a public governmental body makes a motion
to close a meeting, or a record, or a vote from the public and any other
member believes that such motion, if passed, would cause a meeting,
record or vote to be closed from the public in violation of any provision
in Chapter 610, RSMo., or this Chapter, such latter member shall state
his or her objection to the motion at or before the time the vote is taken
on the motion. The public governmental body shall enter in the minutes
of the public governmental body any objection made pursuant to this
Subsection. Any member making such an objection shall be allowed to
fully participate in any meeting, record or vote that is closed from the
public over the member's objection. In the event the objecting member
also voted in opposition to the motion to close the meeting, record or
vote at issue, the objection and vote of the member as entered in the
minutes shall be an absolute defense to any claim filed against the
objecting member pursuant to Chapter 610, RSMo.
A. Records and information that have been closed pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter, Chapter 610, RSMo., and other relevant
State and Federal laws and regulations are to be treated as confidential
by all employees and elected and appointed officials of the City.
B. It shall be grounds for disciplinary action for any employee to:
1. Violate the confidentiality relating to such records or information;
Section
140.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.135
100:141
2. Copy or remove closed and/or confidential information without the
specific consent of the custodian thereof or in the normal course of
performing such employee's duties for the City;
3. Provide or discuss closed records or confidential information with
any person other than as a necessary part of performing such
employee's duties for the City; or
4. Divulge, discuss or disclose information or records addressed in
any closed meeting of a public governmental body, other than as a
necessary part of performing such employee's duties for the City.
C. Elected and appointed officials are also expected to maintain the same
strict standards of confidentiality required of employees. Breach of the
confidentiality standards established by this Chapter and required of
employees in this Section may be grounds for removal from office or
other sanctions as may be deemed appropriate by the body of which
such official is a member or by the City Council.
Section
140.135
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
140.135
100:142
ARTICLE III
Arrest Records
Section 140.140. Definitions. [Ord. No. 5110 §1, 12-14-2006]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
ARREST — An actual restraint of the person of the defendant, or by his/
her submission to the custody of the officer, under authority of a warrant
or otherwise for a criminal violation which results in the issuance of a
summons or the person being booked.
ARREST REPORT — A record of a law enforcement agency of an arrest and
of any detention or confinement incident thereto together with the charge
therefor.
INACTIVE — An investigation in which no further action will be taken by a
law enforcement agency or officer for any of the following reasons:
INCIDENT REPORT — A record of a law enforcement agency consisting of
the date, time, specific location, name of the victim and immediate facts
and circumstances surrounding the initial report of a crime or incident,
including any logs of reported crimes, accidents and complaints maintained
by that agency.
INVESTIGATIVE REPORT — A record, other than an arrest or incident
report, prepared by personnel of a law enforcement agency, inquiring into
a crime or suspected crime, either in response to an incident report or in
response to evidence developed by Law Enforcement Officers in the course
of their duties.
Section 140.150. Police Department Records. [Ord. No. 5110 §1,
12-14-2006]
1. A decision by the law enforcement agency not to pursue the case;
Expiration of the time to file criminal charges pursuant to the
applicable statute of limitations or ten (10) years after the commission
of the offense; whichever date earliest occurs;
2.
Finality of the convictions of all persons convicted on the basis of the
information contained in the investigative report by exhaustion of, or
expiration of, all rights of appeal of such persons.
3.
A. The Police Department shall maintain records of all incidents reported
to the Police Department, and investigations and arrests made by the
Police Department. All incident reports and arrest reports shall be open
records. Notwithstanding any other provision of law other than the
provisions of Subsection (C) of this Section or Section 320.083, RSMo.,
investigative reports of the Police Department are closed records until
the investigation becomes inactive. If any person is arrested and not
charged with an offense against the law within thirty (30) days of the
Section
140.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.150
100:143
Section 140.160. Effect of Nolle Pros, Dismissal and Suspended
Imposition of Sentence On Records. [Ord. No. 5110 §1, 12-14-2006]
If the person arrested is charged but the case is subsequently nolle prossed
or dismissed, or the accused is found not guilty, or imposition of sentence
is suspended in the court in which the action is prosecuted, official records
pertaining to the case shall thereafter be closed records when such case
is finally terminated except that the disposition portion of the record may
be accessed and except as provided in Section 140.170. If the accused
is found not guilty due to mental disease or defect pursuant to Section
person's arrest, the arrest report shall thereafter be a closed record
except that the disposition portion of the record may be accessed for
purposes of exculpation and except as provided in Section 140.170.
B. Except as provided in Subsections (C) and (D) of this Section, if any
portion of a record or document of a Police Department Officer or the
Police Department, other than an arrest report, which would otherwise
be open, contains information that is reasonably likely to pose a clear
and present danger to the safety of any victim, witness, undercover
officer or other person; or jeopardize a criminal investigation, including
records which would disclose the identity of a source wishing to remain
confidential or a suspect not in custody; or which would disclose
techniques, procedures or guidelines for Police Department
investigations or prosecutions, that portion of the record shall be closed
and shall be redacted from any record made available pursuant to this
Article.
C. Any person, attorney for a person or insurer of a person involved in any
incident or whose property is involved in an incident may obtain any
records closed pursuant to this Section or Section 140.180 for purposes
of investigation of any civil claim or defense as provided by this
Subsection. Any individual, his/her attorney or insurer involved in an
incident or whose property is involved in an incident, upon written
request, may obtain a complete unaltered and unedited incident report
concerning the incident and may obtain access to other records closed
by the Police Department pursuant to this Section. Within thirty (30)
days of such request, the Police Department shall provide the requested
material or file a motion pursuant to this Subsection with the Circuit
Court having jurisdiction over the Police Department stating that the
safety of the victim, witness or other individual cannot be reasonably
ensured, or that a criminal investigation is likely to be jeopardized.
Pursuant to Section 610.100(4) RSMo., if, based on such motion, the
court finds for the Police Department, the court shall either order the
record closed or order such portion of the record that should be closed
to be redacted from any record made available pursuant to this
Subsection.
D. The victim of an offense under Chapter 566, RSMo., may request that
his/her identity be kept confidential until a charge relating to said
incident is filed.
Section
140.150
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
140.160
100:144
552.030, RSMo., official records pertaining to the case shall thereafter
be closed records upon such findings, except that the disposition may be
accessed only by law enforcement agencies, child care agencies, facilities as
defined in Section 198.006, RSMo., and in-home services provider agencies
as defined in Section 660.250, RSMo., in the manner established by Section
610.120, RSMo.
Section 140.170. Public Access of Closed Arrest Records. [Ord. No.
5110 §1, 12-14-2006]
Section 140.180. 911 Telephone Reports. [Ord. No. 5110 §1,
12-14-2006]
Except as provided by this Section, any information acquired by the Police
Department by way of a complaint or report of a crime made by telephone
contact using the emergency number 911 shall be inaccessible to the
A. Records required to be closed shall not be destroyed; they shall be
inaccessible to the general public and to all persons other than the
defendant except as provided in this Section and Section 43.507, RSMo.
They shall be available to the Sentencing Advisory Commission created
in Section 558.019, RSMo., for the purpose of studying sentencing
practices, and only to courts, law enforcement agencies, child care
agencies as herein defined, Department of Revenue for driving record
purposes, facilities as defined in Section 198.006, RSMo., in-home
services provider agencies as defined in Section 660.250, RSMo., the
Division of Workers' Compensation for the purposes of determining
eligibility for crime victims' compensation pursuant to Sections 595.010
to 595.075, RSMo., and Federal agencies for purposes of prosecution,
sentencing, parole consideration, criminal justice employment, child
care employment, nursing home employment and to Federal agencies
for such investigative purposes as authorized by law or presidential
executive order. These records shall be made available for the above
purposes regardless of any previous statutory provision which had
closed such records to certain agencies or for certain purposes. All
records which are closed records shall be removed from the records of
the Police Department and Municipal Court which are available to the
public and shall be kept in separate records which are to be held
confidential and, where possible, pages of the public record shall be
retyped or rewritten omitting those portions of the record which deal
with the defendant's case. If retyping or rewriting is not feasible
because of the permanent nature of the record books, such record
entries shall be blacked out and recopied in a confidential book.
B. As used in this Section, the term "child care" includes providers and
youth services agencies as those terms are defined in Section 43.540,
RSMo., elementary and secondary school teachers, and elementary and
secondary school bus drivers, whether such drivers are employed by a
school or an entity which has contracted with the school to provide
transportation services.
Section
140.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.180
100:145
general public. However, information consisting of the date, time, specific
location and immediate facts and circumstances surrounding the initial
report of the crime or incident shall be considered to be an incident report
and subject to Section 140.150. Any closed records pursuant to this Section
shall be available upon request by law enforcement agencies or the Division
of Workers' Compensation or pursuant to a valid court order authorizing
disclosure upon motion and good cause shown.
Section
140.180
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
140.180
100:146
ARTICLE IV
Police Department Reports
Section 140.190. Daily Log or Record Maintained By Police
Department of Crimes, Accidents or Complaints — Public Access To
Certain Information. [Ord. No. 5110 §1, 12-14-2006]
A. The Police Department, if it maintains a daily log or record that lists
suspected crimes, accidents or complaints, shall make available the
following information for inspection and copying by the public:
1. The time, substance and location of all complaints or requests for
assistance received by the Police Department;
2. The time and nature of the Police Department's response to all
complaints or requests for assistance; and
3. If the incident involves an alleged crime or infraction:
a. The time, date and location of occurrence;
b. The name and age of any victim, unless the victim is a victim of
a crime under Chapter 566, RSMo.;
c. The factual circumstances surrounding the incident; and
d. A general description of any injuries, property or weapons
involved.
Section
140.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.190
100:147
Chapter 145
TAXATION
Section
140.190
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
140.190
100:148
ARTICLE I
Transient Guest Tax
Section 145.010. Transient Guest Tax. [R.O. 2007 §145.010; Ord.
No. 3709 §§2—8, 6-17-1998; Ord. No. 5786 §1, 4-26-2012; Ord. No.
5856 §1, 2-28-2013; Ord. No. 6085 §1, 4-9-2015]
A. Any person, partnership, venture or corporation now or hereafter
engaged in the business of letting sleeping rooms within the City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, shall collect a tax sum equal to five percent (5%) of
the charge for the sleeping room, in addition to the charge for the
sleeping room and shall be in addition to any and all taxes imposed by
law; provided, however, that non-governmental agencies
Congressionally mandated to provide disaster relief services and all
government agencies exempt from the payment of sales taxes shall be
exempt from the tax imposed under this Section. No such tax shall be
applicable, levied or collected where payment for a sleeping room is
being made by such an agency. The tax shall be remitted to the City
Collector within thirty (30) days after the last day of each calendar
month.
B. The tax herein required shall not be so construed as to exempt any
person, partnership, venture or corporation from the payment of the tax
to the City of O'Fallon which the City of O'Fallon levies upon the real or
personal property belonging to any such person, the tax required of
merchants or manufacturers for the sale of goods, nor shall the tax
herein required exempt any person from the payment of any tax which
may be lawfully required.
C. Any person, partnership, venture or corporation engaged in the
business of letting sleeping rooms who shall violate any of the transient
guest tax ordinance provisions shall be deemed guilty of an infraction
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined five percent (5%) of the
average monthly transient guest tax levied during the previous twelvemonth
period.
D. The City Collector is hereby required to create the Transient Guest Tax
Fund to record revenues received and appropriations expended for like
cause. The purpose of this fund shall remain singular, and monies for
other purposes shall not be commingled.
E. There is hereby established an O'Fallon Convention and Visitors Bureau
(OCVB) to serve as advisors to the City Council regarding the
expenditure of transient guest tax revenue. The Directors shall be one
(1) Council member (to be appointed by the Mayor annually), who will
in addition perform as liaison with the City Council; two (2) City
Government positions (Finance Analyst and Economic Development
Director); two (2) O'Fallon Business District representatives (each to be
appointed by the Mayor for two-year terms, one (1) renewable in evennumbered
years and one (1) renewable in odd-numbered years); two (2)
O'Fallon hotel or motel managers (each to be appointed by the Mayor
Section
145.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.010
100:149
for two-year terms, one (1) renewable in even-numbered years and
one (1) renewable in odd-numbered years); and two (2) citizens at
large (each to be appointed by the Mayor for two-year terms, one
(1) renewable in even-numbered years and one (1) renewable in oddnumbered
years). The Director terms shall commence on the first of
June following their appointment.
F. Vacancies created by removal, resignation or otherwise shall be
reported to the City Council by the Mayor and shall be filled in like
manner as original appointments, except that the term of office is
restricted to the unexpired term of office. No Director of the OCVB shall
receive compensation for service.
G. The OCVB is hereby responsible for modeling the continuation and
enhancement of current tourism endeavors while envisioning future
possibilities. Planning should include consideration of community
impact to citizens and business owners, as well as operational and
capital requirements.
Section
145.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
145.010
100:150
ARTICLE II
City Sales Taxes
Section 145.020. General Sales Tax Imposed — Rate.
Section 145.030. Tax For Parks and Stormwater. [Ord. No. 5274
§§1—4, 1-10-2008]
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by and subject to the provisions of
Sections 94.500 through 94.550, RSMo., a tax for general revenue
purposes is hereby imposed upon all sellers, for the privilege of
engaging in the business of selling tangible personal property or
rendering taxable services at retail to the extent and in the manner
provided in Sections 144.010 through 144.525, RSMo., and the rules
and regulations of the State Director of Revenue issued pursuant
thereto.
B. The rate of the tax shall be one percent (1%) on the receipts from the
sale at retail of all tangible personal property or taxable services at
retail within the City, if such property and taxable services are subject
to taxation by the State under the provisions of Sections 144.010
through 144.525, RSMo.
C. The tax shall be collected pursuant to the provisions of Sections 94.500
through 94.550, RSMo.
A. Tax Imposed. A sales tax in the amount of one-half of one percent (0.5%)
is hereby imposed on all retail sales in the City of O'Fallon, Missouri,
which are subject to taxation under the provisions of Sections 144.010
to 144.525, RSMo. The tax authorized by this Section shall be in
addition to any and all other sales taxes allowed by law and levied under
the Statutes of the State of Missouri, or the Ordinances of the County of
St. Charles or the City of O'Fallon.
B. Uses Of Revenue. All expenditures of funds arising from the tax
referenced in Subsection (A) shall be by an appropriation enacted by
the City Council or appropriated as a part of the annual budget process.
Expenditures may be made from the fund for any municipal park
functions or stormwater control program including, but not limited to:
1. Planning, property acquisition, designing, engineering,
constructing, equipping, staffing, operating and/or maintaining any
and all new or existing parks and any and all new or existing
recreation facilities of the City and any and all other improvements,
enhancements, rehabilitation, modernization, replacement and/or
expansion of park facilities and recreation programs or facilities of
the City as from time to time may be determined to be in the best
interests of the City of O'Fallon; and/or
2. Planning, right-of-way and/or property acquisition, engineering,
constructing, operating and maintaining stormwater control
Section
145.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.030
100:151
Section 145.040. Transportation Tax. [Ord. No. 3975 §1,
10-19-1999]
The City of O'Fallon, Missouri hereby imposes a one-half percent (.5%)
transportation sales tax on all receipts from the sale at retail of all tangible
personal property or taxable services at retail within the City which are
subject to taxation under the provisions of Sections 144.010 to 144.525,
RSMo., inclusive, as amended, for the purpose of making roadway
improvements and expanding certain roadway projects as directed by the
City Council, including construction, reconstruction, repair and
maintenance thereof.
Section 145.050. Sales Tax On Utilities. [Ord. No. 736 §§1—2,
11-3-1979]
The municipal sales tax on all sales of metered water service, electricity,
electrical current, natural, artificial or propane gas, wood, coal or home
heating oil used for non-business, non-commercial or non-industrial
purposes heretofore imposed within the corporate limits of this municipality
is hereby reimposed. The rate of taxation shall be, as heretofore one percent
(1%).
improvements of any and all kinds including, but not limited to,
detention and/or retention basins, curbs, gutters, inlets, piping,
creek improvements, bank stabilization, creek channel cleaning
and/or maintenance and any and all other improvements,
enhancements or projects which the City Council may from time to
time determine to be in the best interests of the City of O'Fallon;
and/or
3. Such other or additional local parks or stormwater projects,
programs, improvements, enhancements or undertakings as may
be determined by the City Council from time to time.
C. The City of O'Fallon shall eliminate the property tax levied for public
parks as a result of imposing the sales tax of one-half of one percent
(0.5%) referenced above.
Section
145.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
145.050
100:152
Chapter 150
PERSONNEL CODE
Section 150.010. Principles of Personnel Administration. [Ord. No.
5516 §1, 10-22-2009]
Section 150.020. Employee Reference Handbook. [Ord. No. 5516 §1,
10-22-2009]
The Employee Reference Guide, revised and dated September, 2009, is
hereby adopted to provide a comprehensive personnel system for City
Officers and employees and as the employee reference handbook for all
O'Fallon employees subject to its provisions. In accord with Section 6.2(B)
of the City Charter, the Employee Reference Guide may be supplemented,
amended, revised and updated from time to time by the City Administrator
and Human Resources Director to comply with Federal and/or State laws or
to reflect and incorporate changes to City policy that are not inconsistent
with the Charter and which have been adopted or approved by the Mayor
and Council. Current copies of the Employee Reference Guide are to be
provided to all City employees.
Section 150.030. Personnel Board Established. [Ord. No. 5516 §1,
10-22-2009; Ord. No. 5592.1 §1, 5-27-2010]
A. In accord with the directives and authority of the City Charter, the City
of O'Fallon shall:
1. Recruit qualified individuals from all segments of society and select
employees on the basis of merit after fair and open competition
which assures that all receive equal opportunity.
2. Treat employees and applicants fairly and equitably, independent of
political affiliation, race, color, national origin, gender, martial
status, age or handicapping condition, and with proper regard for
their privacy and constitutional rights.
3. Provide equal pay for equal work and recognize excellent
performance.
4. Maintain high standards of integrity, conduct and concern for the
public interest.
5. Manage employees efficiently and effectively.
6. Educate and train employees when it will result in better
organizational or individual performance.
7. Protect employees from arbitrary action, personal favoritism or
coercion for partisan political purposes.
Section
145.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
150.030
100:153
Chapter 200
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section 200.010. Major Case Squad. [R.O. 2007 §200.010; Ord. No.
1427 §§1—2, 1-6-1987]
A. There is hereby established a Personnel Board consisting of the Mayor
and members of the City Council.
B. The Personnel Board shall hear timely appeals filed by full-time, nonprobationary
employees arising from disciplinary employment actions
resulting in termination, suspension without pay or demotion with
reduction in pay in accord with the provisions of the Charter. Appeals
shall be limited to those individual employment actions which are
implemented for disciplinary purposes or reasons and the Personnel
Board shall solely determine:
1. Whether the employee is guilty of the transgression that motivated
the disciplinary action, and
2. The appropriateness of the disciplinary action.
Except as provided for in this Subsection, all other
administrative actions falling within the City Administrator's
discretionary authority to organize and manage the City's
workforce, which are not motivated by or premised upon
discipline, are not subject to Personnel Board consideration.
C. The Personnel Board shall review the matter in a closed session and
issue a written decision within a reasonable time.
D. Appeals to the Personnel Board shall not include general, departmental
or City-wide actions as a result of overall reduction in staff or a budget
decision by the City.
A. For the purpose of this Section, the "Major Case Squad" shall mean any
information, operation, organization or cooperative action between any
County, Governing Body, any Municipal Government and the City of
O'Fallon the purpose of which is intensive professional investigation of
certain individual crimes that may occur in their general geographical
area, and which is operated and activated on request of a County
Sheriff or the Police Chief of a political subdivision wherein a crime has
occurred.
B. The Officers of the City of O'Fallon Police Department are authorized to
participate in and cooperate with any Law Enforcement Officers of
jurisdictions in any Major Case Squad operation or formation. The
officers designated to act as the Major Case Squad operation will be so
designated by the Chief of Police and when acting outside of the City of
O'Fallon as a member of the Major Case Squad operation shall be
Section
150.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
200.010
100:154
Section 200.020. Mutual Assistance Plans For Police Emergency.
[R.O. 2007 §200.020; Ord. No. 1083 §§1—3, 2-21-1984]
Chapter 205
SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS
considered to be on active duty the same as if acting within the
boundaries of the City of O'Fallon.
A. The City Council does hereby authorize the City Administrator to enter
into bilateral contracts with other municipalities in the County of St.
Charles for the purpose of instituting emergency police mutual
assistance plans for major disorders and disasters.
B. Such contracts shall be bilateral and the City of O'Fallon will reserve
the right to terminate a contract with another municipality on thirty
(30) days notice without affecting other contractual obligations it may
have with other municipalities.
C. Said contract will be based upon the procedures established by the
Chief of Police, subject to ratification by the City Council.
Section
200.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
200.020
100:155

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 205.010. Purpose. [R.O. 2007 §205.010; Ord. No. 2051 §2,
8-7-1992]
The purpose of this Chapter is to encourage security alarm users and alarm
businesses to maintain the operational reliability of, and to properly use,
alarm systems, thereby limiting unnecessary police emergency responses to
false alarms.
Section 205.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §205.020; Ord. No. 2051
§3, 8-7-1992]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the
meanings set out herein:
ALARM NOTIFICATION — Any notification intended to summon the police
to the alarm site.
ALARM SITE — A single premises or location served by an alarm system or
systems.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device or system that emits, transmits, or relays a
signal intended to summon, or that would be expected to summon, police
services of the City of O'Fallon, including, but not limited to, local alarms.
Excluded under this Chapter are:
CHIEF — The O'Fallon Chief of Police or his/her designated representative.
DEPARTMENT — O'Fallon Police Department.
FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION (F.A.N.) — Any alarm notification to the
Department, when the officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense or
attempted criminal offense. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following
alarms are excluded from this definition:
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that
is audible or visible from the exterior of the structure.
1. Automobile alarms, unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site.
2. An internal alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a building.
During electrical storms, tornados, blizzards and other severe weather
or acts of God.
1.
The intermittent disruption or total disruption of the telephone circuits
beyond the control of the alarm company and/or alarm user.
2.
3. Electrical power disruption or failure.
While the alarm or alarm system is being worked on and after proper
prior notification to the department.
4.
Section
205.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
205.020
100:157
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
organization, government body or similar entity.
Section 205.030. Duties of Person in Control of Alarm System. [R.O.
2007 §205.030; Ord. No. 2051 §4, 8-7-1992]
Section 205.040. Department Held Harmless — When. [R.O. 2007
§205.040; Ord. No. 2051 §5, 8-7-1992]
The Department shall be held harmless should a person, or his/her
designate, responsible for an alarm system summoned to the alarm site
verbally refuse to respond when notified of an alarm. In this case, Police
Officers will return to service and will not respond to the location again until
the site is properly secured and the alarm reset.
Section 205.050. Records of Alarms To Be Kept. [R.O. 2007
§205.050; Ord. No. 2051 §6, 8-7-1992]
The Chief will be responsible for maintaining records of both alarm
notifications and false alarm notifications, and will notify all alarm users
within five (5) working days of any F.A.N.'s. If there is reason to believe that
A. The person in control of an alarm system shall:
1. Maintain the premises and alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarm notification.
2. Provide the Department at all times the name, address and
telephone number of at least two (2) persons who have the
knowledge and ability to reset the alarm and secure the premises in
case of an actual or false alarm.
3. Respond, or cause his/her representative to respond, to the alarm
site within a reasonable length of time once notified by the
Department; and to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to
provide access to the premises by Department personnel, or to
provide security for the premises.
4. Not manually, or allow another person to manually activate an
alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the
alarm system was intended to report.
5. Ensure that an audible local alarm is adjusted so that the alarm
signal will sound for no longer than ten (10) minutes after being
activated.
6. Notify the Department any time that the alarm system is being
altered or repaired.
7. Be responsible for the proper training of their personnel in the
operation of the system so that all provisions of this Chapter will be
complied with.
Section
205.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
205.050
100:158
an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures
proper operation and minimizes F.A.N., the Chief may require a conference
with the alarm user and the alarm company, if applicable, to review the
circumstances for each false alarm.
Section 205.060. Warnings and Fees For False Alarms. [R.O. 2007
§205.060; Ord. No. 2051 §§7—8, 8-7-1992]
Section 205.070. Prohibition As To Certain Alarm Systems. [R.O.
2007 §205.070; Ord. No. 2051 §§9—11, 8-7-1992]
Section 205.080. Intentional Activation of Alarm — Violation. [R.O.
2007 §205.080; Ord. No. 2051 §12, 8-7-1992]
The intentional activation of an alarm when no crime is occurring, or to test
any alarm, or to test the response of police personnel, without first receiving
department permission will be a separate violation of this Chapter.
A. The person in control of an alarm system shall be subject to warnings or
fees depending upon the number of false alarm notifications (F.A.N.)
emitted from an alarm system within the current calendar year based
upon the following schedule:
# of F.A.N. Action Taken
1—3 Warning letter.
4 or more Warning letter and a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) per F.A.N.
B. A newly installed alarm system will be exempt from the above schedule
of F.A.N. for thirty (30) days from the date of activation if notification is
received by the Department stating the date of activation of the system.
C. Alarm notifications caused by an actual criminal offense or with
evidence of a criminal offense attempt, shall not be counted as an F.A.N.
D. It shall be unlawful for the person in control of an alarm system and the
owner of property having an alarm system fail to pay any imposed fee
pursuant to this Section within thirty (30) days of the issuance of such
fee. Any violation of this Section shall be subject to the penalties
provided in Section 100.010. Each day shall constitute a separate
violation.
A. No automatic alarm notification systems, with pre-recorded messages,
will be allowed in the City of O'Fallon that directly contacts the Police
Department; and the use of one of these alarm systems will be a
violation of this Chapter.
B. No direct line alarms shall be installed directly into the Department.
C. No telephone alarm system will be programmed to notify the
Department directly by use of the "911" emergency telephone line.
Section
205.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
205.090
100:159
Section 205.090. Violation and Penalty. [R.O. 2007 §205.090; Ord.
No. 2051 §13, 8-7-1992]
Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, with
the exceptions of Section 205.030 (1—3, 6 and 7), may be subject to a
penalty as set out in Section 100.010. However, no penalty shall be assessed
in conjunction with a fee as outlined in Section 205.060(A).
Section
205.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
205.090
100:160
ARTICLE II
Convenience Business — Security
Section 205.100. Convenience Business Defined — Businesses Not
Included in Definition — Preemption By State of All Security
Regulations.
Section 205.110. Equipment Required For Security of Convenience
Business — Limitation On Cash After 11:00 P.M. Until 5:00 A.M. —
Prohibited Window Signs and Treatment — Operator Defined.
A. As used in this Article, the term "convenience business" means any
place of business that is primarily engaged in the retail sale of
groceries, or both groceries and gasoline, and is open for business at
any time between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M. The term
"convenience business" does not include:
1. A business that is solely or primarily a restaurant;
2. A business that has at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of
retail floor space; or
3. A business which is owned by a person who owns a business at no
other location.
B. A political subdivision of this State may not adopt, for convenience
businesses, security standards which differ from those contained in this
Article, and all such differing standards are hereby preempted and
superseded by State Statute.
A. Prior to January 1, 1997, for the protection of employees and the
consumer public at late-night convenience businesses, every operator
of a convenience business shall ensure that such operator's
convenience business is equipped with the following:
1. A bullet-resistant glass enclosure or security camera system
capable of recording and retrieving an image to assist law
enforcement officials in the identification and apprehension of a
criminal offender and by January 1, 1998, such system shall have at
least one (1) camera focused on the cash register area;
2. A drop safe or cash-management device for restricted access to
cash receipts;
3. Lighting for parking areas and entrances at an intensity to provide
clear visibility under normal conditions, which can be satisfied by
canopy lighting within ten (10) feet of the building;
4. A conspicuous notice at the entrance which states that the cash
register contains limited funds;
5. Height markers at the entrance of the convenience business which
display height measures; and
Section
205.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
205.110
100:161
Section 205.120. Training To Be Provided For Employees in
Robbery Deterrence and Safety — Time Limitation To Provide.
The operator of a convenience business shall provide each employee with
training in proper robbery deterrence and safety within sixty (60) days of an
employee's date of employment or if a person is an employee on January 1,
1997, then by July 1, 1997.
6. A cash management policy to limit the cash on hand at all times
after 11:00 P.M. and before 5:00 A.M.
B. Prior to January 1, 1998, for the protection of employees and the
consumer public at late-night convenience businesses, every operator
of a convenience business shall ensure that such operator's
convenience business is equipped with the following:
1. A silent alarm system which shall be connected to a security
company or a local law enforcement agency; or
2. A telephone, other than a pay telephone, accessible to employees at
all times.
C. After January 1, 1997, for the protection of employees and the
consumer public at late-night convenience businesses, every operator
of a convenience business shall ensure that:
1. No window signs shall be located so as to obstruct the view from
outside the building to the cash register and sales transaction area;
and
2. No window tinting that significantly reduces exterior or interior
view in a normal line of sight.
D. For the purposes of Sections 205.100—205.120, "operator" means any
individual proprietor or business entity responsible for the day-to-day
operation of the convenience business.
Section
205.110
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
205.120
100:162
Chapter 210
ANIMAL CONTROL CODE
Section 210.010. Short Title. [R.O. 2007 §210.010; Ord. No. 3130
§2, 7-19-1994]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Animal Control
Ordinance".
Section 210.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §210.020; Ord. No. 3130
§3, 7-19-1994; Ord. No. 5347 §1, 7-10-2008; Ord. No. 5643 §1,
12-9-2010]
As used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed herein, unless the context otherwise indicates:
ADEQUATE CARE — Normal and prudent attention to the needs of an
animal, including wholesome food, clean water, shelter, and medical care as
necessary to maintain good health in a specific species of animal.
ADEQUATE SHELTER — Structurally sound, properly ventilated and
weather-proofed housing which is large enough to let the animal housed
in it stand up, turn around and lie down; equipped with bedding that will
not absorb water and/or freeze; and will not exacerbate existing weather
conditions by, for example, absorbing heat on hot sunny days or excessive
size which would not retain body heat in winter. Suitable drainage must be
provided so that water is not standing in or around shelter.
AFFECTED WITH RABIES — Infected with the rabies virus as determined
by standard laboratory testing.
ANIMAL — Every living vertebrate except a human being.
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and not on a leash of less than
eight (8) feet in length controlled by some person physically able to prevent
the animal from running free.
BITE — Breaking of the skin caused by an animal. Scratches are included.
CAT — Any male or female member of the domestic feline family.
DOG — Any male or female member of the domestic canine family.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Animals that are normally considered to be
household pets.
EXPOSED TO RABIES — When bitten by, or fought with, or has come in
close contact with a dog or other animal shown to be infected with the
rabies virus as determined by standard laboratory testing.
FARM ANIMAL — An animal normally raised on a farm or ranch and used
or intended for use in farm or ranch production or as food or fiber.
Section
205.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.020
100:163
FIERCE/DANGEROUS ANIMAL —
OWNER — In addition to its ordinary meaning, any person who keeps or
harbors an animal or professes to be owning, keeping, or harboring an
animal.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any animal that habitually barks, howls, whines,
or makes other sounds that disturb a person's peace, or causes a foul or
obnoxious odor to be emitted from the premises.
SURROUNDING ADJACENT PROPERTY — Premises on both sides, directly
to the rear, on both sides of the premises directly to the rear and directly
across the street of the animal owner.
WILD ANIMAL — Any live non-human primate, raccoon, fox, skunk,
poisonous reptile, bear, wolf, wolf-hybrid, cougar, leopard, jaguar, tiger, lion,
lynx, bobcat, ocelot, or any other animal which can normally be found in the
wild state.
Section 210.030. Control of Animals. [R.O. 2007 §210.030; Ord. No.
3130 §4, 7-19-1994; Ord. No. 5643 §1, 12-9-2010]
Any animal that bites, attacks or injures a human being or another
domestic animal or that, by its immediate or previous action, exhibits
a threat of attacking or biting a human being or another animal. The
presence of the animal on its owner's property shall be no defense to
a finding that it is fierce/dangerous in the event that the animal bites,
attacks or injures a human being or another animal unless such animal
was defending its owner from physical attack.
1.
Any animal that causes fear or annoys any person without provocation
on public property or on the private property other than its owner's
property.
2.
A. Any owner having custody of any animal shall maintain control of that
animal, and:
1. Shall not permit the animal to be a public nuisance or disturb the
peace of any person.
2. Shall not permit the animal to be at large within the City limits.
3. Shall not keep or allow to be kept on or about their property or
premises, any fierce/dangerous animal.
4. Shall not keep, or cause to be kept, maintained, or controlled, more
than three (3) animals, over the age of three (3) months, per
household or business establishment, except:
a. When a household owner obtains a written permission from all
surrounding adjacent property owners.
b. When a business establishment is licensed to board, sell, care
for, or protect animals.
Section
210.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
210.030
100:164
Section 210.040. Animal Neglect or Abandonment. [Ord. No. 5643
§1, 12-9-2010]
5. Shall ensure the animal is properly vaccinated against rabies and
other diseases as may be necessary; and displays a current St.
Charles County Department of Health tag.
6. Shall keep every female dog or cat in heat confined in a building or
secure enclose in such manner that such female dog or cat cannot
come into contact with another animal except for a planned
breeding.
7. May use the electronic containment system commonly known as
"Invisible Fence" as a restraint system for animals. The "Invisible
Fence" may be used as a secondary restrain in addition to a visible
primary enclosure. This system is permitted if all maintenance
requirements to keep the "Invisible Fence" in good working
condition are met.
8. Shall remove and dispose of all fecal accumulations in any pen, run,
cage or yard where any animal is kept in such a manner as to
prevent the breeding of flies or other insects, or the creation of
offensive, disagreeable or noxious odors or other nuisance
conditions.
9. Shall remove fecal matter deposited by the animal on their
property, someone else's property, or in a public place, including
but not limited to streets, sidewalks, parking lots, and public parks.
10. Shall not transport an animal in an open vehicle from which it can
escape. When transporting an animal in an open-bed pickup or in
any open-bed vehicle, the animal shall be confined in a secured
animal carrier that provides the animal adequate room to stand,
turn around, and stretch out without hindrance and provides
adequate ventilation and protection from environmental
conditions. Shall not allow an animal to remain in a vehicle when
the temperature within such vehicle is reasonably likely to cause
sickness or injury to the animal.
A. A person is guilty of animal neglect when he/she has custody, ownership
or both of an animal and fails to provide adequate care, adequate
shelter or adequate control which creates an unreasonable risk of
injury to the animal or results in harm to the animal or harm to a person
or other domestic animal.
1. When outdoor temperatures reach freezing levels, all cats, dogs
and small domestic animals must be moved indoors or to an area
that provides heat and shelter from the weather.
2. All areas where animals are kept shall be cleaned regularly so that
fecal matter is disposed of so not to attract insects or rodents,
become unsightly or cause objectionable odor.
Section
210.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.040
100:165
3. An Animal Control Officer may remove an animal that is living in
conditions that do not meet standards outlined. If modifications to
the shelter or living area do not meet the standards within five (5)
business days, that animal may be seized and disposed of as
ordinances permit.
4. An owner must provide animals with access to clean, unfrozen
water in a tip-proof bowl and an appropriate shelter at all times and
nutritious food at least once a day.
5. Animals may not be muzzled while on a tether or chain. "Tether"
does not include the use of a leash to walk an animal.
6. Animals confined to outside pens must have not less than one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of open space for each animal
housed.
7. Protection from temperature extremes. An owner may not leave an
animal outside and unattended in the case of severe weather
conditions, during weather or when a heat advisory or cold
advisory has been issued by a local or State authority or
jurisdiction, or where temperatures and/or heat and cold indices
fall below thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) or above eighty-five
degrees (85°).
8. An owner may not leave an animal inside where temperatures and/
or heat and cold indices fall below thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit
(32°F) or above eighty-five degrees (85°), including, but not limited
to, confinement in garages and basements.
9. No person shall have an animal in possession that is known to, or
suspected to, have an untended injury, accidental or deliberate, or
to exhibit any signs of disease, shock, temperature fluctuations,
tremors, swelling, open wounds, inability to eat, blistering or
abnormal bleeding, partial paralysis, discharging blood or mucus.
B. A person is guilty of animal abandonment when he/she has knowingly
abandoned an animal in any place without making provisions for
adequate care.
C. Animal neglect or animal abandonment are ordinance violations. For a
first (1st) offense of either violation, a term of imprisonment not to
exceed fifteen (15) days, or a minimum fine of seventy-five dollars
($75.00) up to a fine not to exceed an amount set by State Statute, or
both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed. For a second (2nd) or
subsequent violation of either offense, a term of imprisonment not to
exceed three (3) months, or a minimum fine of two hundred dollars
($200.00) up to a fine not to exceed an amount set by State Statute, or
both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed. Each animal and
each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. All fines and
penalties for a first (1st) conviction of animal neglect or animal
abandonment may be waived by the court, provided that the person
Section
210.040
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
210.040
100:166
Section 210.050. Animal Abuse.24
Section 210.055. Tethering, Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 5469 §1,
6-11-2009; Ord. No. 5643 §1, 12-9-2010]
found guilty of animal neglect or abandonment shows that adequate,
permanent remedies for the neglect or abandonment have been made.
Reasonable costs incurred for the care and maintenance of neglected
or abandoned animals may not be waived.
D. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Section, the court may
order a person found guilty of animal neglect or animal abandonment to
pay all reasonable costs and expenses necessary for:
1. The care and maintenance of neglected or abandoned animals
within the person's custody or ownership;
2. The disposal of any dead or diseased animals within the person's
custody or ownership;
3. The reduction of resulting organic debris affecting the immediate
area of the neglect or abandonment; and
4. The avoidance or minimization of any public health risks created by
the neglect or abandonment of the animals.
A. A person is guilty of animal abuse when a person:
1. Intentionally or purposely kills an animal in any manner not
allowed by or expressly exempted from the provisions of Sections
578.005 to 578.023 and 273.030, RSMo.;
2. Purposely or intentionally causes injury or suffering to an animal;
or
3. Having ownership or custody of an animal knowingly fails to
provide adequate care or adequate control.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person controlling,
possessing or having custody any dog or cat to:
1. Leave a dog or cat tethered outdoors for eight (8) continuous hours
or for a total of twelve (12) hours in a twenty-four (24) hour period.
2. Tether a dog or cat except by means of:
a. A properly fitting harness or collar of nylon or leather
construction which does not chafe or injure the animal, and
b. A tether in proportion to the size of the animal such that its
weight and construction do not burden or encumber the
24.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.055
100:167
Section 210.060. Knowingly Releasing An Animal.
Section 210.070. Animal Control Officer. [R.O. 2007 §210.050; Ord.
No. 3130 §6, 7-19-1994; Ord. No. 5347 §2, 7-10-2008; Ord. No. 5643
§1, 12-9-2010]
animal. The tether must be at least fifteen (15) feet in length
with a swivel at both ends.
3. Tether a dog or cat in such a manner that the animal cannot access
adequate shelter while tethered.
4. Tether a dog or cat outdoors under conditions where the animal or
tether can become entangled on the tether, another animal or some
other object or where the tether can restrict the animal's access to
suitable, edible and sufficient food, clean water (cool in summer
and unfrozen in winter) and appropriate shelter.
5. Tether a dog or cat outdoors in unsafe or unsanitary conditions or
when the tether does not allow the animal to defecate or urinate in
an area separate from the areas where it must eat, drink or lie
down.
6. Expose a dog or cat to any weather conditions that cause
immediate imminent threat to the animal's physical well-being.
7. No person shall tether an animal on a choke, prong or pinch collar
or tow chain or in such a manner as to cause injury, strangulation
or entanglement of the animal on fences, trees or other manmade
or natural obstacles.
8. No person shall tether an animal in an area where bare earth is
present and no steps have been taken to prevent the surface from
becoming wet and muddy in the event of precipitation.
9. No person shall leave an animal tethered outside between the
hours of 10:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M., except temporarily tethering
outdoors for a time period not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes.
A. A person commits the offense of knowingly releasing an animal if that
person, acting without the consent of the owner or custodian of an
animal, intentionally releases any animal that is lawfully confined for
the purpose of companionship or protection of persons or property or
for recreation, exhibition or educational purposes.
B. As used in this Section, "animal" means every living creature,
domesticated or wild, but not including Homo sapiens.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a public servant acting
in the course of such servant's official duties.
A. The Chief of Police shall appoint and subsequently supervise a suitable
person(s) as an Animal Control Officer; and shall properly equip such
Section
210.055
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
210.070
100:168
person(s) to carry out all assigned duties. Duties of the Animal Control
Officer shall include:
1. The enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter and any other
State of Missouri Statute or City of O'Fallon ordinance, law or
regulation pertaining to the control of animals as they apply within
the limits of the City of O'Fallon.
2. The impoundment, transportation and confinement of any animal,
whether on view or as the result of a complaint, in violation of the
provisions of this or any other applicable law or ordinance.
3. The impoundment and quarantine of any animal believed to have
bitten or scratched someone, or exhibiting the symptoms of rabies,
for a period of ten (10) days from the date of the bite or scratch.
This impoundment shall be at the animal owners expense in the
City animal shelter. However, the offending animal may be
impounded/quarantined at the animal owners residence if all of the
following conditions are met:
a. The offending animal has a valid rabies vaccination.
b. The animal is not considered by the Chief of Police, or his
designee, to be a fierce/dangerous animal.
c. The animal owner and victim (victim's family if the victim is a
minor) both agree to the quarantine at the owner's home or
business.
d. The animal owner agrees to the following guidelines:
(1) Animal is not allowed outdoors off-leash.
(2) Animal is allowed no contact with visitors or other animals.
(3) Animal must reside indoors for the duration of the
quarantine observation.
(4) The Animal Control Officer or other designated Police
Official shall have twenty-four (24) hour access to the
animal to check on its condition.
(5) If the owner fails to follow these guidelines the Animal
Control Officer shall impound the animal at the designated
facility for the rest of the observation period.
(6) If an animal dies while under quarantine during the ten
(10) days of impoundment, regardless of location or cause
of death, the Animal Control Officer shall be notified and
cause the head to be removed by the veterinarian and
submitted for rabies testing. The owner will be responsible
for all costs involved.
Section
210.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.070
100:169
Section 210.080. City Animal Shelter. [R.O. 2007 §210.060; Ord. No.
3130 §7, 7-19-1994]
4. The destruction of any animal in violation of this or any other
applicable law or ordinance, when such animal cannot be safely
impounded, exhibits the symptoms of rabies, or is deemed by the
Animal Control Officer or on-duty Police Watch Commander a
fierce/dangerous animal, or is injured to such an extent that in the
opinion of the Animal Control Officer or Watch Commander such
destruction would be merciful.
5. The issuance of a "Notice to Abate Nuisance Within Ten Days" to
the owner or tenant of any household or business establishment
where reasonable suspicion exists that:
a. More than three (3) animals are kept, maintained, or
controlled without proper authority.
b. A public nuisance is being kept, maintained, or controlled.
Such a notice may be issued in person, by U.S. Mail to the
real property owner, tenant or agent, or by posting on the
premises.
6. The impoundment of any and all animals in violation of the ten (10)
day notice upon expiration of the notice period; and transportation
of the animal to the City animal shelter.
7. The removal at the owner's request of any unwanted animal from
any O'Fallon resident and transportation of the animal to the City
animal shelter for disposal.
A. The City of O'Fallon may contract with a suitable person to maintain an
animal shelter to board all animals impounded by the Animal Control
Officer or any other agent of the City. The owner of the animal shelter:
1. Shall maintain the shelter in a sanitary condition; feed and water
all impounded animals daily; protect impounded animals from any
cruel treatment; maintain a telephone during normal business
hours and for non-working hour emergencies; and humanely
dispose of all unwanted or unclaimed animals when necessary.
2. Shall transmit, when deemed necessary by the animal shelter
owner and the Animal Control Officer, the head of any animal which
is killed or dies in impoundment to the State Division of Health or
other such institution or person for the purpose of determining the
presence of rabies.
3. Shall not release any impounded animal until properly immunized
when such immunization is required by law or deemed necessary
by the animal shelter owner. The animal shelter owner may collect,
Section
210.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
210.080
100:170
Section 210.090. Pursuit of Animals. [R.O. 2007 §210.070; Ord. No.
3130 §8, 7-19-1994]
Section 210.100. Authority of The O'Fallon Municipal Court Judge.
[R.O. 2007 §210.080; Ord. No. 3130 §9, 7-19-1994; Ord. No. 5347 §3,
7-10-2008]
from the animal's owner, a reasonable fee for any immunization
provided.
4. Shall not release any sick or injured animal until appropriate
treatment has been rendered when deemed necessary by the
animal shelter owner, unless the animal's owner signs a hold
harmless agreement releasing the animal shelter, the City of
O'Fallon, and all employees of either entity from all liability. Such
treatment, if provided, will be at the animal owner's expense.
5. Shall not release any animal impounded until proof of payment of
all required City fees is exhibited.
A. The Animal Control Officer:
1. Shall while in pursuit of any animal running at large, have the right
to enter any lot or land area within the City limits for the purpose of
impounding that animal.
2. Shall have the power to impound any animal, whether licensed or
not, believed to be affected with rabies. Thereafter, any impounded
animal, upon examination by any certified Doctor of Veterinary
Medicine, found to be affected with rabies, or known to have been
bitten by a rabid animal or other creature, shall be disposed of in a
humane manner upon direction of the Chief of Police.
3. Shall cause to be arrested, by a Police Officer, any person who
interferes with, obstructs, or refuses to deliver an animal upon
reasonable request by the Animal Control Officer or other City of
O'Fallon Official, while the Animal Control Officer is in the
performance of impounding any animal or while investigating any
incident or complaint of violation of this Chapter.
A. Following the filing of charges under the provisions of this Chapter the
certification of the Chief of Police, or the Chief's designee having
property authority, that an animal is fierce/dangerous, and upon the
motion of the Municipal Prosecutor, the Judge of the Municipal Court
may order any of the following: the animal be seized and impounded
pending disposition of the charges; the animal be impounded past the
ten (10) day rabies quarantine period; the animal be permanently
removed from the City limits; or that the animal be euthanized. If the
owner requests in writing to the Court, a hearing shall be granted
within five (5) days.
Section
210.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.100
100:171
Section 210.110. Animal Redemption and Fees. [R.O. 2007
§210.090; Ord. No. 3130 §10, 7-19-1994]
Every animal impounded under the provisions of this Chapter may be
redeemed by the owner of the animal upon payment to the City Collector a
fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the first (1st) impoundment, forty dollars
($40.00) for the second (2nd) impoundment, and sixty dollars ($60.00)
for the third (3rd) and subsequent impoundments. Additionally, all daily
expenses incurred by the City animal shelter for taking care of the animal
and for complying with the provisions of this Chapter must be paid to the
animal shelter. The animal shelter owner shall set the daily boarding fee
in accordance with regular daily rates charged. Any animal impounded for
three (3) full days and not redeemed by the owner, may, within four (4)
days thereafter, be redeemed by any other person providing that person
executes a receipt to the City stating that such person has received the
animal subject to the rights of the real owner, paying all associated fees,
and agreeing to indemnify the City for its costs incidental to the animal.
Any animal not redeemed after a period of one (1) week may be humanely
disposed of by the animal shelter owner.
Section 210.120. Penalties. [R.O. 2007 §210.100; Ord. No. 3130 §11,
7-19-1994; Ord. No. 5643 §1, 12-9-2010]
B. Upon conviction under any of the provisions of this Chapter relating to
fierce/dangerous animals it shall appear to the Judge of the Municipal
Court that it is necessary for the public safety and welfare that the
animal concerned be euthanized, the Judge shall so order and the
Animal Control Officer shall transport the animal to the City animal
shelter for execution per the order of the court. The expense of the
impoundment and any other associated costs shall be charged to the
animal owner.
A. Any person in violation of any provision of this Chapter is guilty of an
ordinance violation and upon conviction thereof shall, unless otherwise
authorized:
1. Be fined a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first (1st) offense,
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second (2nd) offense, and one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a third (3rd) and subsequent
offense. Each animal and each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
2. Be fined up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) if the conviction
involves failure to comply with a "Notice to Abate Nuisance Within
Ten Days" for each day of violation as well as all expenses of
abatement.
3. Be required to remove from the City limits or humanely dispose of
any fierce/dangerous animal as determined by the Municipal Court.
Section
210.100
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
210.130
100:172
Section 210.130. City Officials. [R.O. 2007 §210.110; Ord. No. 3130
§12, 7-19-1994]
For the purposes of this Chapter a City of O'Fallon Police Officer or Code
Enforcement Officer may when required perform the duties and assume the
powers of the Animal Control Officer in the enforcement of the provisions of
this Chapter.
Section 210.140. Animals Prohibited in Any City Park During
Certain Celebrations. [R.O. 2007 §210.120; Ord. No. 1929 §§2—3,
6-6-1991]
All persons are hereby prohibited from bringing animals of any type, with
the exception of Police dogs and seeing eye dogs, into any City park during
any City sponsored festival or celebration, such as the Fourth of July or
Celebration of Lights unless written permission is received from the
Director of Parks or Board. This includes any pets on leashes.
Section 210.150. Killing or Disabling A Police Animal.
A person commits the ordinance violation of killing or disabling a police
animal when such person knowingly causes the death of a police animal, or
knowingly disables a police animal to the extent it is unable to be utilized
as a police animal, when that animal is involved in a law enforcement
investigation, apprehension, tracking, or search and rescue, or the animal
is in the custody of or under the control of a Law Enforcement Officer,
Department of Corrections Officer, Municipal Police Department, Fire
Department and a rescue unit or agency.
Section 210.160. Assault On A Police Animal.
A person commits the ordinance violation of assault on a police animal
when such person knowingly attempts to kill or disable or knowingly causes
or attempts to cause serious physical injury to a police animal when that
animal is involved in law enforcement investigation, apprehension, tracking,
or search, or the animal is in the custody of or under the control of a Law
Enforcement Officer, Department of Corrections Officer, Municipal Police
Department, Fire Department or a rescue unit or agency.
Section 210.170. Regulation of The Sale, Ownership, Possession or
Harboring of Certain Animals. [R.O. 2007 §210.140; Ord. No. 4505
§1, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 5741 §1, 10-27-2011]
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, own, possess or harbor any
bear, lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah, margay, mountain lion,
Canada lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, hyena, wolf, wolf hybrids or coyote, or any
deadly, dangerous or poisonous reptile in any place other than a properly
maintained zoological park, circus, scientific or educational institution,
research laboratory, veterinary hospital or animal refuge. The keeping of
farm animals, cattle, swine, sheep, horses, goats, and poultry is permissible
Section
210.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.170
100:173
only in agricultural zoning districts where and as may be permitted
pursuant to applicable zoning regulations.
Section 210.180. Animal Identification For Certain Animals. [R.O.
2007 §210.150; Ord. No. 4506 §§1—2, 4-21-2003]
Chapter 215
OFFENSES
A. Any dog, cat or ferret which is apprehended running at large or who has
bitten a human being or animal shall be permanently identified by the
implantation of an encoded, inert chip or like device which contains a
unique identifier capable of providing a permanent record of the
identity of the animal. Such device shall be implanted prior to the
release of the animal from impoundment.
B. The cost of such permanent identification shall be charged to the owner
as a fee.
Section
210.170
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
210.180
100:174
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 215.005. Definitions.
In this Chapter, unless the context requires a different definition, the
following shall apply:
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.056,
RSMo.
BURDEN OF INJECTING THE ISSUE — Has the meaning specified in
Section 556.051, RSMo.
COMMERCIAL FILM AND PHOTOGRAPHIC PRINT PROCESSOR — Any
person who develops exposed photographic film into negatives, slides or
prints or who makes prints from negatives or slides for compensation. The
term "commercial film and photographic print processor" shall include all
employees of such persons but shall not include a person who develops film
or makes prints for a public agency.
CONFINEMENT —
CONSENT — Consent or lack of consent may be expressed or implied.
Assent does not constitute consent if:
A person is in confinement when he/she is held in a place of
confinement pursuant to arrest or order of a court and remains in
confinement until:
a. A court orders his/her release;
He/she is released on bail, bond or recognizance, personal or
otherwise; or
b.
A public servant having the legal power and duty to confine him/
her authorizes his/her release without guard and without condition
that he/she return to confinement.
c.
1.
A person is not in confinement if:
a. He/she is on probation or parole, temporary or otherwise; or
He/she is under sentence to serve a term of confinement which
is not continuous, or is serving a sentence under a work-release
program, and in either such case is not being held in a place of
confinement or is not being held under guard by a person having
the legal power and duty to transport him/her to or from a place of
confinement.
b.
2.
It is given by a person who lacks the mental capacity to authorize the
conduct charged to constitute the offense and such mental incapacity is
manifest or known to the actor;
1.
Section
215.005
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.005
100:175
CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.016,
RSMo.
CUSTODY — A person is in custody when he/she has been arrested but has
not been delivered to a place of confinement.
DANGEROUS FELONY — The felonies of arson in the first degree, assault in
the first degree, attempted forcible rape if physical injury results, attempted
forcible sodomy if physical injury results, forcible rape, forcible sodomy,
kidnapping, murder in the second degree, assault of a Law Enforcement
Officer in the first degree, domestic assault in the first degree, elder abuse
in the first degree, robbery in the first degree, statutory rape in the first
degree when the victim is a child less than twelve (12) years of age at
the time of the commission of the act giving rise to the offense, statutory
sodomy in the first degree when the victim is a child less than twelve (12)
years of age at the time of the commission of the act giving rise to the
offense, and abuse of a child pursuant to Subdivision (2) of Subsection (3)
of Section 568.060, RSMo., and child kidnapping.
DANGEROUS INSTRUMENT — Any instrument, article or substance which,
under the circumstances in which it is used, is readily capable of causing
death or other serious physical injury.
DEADLY WEAPON — Any firearm, loaded or unloaded, or any weapon from
which a shot, readily capable of producing death or serious physical injury,
may be discharged or a switchblade knife, dagger, billy, blackjack or metal
knuckles.
FELONY — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.016, RSMo.
FORCIBLE COMPULSION — Means either:
INCAPACITATED — That physical or mental condition, temporary or
permanent, in which a person is unconscious, unable to appraise the nature
of his/her conduct, or unable to communicate unwillingness to an act. A
person is not "incapacitated" with respect to an act committed upon him/
her if he/she became unconscious, unable to appraise the nature of his/her
conduct, or unable to communicate unwillingness to an act after consenting
to the act.
INFRACTION — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.021, RSMo.
It is given by a person who by reason of youth, mental disease or defect,
or intoxication is manifestly unable or known by the actor to be unable
to make a reasonable judgment as to the nature or harmfulness of the
conduct charged to constitute the offense; or
2.
3. It is induced by force, duress or deception.
1. Physical force that overcomes reasonable resistance; or
A threat, express or implied, that places a person in reasonable fear
of death, serious physical injury, or kidnapping of himself/herself or
another person.
2.
Section
215.005
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.005
100:176
INHABITABLE STRUCTURE — Has the meaning specified in Section
569.010, RSMo.
KNOWINGLY — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.016, RSMo.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any public servant having both the
power and duty to make arrests for violations of the laws of this State, and
Federal Law Enforcement Officers authorized to carry firearms and to make
arrests for violations of the laws of the United States.
OFFENSE — Any felony, misdemeanor or infraction.
ORDINANCE VIOLATION — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.016,
RSMo.
PHYSICAL INJURY — Physical pain, illness, or any impairment of physical
condition.
PLACE OF CONFINEMENT — Any building or facility and the grounds
thereof wherein a court is legally authorized to order that a person charged
with or convicted of a crime be held.
POSSESS OR POSSESSED — Having actual or constructive possession of
an object with knowledge of its presence. A person has actual possession if
he/she has the object on his/her person or within easy reach and convenient
control. A person has constructive possession if he/she has the power and
the intention at a given time to exercise dominion or control over the
object either directly or through another person or persons. Possession may
also be sole or joint. If one (1) person alone has possession of an object,
possession is sole. If two (2) or more persons share possession of an object,
possession is joint.
PUBLIC SERVANT — Any person employed in any way by a government
of this State who is compensated by the government by reason of his/her
employment, any person appointed to a position with any government of
this State, or any person elected to a position with any government of this
State. It includes, but is not limited to, legislators, jurors, members of the
judiciary and Law Enforcement Officers. It does not include witnesses.
PURPOSELY — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.016, RSMo.
RECKLESSLY — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.016, RSMo.
RITUAL OR CEREMONY — An act or series of acts performed by two (2) or
more persons as part of an established or prescribed pattern of activity.
SERIOUS EMOTIONAL INJURY — An injury that creates a substantial risk
of temporary or permanent medical or psychological damage manifested
by impairment of a behavioral, cognitive or physical condition. "Serious
emotional injury" shall be established by testimony of qualified experts upon
the reasonable expectation of probable harm to a reasonable degree of
medical or psychological certainty.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY — Physical injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes serious disfigurement or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any part of the body.
Section
215.005
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.005
100:177
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Acts of human masturbation; deviate sexual
intercourse; sexual intercourse; or physical contact with a person's clothed
or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the breast of a female in an
act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Any touching of the genitals or anus of any person, or
the breast of any female person, or any such touching through the clothing
for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire of any person.
SEXUAL PERFORMANCE — Any performance, or part thereof, which
includes sexual conduct by a child who is less than seventeen (17) years of
age.
VOLUNTARY ACT — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.011, RSMo.
Section
215.005
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.005
100:178
ARTICLE II
Offenses Against The Person
Section 215.010. Assault.
Section 215.015. Domestic Assault.25
A. A person commits the offense of assault if:
1. The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury
to another person;
2. With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to
another person by means of a deadly weapon;
3. The person purposely places another person in apprehension of
immediate physical injury;
4. The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave
risk of death or serious physical injury to another person;
5. The person knowingly causes physical contact with another person
knowing the other person will regard the contact as offensive or
provocative; or
6. The person knowingly causes physical contact with an
incapacitated person, as defined in Section 475.010, RSMo., which
a reasonable person, who is not incapacitated, would consider
offensive or provocative.
A. A person commits the offense of domestic assault if the act involves a
family or household member or an adult who is or has been in a
continuing social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with the
actor as defined in Section 455.010, RSMo.; and
1. The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury
to such family or household member;
2. With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to such
family or household member by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous instrument;
3. The person purposely places such family or household member in
apprehension of immediate physical injury by any means;
4. The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave
risk of death or serious physical injury to such family or household
member;
25.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.015
100:179
Section 215.020. Assault of A Law Enforcement Officer.
Section 215.030. Definitions — Determination of Location of
Offense. [Ord. No. 5272 §1, 1-14-2008]
5. The person knowingly causes physical contact with such family or
household member knowing the other person will regard the
contact as offensive; or
6. The person knowingly attempts to cause or causes the isolation of
such family or household member by unreasonably and
substantially restricting or limiting such family or household
member's access to other persons, telecommunication devices or
transportation for the purpose of isolation.
A. A person commits the offense of assault of a Law Enforcement Officer,
Emergency Personnel or Probation and Parole Officer if:
1. Such person recklessly causes physical injury to a Law
Enforcement Officer, Emergency Personnel or Probation and Parole
Officer;
2. Such person purposely places a Law Enforcement Officer,
Emergency Personnel or Probation and Parole Officer in
apprehension of immediate physical injury;
3. Such person knowingly causes or attempts to cause physical
contact with a Law Enforcement Officer, Emergency Personnel or
Probation and Parole Officer without the consent of the Law
Enforcement Officer, Emergency Personnel or Probation and Parole
Officer.
B. As used in this Section, "emergency personnel" means any paid or
volunteer firefighter, emergency room or trauma center personnel, or
emergency medical technician as defined in Subdivisions (15), (16) and
(17) of Section 190.100, RSMo.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of Section 215.033, 215.035 and 215.037,
the following words shall have the meanings set out herein:
COURSE OF CONDUCT — A pattern of conduct composed of a series
of acts over a period of time, however short, evidencing a continuity of
purpose. Constitutionally protected activity is not included within the
meaning of "course of conduct". Such constitutionally protected activity
includes picketing or other organized protests.
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION — The origination, emission,
dissemination, transmission or reception of data, images, signals,
sounds, or other intelligence or equivalence of intelligence of any
nature over any communications system by any method including, but
not limited to, a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital or
Section
215.015
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.030
100:180
Section 215.033. Stalking. [Ord. No. 5272 §1, 1-14-2008]
Section 215.035. Harassment. [Ord. No. 5272 §1, 1-14-2008]
analog method. By way of example, "electronic communication"
includes, but is not limited to:
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE — Any instrument,
equipment, machine or other device that facilitates telecommunication,
including, but not limited to, a computer, computer network, computer
chip, computer circuit, scanner, telephone, cellular telephone, pager,
personal communications device, transponder, receiver, radio, modem
or device that enables the use of a modem.
HARASSES — To engage in a course of conduct directed at a specific
person that serves no legitimate purpose that:
STALKING — When a person purposely and repeatedly harasses or
follows with the intent of harassing another person.
1. Electronic mail;
2. Internet-based communications;
3. Pager service; and
4. Electronic text messaging.
Would cause a reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional
distress and that actually causes substantial emotional distress to
that person; or
1.
If the course of conduct is engaged in by a person eighteen (18)
years of age or older with respect to a person under the age
of eighteen (18) , would cause a prudent parent or guardian to
reasonably observe, or reasonably fear, substantial emotional
distress on the part of the minor who is the target of such conduct.
2.
B. For purposes of Section 215.033, 215.035 and 215.037, an offense
alleged to have been committed by means of a writing, by telephone or
by an electronic communications device may be deemed to have been
committed either at the place from which the communication was made
or at the place where the communication was received.
A. Any person who purposely and repeatedly harasses or follows with the
intent of harassing another person commits the offense of stalking.
B. The offense of stalking shall be an ordinance violation and shall be
punishable as provided in Section 100.010 of the Municipal Code of the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
A. A person commits the offense of harassment if for the purpose of
frightening or disturbing another person he/she:
Section
215.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.035
100:181
Section 215.037. Cyber-Harassment. [Ord. No. 5272 §1, 1-14-2008]
1. Communicates in person, or in writing, or by telephone or by
means of any electronic communications device a threat to commit
any felony;
2. Makes a telephone call, communicates in writing or by means of
any electronic communications device and uses coarse language
offensive to one of average sensibility;
3. Makes a telephone call anonymously;
4. Communicates by means of any electronic communications device
or through the Internet using a false identification; or
5. Makes repeated telephone calls.
B. The offense of harassment shall be an ordinance violation and shall be
punishable as provided in Section 100.010 of the Municipal Code of the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
A. A person commits the offense of cyber-harassment if, with intent to
harass, alarm, annoy, abuse, threaten, intimidate, torment or embarrass
any other person, he/she:
1. Transmits or causes the transmission of an electronic
communication, or knowingly permits an electronic communication
to be transmitted from an electronic communication device under
his or her control, to such other person:
a. Using any lewd, lascivious, indecent or obscene words, images
or language or suggesting the commission of any lewd or
lascivious act;
b. Anonymously or repeatedly whether or not conversation
occurs; or
c. Threatening to inflict injury on the person or property of the
person communicated with or any member of his or her family
or household; or
2. Transmits or causes the transmission of an electronic
communication, or knowingly permits an electronic communication
to be transmitted from an electronic communications device under
the his or her control, to a third party for the purpose of instigating,
initiating, prompting or otherwise bringing about or causing such
third party to harass, alarm, annoy, abuse, threaten, intimidate,
torment or embarrass such other person.
B. The offense of cyber-harassment shall be an ordinance violation and
shall be punishable as provided in Section 100.010 of the Municipal
Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
Section
215.035
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.040
100:182
Section 215.040. False Imprisonment.26
A person commits the offense of false imprisonment if he/she knowingly
restrains another unlawfully and without consent so as to interfere
substantially with his/her liberty.
Section 215.050. Endangering The Welfare of A Child.27
Section 215.055. Leaving A Child Unattended in A Motor Vehicle.28
A. A person commits the offense of endangering the welfare of a child if:
1. He/she with criminal negligence acts in a manner that creates a
substantial risk to the life, body or health of a child less than
seventeen (17) years old;
2. He/she knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than
seventeen (17) years old to engage in any conduct which causes or
tends to cause the child to come within the provisions of Paragraph
(d) of Subdivision (2) of Subsection (1) or Subdivision (3) of
Subsection (1) of Section 211.031, RSMo.;
3. Being a parent, guardian or other person legally charged with the
care or custody of a child less than seventeen (17) years old, he/she
recklessly fails or refuses to exercise reasonable diligence in the
care or control of such child to prevent him/her from coming within
the provisions of Paragraph (c) of Subdivision (1) of Subsection (1)
or Paragraph (d) of Subdivision (2) of Subsection (1) or Subdivision
(3) of Subsection (1) of Section 211.031, RSMo.;
4. He/she knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than
seventeen (17) years of age to enter into any room, building or
other structure which is a public nuisance as defined in Section
195.130, RSMo.; or
5. He/she operates a vehicle in violation of Subdivision (2) or (3) of
Subsection (1) of Section 565.024, RSMo., or Subdivision (4) of
Subsection (1) of Section 565.060, RSMo., or Sections 342.020 or
342.030 of this Code, while a child less than seventeen (17) years
old is present in the vehicle.
B. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to mean the welfare of a child
is endangered for the sole reason that he/she is being provided nonmedical
remedial treatment recognized and permitted under the laws
of this State.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these
prescribed meanings:
26.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
27.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
28.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.055
100:183
COLLISION — The act of a motor vehicle coming into contact with an
object or a person.
INJURY — Physical harm to the body of a person.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any automobile, truck, truck-tractor, or any
motorbus or motor-propelled vehicle not exclusively operated or driven
on fixed rails or tracks.
UNATTENDED — Not accompanied by an individual fourteen (14) years
of age or older.
B. A person commits the offense of leaving a child unattended in a motor
vehicle if such person knowingly leaves a child ten (10) years of age or
less unattended in a motor vehicle and such child injures another
person by causing a motor vehicle collision or by causing the motor
vehicle to injure a pedestrian.
Section
215.055
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.055
100:184
ARTICLE III
Offenses Concerning Administration of Justice
Section 215.060. Concealing An Offense.29
Section 215.065. Obstructing Government Operations. [R.O. 2007
§215.177; Ord. No. 4512 §1, 5-13-2003]
A person commits the offense of obstructing government operations if he/
she purposely obstructs, impairs, hinders or perverts the performance of
a governmental function by the use or threat of violence, force or other
physical interference or obstacle.
Section 215.070. Hindering Prosecution.30
Section 215.080. Refusal To Identify As A Witness.
A person commits the offense of refusal to identify as a witness if, knowing
he/she has witnessed any portion of a crime, or of any other incident
A. A person commits the offense of concealing an offense if:
1. He/she confers or agrees to confer any pecuniary benefit or other
consideration to any person in consideration of that person's
concealing of any offense, refraining from initiating or aiding in the
prosecution of an offense, or withholding any evidence thereof; or
2. He/she accepts or agrees to accept any pecuniary benefit or other
consideration in consideration of his/her concealing any offense,
refraining from initiating or aiding in the prosecution of an offense,
or withholding any evidence thereof.
A. A person commits the offense of hindering prosecution if for the
purpose of preventing the apprehension, prosecution, conviction or
punishment of another for conduct constituting a crime he/she:
1. Harbors or conceals such person;
2. Warns such person of impending discovery or apprehension, except
this does not apply to a warning given in connection with an effort
to bring another into compliance with the law;
3. Provides such person with money, transportation, weapon, disguise
or other means to aid him/her in avoiding discovery or
apprehension; or
4. Prevents or obstructs, by means of force, deception or intimidation,
anyone from performing an act that might aid in the discovery or
apprehension of such person.
29.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
30.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.080
100:185
resulting in physical injury or substantial property damage, upon demand
by a Law Enforcement Officer engaged in the performance of his/her official
duties, he/she refuses to report or gives a false report of his/her name and
present address to such officer.
Section 215.090. Disturbing A Judicial Proceeding.
A person commits the offense of disturbing a judicial proceeding if, with
purpose to intimidate a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness and thereby
to influence a judicial proceeding, he/she disrupts or disturbs a judicial
proceeding by participating in an assembly and calling aloud, shouting,
or holding or displaying a placard or sign containing written or printed
matter concerning the conduct of the judicial proceeding or the character
of a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness engaged in such proceeding,
or calling for or demanding any specified action or determination by such
judge, attorney, juror, party or witness in connection with such proceeding.
Section 215.100. Tampering With A Witness — Tampering With A
Victim.31
A. A person commits the offense of tampering with a witness if, with
purpose to induce a witness or a prospective witness to disobey a
subpoena or other legal process, or to absent himself/herself or avoid
subpoena or other legal process, or to withhold evidence, information
or documents, or to testify falsely, he/she:
1. Threatens or causes harm to any person or property;
2. Uses force, threats or deception;
3. Offers, confers or agrees to confer any benefit, direct or indirect,
upon such witness; or
4. Conveys any of the foregoing to another in furtherance of a
conspiracy.
B. A person commits the offense of "victim tampering" if, with purpose to
do so, he/she prevents or dissuades or attempts to prevent or dissuade
any person who has been a victim of any crime or a person who is acting
on behalf of any such victim from:
1. Making any report of such victimization to any Peace Officer or
State, local or Federal Law Enforcement Officer or prosecuting
agency or to any judge;
2. Causing a complaint, indictment or information to be sought and
prosecuted or assisting in the prosecution thereof; or
3. Arresting or causing or seeking the arrest of any person in
connection with such victimization.
31.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.080
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.105
100:186
Section 215.105. Tampering With Physical Evidence.
Section 215.110. Improper Communication.
A person commits the offense of improper communication if he/she
communicates, directly or indirectly, with any juror, special master, referee
or arbitrator in a judicial proceeding, other than as part of the proceedings
in a case, for the purpose of influencing the official action of such person.
Section 215.120. False Impersonation.
A. A person commits the offense of tampering with physical evidence if he/
she:
1. Alters, destroys, suppresses or conceals any record, document or
thing with the purpose to impair its verity, legibility or availability
in any official proceeding or investigation; or
2. Makes, presents or uses any record, document or thing knowing it
to be false with purpose to mislead a public servant who is or may
be engaged in any official proceeding or investigation.
A. A person commits the offense of false impersonation if such person:
1. Falsely represents himself/herself to be a public servant with
purpose to induce another to submit to his/her pretended official
authority or to rely upon his/her pretended official acts, and
a. Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b. Causes another to act in reliance upon his/her pretended
official authority.
2. Falsely represents himself/herself to be a person licensed to
practice or engage in any profession for which a license is required
by the laws of this State with purpose to induce another to rely
upon such representation, and
a. Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b. Causes another to act in reliance upon such representation.
3. Upon being arrested, falsely represents himself/herself, to a Law
Enforcement Officer, with the first and last name, date of birth or
Social Security number, or a substantial number of identifying
factors or characteristics as that of another person that results in
the filing of a report or record of arrest or conviction for an
infraction, misdemeanor, ordinance violation or felony that
contains the first and last name, date of birth and Social Security
number, or a substantial number of identifying factors or
characteristics to that of such other person as to cause such other
person to be identified as the actual person arrested or convicted.
Section
215.105
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.120
100:187
Section 215.130. False Reports.
Section 215.135. Refusal To Comply. [R.O. 2007 §215.090; CC 1978
§215.040; Ord. No. 225 §§1—3, 6-20-1961; Ord. No. 513 §§2—4,
1-5-1976]
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and intentionally refuse or fail
to comply with the reasonable request or lawful orders of any Police Officer,
B. If a violation of Subsection (A)(3) hereof is discovered prior to any
conviction of the person actually arrested for an underlying charge,
then the prosecuting attorney, bringing any action on the underlying
charge shall notify the court thereof, and the court shall order the falseidentifying
factors ascribed to the person actually arrested as are
contained in the arrest and court records amended to correctly and
accurately identify the defendant and shall expunge the incorrect and
inaccurate identifying factors from the arrest and court records.
C. Any person who is the victim of a false impersonation and whose
identity has been falsely reported in arrest or conviction records may
move for expungement and correction of said records under the
procedures set forth in Section 610.123, RSMo. Upon a showing that a
substantial number of identifying factors of the victim was falsely
ascribed to the person actually arrested or convicted, the court shall
order the false identifying factors ascribed to the person actually
arrested as are contained in the arrest and court records amended to
correctly and accurately identify the defendant and shall expunge the
incorrect and inaccurate factors from the arrest and court records.
A. A person commits the offense of making a false report if he/she
knowingly:
1. Gives false information to any person for the purpose of implicating
another person in a crime or offense;
2. Makes a false report to a Law Enforcement Officer that a crime or
offense has occurred or is about to occur; or
3. Makes a false report or causes a false report to be made to a Law
Enforcement Officer, security officer, Fire Department or other
organization, official or volunteer which deals with emergencies
involving danger to life or property that a fire or other incident
calling for an emergency response has occurred or is about to
occur.
B. It is a defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section that
the actor retracted the false statement or report before the Law
Enforcement Officer or any other person took substantial action in
reliance thereon.
C. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction
under Subsection (B) of this Section.
Section
215.120
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.135
100:188
or any member of the O'Fallon Police Department, or any Law Enforcement
Officer duly empowered with police authority, while in the discharge of his
or her duty within the City limits of O'Fallon, Missouri.
Section 215.140. Resisting or Interfering With Arrest, Detention or
Stop.32
Section 215.150. Escape or Attempted Escape From Custody.33
A person commits the offense of escape from custody or attempted escape
from custody if, while being held in custody after arrest for any crime or
offense, he/she escapes or attempts to escape from custody.
Section 215.155. Interference With Legal Process.
A. A person commits the offense of resisting or interfering with arrest,
detention or stop if, knowing that a Law Enforcement Officer is making
an arrest or attempting to lawfully detain or stop an individual or
vehicle, or the person reasonably should know that a Law Enforcement
Officer is making an arrest or attempting to lawfully detain or lawfully
stop an individual or vehicle, for the purpose of preventing the officer
from effecting the arrest, stop or detention, the person:
1. Resists the arrest, stop or detention of such person by using or
threatening the use of violence or physical force or by fleeing from
such officer; or
2. Interferes with the arrest, stop or detention of another person by
using or threatening the use of violence, physical force or physical
interference.
B. This Section applies to arrests, stops or detentions with or without
warrants and to arrests, stops or detentions for any crime, infraction or
ordinance violation.
C. A person is presumed to be fleeing a vehicle stop if that person
continues to operate a motor vehicle after that person has seen or
should have seen clearly visible emergency lights or has heard or
should have heard an audible signal emanating from the law
enforcement vehicle pursuing that person.
D. It is no defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section
that the Law Enforcement Officer was acting unlawfully in making the
arrest. However, nothing in this Section shall be construed to bar civil
suits for unlawful arrest.
A. A person commits the offense of interference with legal process if,
knowing any person is authorized by law to serve process, for the
32.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
33.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.135
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.155
100:189
purpose of preventing such person from effecting the service of any
process, he/she interferes with or obstructs such person.
B. "Process" includes any writ, summons, subpoena, warrant other than an
arrest warrant, or other process or order of a court.
C. Interference with legal process is an ordinance violation.
Section
215.155
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.155
100:190
ARTICLE IV
Offenses Concerning Public Safety
Section 215.157. Interference With Fire Department. [R.O. 2007
§215.150; CC 1978 §215.060; Ord. No. 191 §1, 10-20-1959]
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and Policemen present to aid in
preventing interference with the Fire Department in the suppression of fires
and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any way with any fire
apparatus or the operation thereof, or with any Fireman in the discharge of
his/her duties in suppressing fires, or to refuse or neglect to obey any and
all proper and legal orders of the Fire Chief.
Section 215.160. Abandonment of Airtight or Semi-Airtight
Containers.
Section 215.170. Littering.
A person commits the offense of littering if he/she throws or places or
causes to be thrown or placed any glass, glass bottles, wire, nails, tacks,
hedge, cans, garbage, trash, refuse or rubbish of any kind, nature or
description on the right-of-way of any public road or State highway or on or
in any of the waters in this City or on the banks of any stream or on any land
or water owned, operated or leased by the State, any board, department,
agency or commission thereof or on any land or water owned, operated or
leased by the Federal Government or on any private real property owned by
another without his/her consent.
Section 215.180. Littering Via Carcasses.
A. A person commits the offense of abandonment of airtight icebox if he/
she abandons, discards or knowingly permits to remain on premises
under his/her control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned
or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half (1½) cubic feet or
more and an opening of fifty (50) square inches or more and which has a
door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable
of securing such door or lid without rendering such equipment
harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches or other
hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein.
B. Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply to an icebox, refrigerator
or other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a
building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman.
C. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue under
Subsection (B) of this Section.
A. If any person or persons shall put any dead animal, carcass or part
thereof, the offal or any other filth into any well, spring, brook, branch,
creek, pond or lake, every person so offending shall, on conviction
Section
215.157
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.180
100:191
Section 215.190. Corrupting or Diverting Water Supply.
Whoever willfully or maliciously poisons, defiles or in any way corrupts the
water of a well, spring, brook or reservoir used for domestic or municipal
purposes, or whoever willfully or maliciously diverts, dams up and holds
back from its natural course and flow any spring, brook or other water
supply for domestic or municipal purposes, after said water supply shall
have once been taken for use by any person or persons, corporation, Town
or City for their use, shall be adjudged guilty of an ordinance violation and
punished by a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the City or County Jail
not exceeding three (3) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and
shall be liable to the party injured for three (3) times the actual damage
sustained, to be recovered by suit at law.
Section 215.200. Abandoning Motor Vehicle or Trailer.
thereof, be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
B. If any person shall remove or cause to be removed and placed in or near
any public road or highway, or upon premises not his/her own, or in any
river, stream or watercourse any dead animal, carcass or part thereof,
or other nuisance to the annoyance of the citizens of this City, or any of
them, every person so offending shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
for every offense not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and if such nuisance be not
removed within three (3) days thereafter, it shall be deemed a second
(2nd) offense against the provisions of this Section.
A. A person commits the offense of abandoning a motor vehicle or trailer if
he/she abandons any motor vehicle or trailer on the right-of-way of any
public road or State highway or on or in any of the waters in this State
or on the banks of any stream or on any land or water owned, operated
or leased by the State, any board, department, agency or commission
thereof or any political subdivision thereof or on any land or water
owned, operated or leased by the Federal Government or on any private
real property owned by another without his/her consent.
B. For purposes of this Section, the last owner of record of a motor vehicle
or trailer found abandoned and not shown to be transferred pursuant to
Sections 301.196 and 301.197, RSMo., shall be deemedprima facie to
have been the owner of such motor vehicle or trailer at the time it was
abandoned and to have been the person who abandoned the motor
vehicle or trailer or caused or procured its abandonment. The
registered owner of the abandoned motor vehicle or trailer shall not be
subject to the penalties provided by this Section if the motor vehicle or
trailer was in the care, custody or control of another person at the time
of the violation. In such instance, the owner shall submit such evidence
in an affidavit permitted by the court setting forth the name, address,
Section
215.180
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.200
100:192
Section 215.205. Keeping Sidewalks Free of Snow and Other
Obstructions. [R.O. 2007 §215.170; CC 1978 §215.090; Ord. No. 763
§§2—3, 2-8-1980]
All commercial property owners within the City limits shall keep sidewalks
along or abutting their property clear of snow, ice, debris or other
obstructions, and shall cause them to be safe for pedestrian use.
Section 215.207. Encroachments Into Sidewalks Prohibited —
Removal. [R.O. 2007 §215.270; Ord. No. 1632 §§2—5, 9-20-1988]
and other pertinent information of the person who leased, rented, or
otherwise had care, custody or control of the motor vehicle or trailer
at the time of the alleged violation. The affidavit submitted pursuant to
this Subsection shall be admissible in a court proceeding adjudicating
the alleged violation and shall raise a rebuttable presumption that the
person identified in the affidavit was in actual control of the motor
vehicle or trailer. In such case, the court has the authority to terminate
the prosecution of the summons issued to the owner and issue a
summons to the person identified in the affidavit as the operator. If the
motor vehicle or trailer is alleged to have been stolen, the owner of the
motor vehicle or trailer shall submit proof that a Police report was filed
in a timely manner indicating that the vehicle was stolen at the time of
the alleged violation.
C. Any person convicted pursuant to this Section shall be civilly liable for
all reasonable towing, storage, and administrative costs associated with
the abandonment of the motor vehicle or trailer. Any reasonable towing,
storage and administrative costs in excess of the value of the
abandoned motor vehicle or trailer that exist at the time the motor
vehicle is transferred pursuant to Section 304.156, RSMo., shall remain
the liability of the person convicted pursuant to this Section so long as
the towing company, as defined in Chapter 304, RSMo., provided the
title owner and lienholders, as ascertained by the Department of
Revenue records, a notice within the timeframe and in the form as
described in Subsection (1) of Section 304.156, RSMo.
A. Encroachments into and upon sidewalks are prohibited and the expense
of removal of such encroachments shall be the owners or occupants of
ground fronting thereon.
B. The Police Officer/Code Enforcement Officer who observes a sidewalk
obstruction in violation of this Section shall serve a twenty-four (24)
hour notice to remove the obstruction. This may be done personally, by
United States mail or by posting notice on or near the obstruction.
C. Such obstruction unrelated to the property owner or tenant can be
removed forthwith by the Police Department upon determination by a
Police Officer/Code Enforcement Officer.
Section
215.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.207
100:193

ARTICLE V
Offenses Concerning Public Peace
Section 215.210. Peace Disturbance.
Section 215.215. Private Peace Disturbance.
Section 215.220. Peace Disturbance Definitions.
A. A person commits the offense of peace disturbance if:
1. He/she unreasonably and knowingly disturbs or alarms another
person or persons by:
a. Loud noise;
b. Offensive language addressed in a face-to-face manner to a
specific individual and uttered under circumstances which are
likely to produce an immediate violent response from a
reasonable recipient;
c. Threatening to commit a felonious act against any person
under circumstances which are likely to cause a reasonable
person to fear that such threat may be carried out;
d. Fighting; or
e. Creating a noxious and offensive odor.
2. He/she is in a public place or on private property of another without
consent and purposely causes inconvenience to another person or
persons by unreasonably and physically obstructing:
a. Vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
b. The free ingress or egress to or from a public or private place.
A. A person commits the offense of private peace disturbance if he/she is
on private property and unreasonably and purposely causes alarm to
another person or persons on the same premises by:
1. Threatening to commit a crime or offense against any person; or
2. Fighting.
A. For the purposes of Sections 215.210 and 215.215, the following words
shall have the meanings set out herein:
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any place which at the time is not open to the
public. It includes property which is owned publicly or privately.
PROPERTY OF ANOTHER — Any property in which the actor does not
have a possessory interest.
Section
215.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.220
100:195
Section 215.223. Disturbance of Funeral and Burial Services.34
[Ord. No. 5838 §1, 12-13-2012]
Section 215.225. Unlawful Assembly.
A person commits the offense of unlawful assembly if he/she knowingly
assembles with six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons
to violate any of the criminal laws of this State or of the United States with
force or violence.
Section 215.230. Rioting.35
A person commits the offense of rioting if he/she knowingly assembles with
six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons to violate any of
the criminal laws of this State or of the United States with force or violence
and thereafter, while still so assembled, does violate any of said laws with
force or violence.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place which at the time is open to the public. It
includes property which is owned publicly or privately.
B. If a building or structure is divided into separately occupied units, such
units are separate premises.
A. Every citizen may freely speak, write and publish the person's
sentiments on all subjects, being responsible for the abuse of the right,
but no person shall knowingly picket or engage in other protest
activities, nor shall any association or corporation knowingly cause
picketing or other protest activities to occur, within three hundred
(300) feet of any residence, cemetery, funeral home, church,
synagogue, or other establishment or location during or within one (1)
hour before or one (1) hour after any actual funeral or burial service at
that place.
B. As used in this Section, "other protest activities" means any action that
is disruptive or undertaken to disrupt or disturb a funeral or burial
service.
C. As used in this Section, "funeral" and "burial" services mean the
ceremonies and memorial services held in conjunction with the burial
or cremation of the dead, but this Section does not apply to processions
while they are in transit beyond any three hundred (300) foot zone that
is established under Subsection (A) above.
34.Editor's Note—Ord. no. 5492 §1, adopted August 27, 2009, repealed section 215.223
"funeral protests prohibited, when—funeral defined" in its entirety. Subsequently, ord. no.
5838 §1, adopted December 13, 2012, enacted the new provisions set out herein.
35.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.220
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.235
100:196
Section 215.235. Refusal To Disperse.
A person commits the offense of refusal to disperse if, being present at the
scene of an unlawful assembly or at the scene of a riot, he/she knowingly
fails or refuses to obey the lawful command of a Law Enforcement Officer
to depart from the scene of such unlawful assembly or riot.
Section 215.237. Regulation of Noise Levels. [R.O. 2007 §215.340;
Ord. No. 3914 §§1—19, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 5713 §1, 6-23-2011]
A. The City of O'Fallon, Missouri, recognizes that the right and privilege to
participate in or to attend sporting events is favored by public policy,
legislation and court decisions.
B. The public policy is to encourage family-oriented activities and open-air
amusements, tourism, economic and general welfare.
C. Sporting events and surrounding activities, bands, fireworks and
parades are beneficial to the residents of the City of O'Fallon and
surrounding areas.
D. Residents of cities are subject to variable levels of noise from trains,
diesel vehicles and highway traffic, etc., and as the City grows more,
new noises have to be expected and accommodated so long as they are
not unreasonably loud.
E. The City recognizes that sporting events conducted near or even
adjoining private residential property are not a nuisance per se;
nevertheless, the time or manner of conducting such events may make
the noise level a nuisance in fact outside the stadium or field area.
F. It shall be a violation of this Section for any person to make, continue or
cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually
loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or
endangers the comfort, health, peace or safety of others within the
limits of the City. Noises which are the result of legally operating
businesses engaged in their normal operations are to be subject to the
objective noise level limits listed in this Section.
G. The following acts, among others, when created by activities which are
not normal, or approved business activity which are governed by the
objective noise standards, may be declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of the provisions of this Section, but
said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
1. Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sound of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or other vehicle on
any street or public place of the City, except as a warning or danger
signal, the creation by means of any such signaling device of any
unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except
tone operated by hand or electricity the use of any horn, whistle or
Section
215.235
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.237
100:197
other device operated by engine exhaust and the use of any such
signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.
2. Loud speakers, amplifiers for advertising. The use, operation or
permitting to be played, used or operated any radio-receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound
which is broadcast from the public streets for the purpose of
commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to
any building or structure that is determined to be excessive based
upon the criteria set out in this Section.
3. Yelling, shouting, etc. Prolonged yelling, shouting, hooting or
whistling on the public streets, particularly between the hours of
10:30 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. or at any time or place so as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons of reasonable
sensitivity in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence,
or of any persons in the vicinity.
4. Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird on residential
premises that causes frequent or long continued noise which
disturbs the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
5. Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any
hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such
institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the
hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets
indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street.
6. Engines and equipment, etc. Allowing vehicle or equipment
engines to rev up or idle for prolonged periods or at times or
locations which can reasonably be expected to annoy or disturb the
quiet, comfort or repose of persons of reasonable sensitivity in
nearby areas.
H. Enforcement Factors. In the enforcement of standards established in
this Section, an Enforcement Officer may be required to exercise
judgment in determining if a particular noise is sufficiently loud or
otherwise so offensive that it would unreasonably disturb other persons
in the vicinity. When making such determinations, the Enforcement
Officer shall consider the following factors:
1. The intensity (sound pressure level) of the noise.
2. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
3. Whether the origin of the noise is natural or manmade.
4. The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any.
Section
215.237
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.237
100:198
5. The proximity of the noise in residential sleeping facilities during
the sleeping hours of 10:30 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.
6. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates.
7. The time of the day or night along with the day of week and time of
year the noise occurs.
8. The duration of the noise.
9. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
I. Definitions. All words used in this Section not defined below shall be in
conformance with applicable publication of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body for the purpose of this
Section. The following words and phrases are defined and shall be
construed as defined below unless it shall be apparent from the context
that a difference meaning is intended.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level in decibels
as measured on a sound level meter using an A-Weighting network. The
level so read is designated dBA.
DECIBEL (dB) — A unity for describing the amplitude of sound, equal
to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the
pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is
twenty (20) micronewtons per square meter.
EMERGENCY WORK — A work performed for the purpose of
preventing or alleviating physical trauma or property damage
threatened or caused by an existing or imminent peril. Emergency work
may also be declared by the City as outlined above.
HOLIDAY — For the purposes of this Section, the following days will be
recognized as holidays for the purpose of granting permits to exceed
maximum sound level: Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day
and December thirty-first (31st).
MUFFLER — An apparatus consisting of a series of chambers or baffle
plates designed for the purpose of transmitting gases while
significantly reducing sound emanating from such apparatus.
NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes
or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on
humans.
OUTDOOR AMPLIFIED SOUND — Any sound using sound equipment,
whose source is outside or whose source is inside and the sound
propagates to the outside through open doors or windows or other
openings in the building.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality
of the United States, the State of Missouri, or any political subdivisions
thereof.
Section
215.237
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.237
100:199
SLOW RESPONSE — Metering function to be used in measurement
of sound for determination of enforcement of the objective noise level
limits stated within this Section.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces
that cause compression, and rarefaction of that medium resulting in air
pressure variations perceptible by the human ear. The description of
sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration,
intensity and frequency.
SOUND LEVEL — The unweighted ("flat") or weighted sound pressure
level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency
weighting network, such A, B or C as specified in the American National
Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI S1.4).
If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting
shall apply.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An ANSI standard S1.4 Type 0, I or II
class instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector,
integrator or time average, output meter and weighting network used
to measure sound pressure levels.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — Twenty (20) times the logarithms to the
base 10 of the ratio of the roof mean squared (RMS) sound pressure to
the reference pressure of twenty (20) micronewtons per square meter.
SOUND RECEPTOR — The location or property boundary receiving
noise from a sound source.
SOUND SOURCE — The location of property boundary from which a
sound emanates.
TIME WEIGHED AVERAGE — For the purposes of enforcement of the
allowable noise level limits in this Section, sound level measurements
shall be average when possible and appropriate over a fifteen (15)
minute period, using a sound level meter which includes an ANSI
standard integration feature. The proper designation for sound level
measurements made using this technique is dBA LEQ (Equivalent
Level).
J. Classification Of Use Occupancies. Use occupancies shall be as follows:
1. Residential use. All premises containing habitually-occupied
sleeping quarters. However, premises containing transient
commercial sleeping quarters are considered commercial use.
Hospitals, nursing homes, schools, libraries, fraternity and sorority
houses and charges are considered residential uses.
2. Public nuisance. An offense against the public order by any act
which annoys, injures, endangers, renders insecure, interferes with
or obstructs the rights or property of the whole community or
neighborhood or of any considerable number of persons, even
Section
215.237
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.237
100:200
though extent of the annoyance, injury or damage may be unequal
or may vary in its effect on individuals.
3. Commercial. All premises where sales, professional or other
commercial activity is legally permitted, except that residentially
zoned properties with lawful home occupations are considered
residential.
4. Industrial. All premises where goods or wares are made,
warehoused or stored or where manufacturing is legally permitted.
5. Agricultural. All premises which are bona fide farms, golf courses,
or which are characterized by farming activities as the primary use
of the premises.
6. Recreational/athletic/amusement/outdoor activity. All premises
which are designated as indoor and outdoor entertainment and/or
recreational activities.
K. Measurement Methodology. This Section describes acceptable methods
of techniques for the measurement and reporting of noise for the
purpose of determining compliance with the allowable noise levels
listed above.
1. Measurement location. Measurement of sound must be made at the
front building line on the property of the noise receptor.
2. Calibration. All sound level measuring devices must be calibrated
by a certified agency or the City.
3. Sound level measurement shall be made with a sound level meter
using the A-weighting scale set on "slow" response.
4. Sound level meters shall be at least Type II meeting American
National Standard Institute (ANSI S1.4-1983 requirements).
Persons using the sound levels shall be trained in sound level
measurement and the operation of sound level measurement
equipment.
5. Measurement procedures. The following procedures must be
followed to obtain representative sound level measurements.
a. Measurement location must be at least three (3) feet above the
ground and not more than ten (10) feet above ground.
b. Measurement shall be taken in location on receptor property
with line of sight to the noise source if possible.
c. Measurements made in sustained winds over ten (10) knots
may be subject to review and considered not valid.
Precipitation or other sounds which result in a difference of
less than 10 dBA between the background or ambient noise
Section
215.237
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.237
100:201
level and the noise source being measured may also invalidate
measurements.
d. Measurements must be made with the sound level meters set
for "A" weighting and "slow" response.
e. Measurements are to be made when possible and appropriate
to the noise source over a fifteen (15) minute period with the
sound level meter in the "averaging" or Leq mode.
Measurements should be made over a continuous period,
unless a transient event which is easily identified, such as an
aircraft overflight, occurs. In this case, the averaging period
may be paused for the duration of the transient event and the
measurement restarted when the transient event sound level is
10 dBA below the noise source being measured.
6. Date documentation. A record of all sound level measurements
must be completed and signed by the person marking the
measurements. The record sheet should include:
a. Date.
b. Time of measurement.
c. Location (street address if possible).
d. Noise source.
e. Wind speed and direction (measured, estimate or from airport
or weather service records).
f. Temperature (if readily available).
g. Humidity (if readily available).
h. Make, model and serial number of sound level meter, date of
last certification/calibration.
i. Field calibration results.
j. Ambient (background) noise level.
k. Name of complainant (if available).
L. In addition to the subjective standards established above, it shall be
presumed that the allowable noise level limits have been violated
whenever any noise or sound is projected from one property in the City
onto another if such sound, measured at the front building line on the
property receiving the sound, exceeds the following decibel standards
at a location appropriate to determine the level of disturbance.
Section
215.237
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.237
100:202
Objective Noise Standards—Allowable Levels
In residentially zoned districts:
7:00 A.M. to 10:30 P.M. 55 dB
10:30 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. 50 dB
In commercially zoned districts:
7:00 A.M. to Midnight 65 dB
Midnight to 7:00 A.M. 60 dB
In industrially zoned districts:
7:00 A.M. to Midnight 70 dB
Midnight to 7:00 A.M. 65 dB
Multi-family structures shall have the same noise limits between
units as for single-family or detached dwellings, as measured at
any point in the interior of the sound receptor residential unit with
windows closed.
M. Exceptions. The following are exempt from the provisions above:
1. Crowd sounds emanating from scheduled outdoor athletic events
and/or festivals, concerts and activities operating under permit
from the City.
2. Noise of safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure relief
valves.
3. All church bells, church chimes, either actual or electronic, or
artificial sound reproduction system intended to sound like church
bells or chimes operated between the hours of 6:00 A.M. and 10:30
P.M.
4. Noise resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle.
5. Noise resulting from parades, lawful picketing or other public
demonstrations protected by the U.S. Constitution or Federal law
for which a local permit has been granted by the City, provided
such activity is of a temporary duration lasting no longer than two
(2) hours during any twenty-four (24) hour period. Regulation of
noise emanating from activities under permit shall be according to
the conditions and limits stated in this Section and according to any
additional conditions stated on the permit.
6. Unamplified and amplified sound at public affairs conducted,
sponsored or sanctioned by the City of O'Fallon, so long as such
sound remains within the parameters of this Section.
7. All noises coming from the normal and legal operations of properly
equipped aircraft.
Section
215.237
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.237
100:203
8. Noise from noisemakers on holidays and fireworks on holidays or at
times allowed under a pyrotechnics permit.
9. Noise from trains and associated railroad rolling stock when
operated in a proper manner.
10. Emergency work, as defined above.
11. Special event permits. When approved by the City Council, the City
Administrator or his/her designated representative may issue
special event permits for events such as, but not limited to,
concerts, festivals, parades and athletic events to permit
reasonable and limited exceptions to the provisions of this Section.
Any special event permit issued shall contain specific provisions as
to the activities which will be conducted and dates and times
during which the provisions of this Section are to be suspended.
Specific sources to the noise which may exceed the established
sound limits shall be identified, with projected or estimated noise
levels, and special conditions may be established in the permit
which will minimize the noise impact of the special event on the
community.
N. Special Use Districts, Overlay Zones. When approved by the City
Council, the objective, allowable noise limits may be modified or
amended to reflect the specialized or unique nature of the land use
being allowed. Such modifications or amendments to the allowable
noise level limits shall be in force for the zoning district only and shall
not serve as an overall modification to the noise level limits throughout
the City.
O. Annexed Or Rezoned Property. Annexed property that has been granted
a non-residential zoning or is currently operating as a commercial or
amusement use shall have twelve (12) months to comply with the
allowable noise level limits listed above. In the event that a transient
lodging or residential zoning is being requested adjacent to or within
one thousand (1,000) feet of an existing commercial or industrial zone,
applicant or owner shall demonstrate, whether through field testing or
by use of the Shell Isolation Rating system, that planned or existing
housing provides 35 dBA of attenuation from outside to inside the
building.
P. The City Administrator or his/her designated representative may
temporarily waive the requirements of this Section to permit work of an
emergency nature necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or
property from imminent exposure to danger or work by public or
private utilities when restoring utility service.
Q. Whenever any public nuisance, as defined in this Section, is determined
to exist, the City Administrator or the City Administrator's designate
shall cause to be served a notice in writing upon the person permitting,
causing, maintaining, allowing to remain or creating the nuisance,
Section
215.237
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.237
100:204
stating the existence of the nuisance and requesting its abatement in
the time specified in this Section.
R. The City Administrator or his/her designate may enter at any
reasonable time, with reasonable notice, into or upon any private or
public property, for the purpose of inspection and investigating any
condition or equipment which the City Administrator or his/her
designate shall have reasonable cause to believe to be causing a
violation of this Section. The City Administrator or his/her designate
may inspect at any reasonable time and in a reasonable manner with
reasonable notice any sound-emitting equipment. No person shall
refuse entry nor obstruct, delay, prevent or in any way interfere with
the City Administrator or his/her designate while carrying out an
inspection, or in the performance of his/her duties.
S. Violations And Penalties.
1. If the alleged violator denies responsibility for the noise level
problem or if the City Administrator or his/her designate is not able
to amicably abate the noise level problem, he/she shall issue a
notice to the person responsible for such noise level problem which
shall specifically state the facts of the violation and the provisions
of this noise level problem Section violated; and he/she shall
require such person to answer the allegations contained in such
notice at a hearing before the City Administrator or his/her
designate to be held not less than seven (7) days after the date of
such notice.
2. If the respondent to such notice of violation desires to offer
evidence at the hearing, he/she shall file a written answer thereto
with the City Administrator or his/her designate not less than two
(2) days before the hearing at the O'Fallon City Hall, setting forth a
summary of the facts and evidence to be presented at the hearing,
in default whereof the facts stated in the notice of violation shall be
deemed by the City Administrator or his/her designate to be true;
and if he/she finds that adequate corrective measures will not be
employed to abate the noise level.
3. After due consideration of all matters at the hearing, or upon the
default in appearance of the alleged violator, and if he/she finds
that adequate corrective measures will not be employed to abate
the noise level, the City Administrator or his/her designate shall
make such determinations and issue such orders as are appropriate
and commensurate with the provisions of this Section, and he/she
shall forthwith give notice thereof in writing to the alleged violator.
4. The City Administrator or his/her designate, upon determination of
a violation of this Section after such hearing is conducted, may
proceed to sign a complaint form at the Police Department of the
City, and should the City Prosecutor decide to proceed with such
Section
215.237
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.237
100:205
signed complaint, a summons will be issued which is returnable in
the O'Fallon Municipal Court.
5. Any person determined to be in violation of any provision of this
Section shall, upon conviction, be assessed a fine of up to five
hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day of such violation shall
constitute a separate violation.
Section
215.237
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.237
100:206
ARTICLE VI
Offenses Concerning Weapons and Firearms
Section 215.240. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings set
out herein:
ANTIQUE, CURIO OR RELIC FIREARM — Any firearm so defined by the
National Gun Control Act, 18 U.S.C. Title 26, Section 5845, and the United
States Treasury/Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 27 CFR Section
178.11:
BLACKJACK — Any instrument that is designed or adapted for the purpose
of stunning or inflicting physical injury by striking a person, and which is
readily capable of lethal use.
CONCEALABLE FIREARM — Any firearm with a barrel less than sixteen
(16) inches in length, measured from the face of the bolt or standing breech.
DEFACE — To alter or destroy the manufacturer's or importer's serial
number or any other distinguishing number or identification mark.
EXPLOSIVE WEAPON — Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb
or similar device designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting death,
serious physical injury or substantial property damage; or any device
designed or adapted for delivering or shooting such a weapon.
FIREARM — Any weapon that is designed or adapted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosive.
FIREARM SILENCER — Any instrument, attachment or appliance that is
designed or adapted to muffle the noise made by the firing of any firearm.
GAS GUN — Any gas ejection device, weapon, cartridge, container or
contrivance, other than a gas bomb, that is designed or adapted for the
purpose of ejecting any poison gas that will cause death or serious physical
injury, but not any device that ejects a repellant or temporary incapacitating
substance.
INTOXICATED — Substantially impaired mental or physical capacity
resulting from introduction of any substance into the body.
Antique firearm is any firearm not designed or redesigned for using
rim fire or conventional center fire ignition with fixed ammunition
and manufactured in or before 1898, said ammunition not being
manufactured any longer; this includes any matchlock, wheel lock,
flintlock, percussion cap or similar type ignition system, or replica
thereof.
1.
Curio or relic firearm is any firearm deriving value as a collectible
weapon due to its unique design, ignition system, operation or at least
fifty (50) years old, associated with a historical event, renown
personage or major war.
2.
Section
215.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.240
100:207
KNIFE — Any dagger, dirk, stiletto, or bladed hand instrument that is
readily capable of inflicting serious physical injury or death by cutting or
stabbing a person. For purposes of this Article, "knife" does not include any
ordinary pocketknife with no blade more than four (4) inches in length.
KNUCKLES — Any instrument that consists of finger rings or guards made
of a hard substance that is designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting
serious physical injury or death by striking a person with a fist enclosed in
the knuckles.
MACHINE GUN — Any firearm that is capable of firing more than one (1)
shot automatically, without manual reloading, by a single function of the
trigger.
PROJECTILE WEAPON — Any bow, crossbow, pellet gun, slingshot or other
weapon that is not a firearm, which is capable of expelling a projectile that
could inflict serious physical injury or death by striking or piercing a person.
RIFLE — Any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder
and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed metallic cartridge to fire a
projectile through a rifled bore by a single function of the trigger.
SHORT BARREL — A barrel length of less than sixteen (16) inches for a rifle
and eighteen (18) inches for a shotgun, both measured from the face of the
bolt or standing breech, or an overall rifle or shotgun length of less than
twenty-six (26) inches.
SHOTGUN — Any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder
and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed shotgun shell to fire a
number of shot or a single projectile through a smooth bore barrel by a
single function of the trigger.
SPRING GUN — Any fused, timed or non-manually controlled trap or device
designed or adapted to set off an explosion for the purpose of inflicting
serious physical injury or death.
SWITCHBLADE KNIFE — Any knife which has a blade that folds or closes
into the handle or sheath, and
Section 215.250. Weapons — Carrying Concealed — Other Unlawful
Use.36
That opens automatically by pressure applied to a button or other
device located on the handle; or
1.
That opens or releases from the handle or sheath by the force of gravity
or by the application of centrifugal force.
2.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons if he/she
knowingly:
1. Carries concealed upon or about his/her person a knife, a firearm, a
blackjack or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use;
36.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.240
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.250
100:208
2. Sets a spring gun;
3. Discharges or shoots a firearm, provided that the provisions of this
Subsection (A) shall not apply to persons discharging a firearm in a
target or archery range authorized by the City;
4. Exhibits, in the presence of one or more persons, any weapon
readily capable of lethal use in an angry or threatening manner;
5. Possesses a firearm or projectile weapon while intoxicated;
6. Openly carries a firearm or any other weapon readily capable of
lethal use;
7. Carries a firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, or any other
weapon readily capable of lethal use into any school, onto any
school bus, or onto the premises of any function or activity
sponsored or sanctioned by school officials or the district school
board.
B. Subparagraphs (1), (3), (4), (6) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section
shall not apply to or affect any of the following:
1. All State, County and Municipal Peace Officers who have completed
the training required by the Police Officer Standards and Training
Commission pursuant to Sections 590.030 to 590.050, RSMo., and
possessing the duty and power of arrest for violation of the general
criminal laws of the State or for violation of ordinances of Counties
or Municipalities of the State, whether such officers are on or off
duty, and whether such officers are within or outside of the law
enforcement agency's jurisdiction, or all qualified retired Peace
Officers, as defined in Subsection (10) of Section 571.030, RSMo.,
and who carry the identification defined in Subsection (11) of
Section 571.030, RSMo., or any person summoned by such officers
to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while actually
engaged in assisting such officer;
2. Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or
convicted of crime;
3. Members of the Armed Forces or National Guard while performing
their official duty;
4. Those persons vested by Article V, Section 1 of the Constitution of
Missouri with the judicial power of the State and those persons
vested by Article III of the Constitution of the United States with
the judicial power of the United States, the members of the Federal
judiciary;
5. Any person whose bona fide duty is to execute process, civil or
criminal;
Section
215.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.250
100:209
6. Any Federal Probation Officer or Federal Flight Deck Officer as
defined under the Federal Flight Deck Officer Program, 49 U.S.C.
Section 44921;
7. Any State Probation or Parole Officer, including supervisors and
members of the Board of Probation and Parole;
8. Any corporate security advisor meeting the definition and fulfilling
the requirements of the regulations established by the Board of
Police Commissioners under Section 84.340, RSMo.; and
9. Any coroner, deputy coroner, medical examiner or assistant
medical examiner.
C. Subparagraphs (1), (5), (6) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section do
not apply when the actor is transporting such weapons in a nonfunctioning
state or in an unloaded state when ammunition is not
readily accessible or when such weapons are not readily accessible.
Subparagraph (1) of Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply to any
person twenty-one (21) years of age or older transporting a concealable
firearm in the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle, so long as
such concealable firearm is otherwise lawfully possessed, nor when the
actor is also in possession of an exposed firearm or projectile weapon
for the lawful pursuit of game, or is in his/her dwelling unit or upon
premises over which the actor has possession, authority or control, or is
traveling in a continuous journey peaceably through this State.
Subparagraph (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply if the
firearm is otherwise lawfully possessed by a person while traversing
school premises for the purposes of transporting a student to or from
school, or possessed by an adult for the purposes of facilitation of a
school-sanctioned firearm-related event.
D. Subparagraphs (1), (6) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section shall not
apply to any person who has a valid concealed carry endorsement
issued pursuant to Sections 571.101 to 571.121, RSMo., or a valid
permit or endorsement to carry concealed firearms issued by another
State or political subdivision of another State.
E. Subparagraphs (3), (4), (5), (6) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section
shall not apply to persons who are engaged in a lawful act of defense
pursuant to Section 563.031, RSMo.
F. Nothing in this Section shall make it unlawful for a student to actually
participate in school-sanctioned gun safety courses, student military or
ROTC courses, or other school-sponsored firearm-related events,
provided the student does not carry a firearm or other weapon readily
capable of lethal use into any school, onto any school bus, or onto the
premises of any other function or activity sponsored or sanctioned by
school officials or the district school board.
Section
215.250
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.255
100:210
Section 215.255. Possession, Manufacture, Transport, Repair,
Sale of Certain Weapons.37
A. Except as provided in Subsection (B) of this Section, it shall be unlawful
for any person to knowingly possess, manufacture, transport, repair or
sell:
1. An explosive weapon;
2. An explosive, incendiary or poison substance or material with the
purpose to possess, manufacture or sell an explosive weapon;
3. A machine gun;
4. A gas gun;
5. A short-barreled rifle or shotgun;
6. A firearm silencer;
7. A switchblade knife;
8. A bullet or projectile which explodes or detonates upon impact
because of an independent explosive charge after having been shot
from a firearm; or
9. Knuckles.
B. A person does not commit an offense under this Section if his/her
conduct:
1. Was incident to the performance of official duty by the Armed
Forces, National Guard, a governmental law enforcement agency
or a penal institution;
2. Was incident to engaging in a lawful commercial or business
transaction with an organization enumerated in Paragraph (1) of
this Subsection;
3. Was incident to using an explosive weapon in a manner reasonably
related to a lawful industrial or commercial enterprise;
4. Was incident to displaying the weapon in a public museum or
exhibition; or
5. Was incident to dealing with the weapon solely as a curio,
ornament, or keepsake, or to using it in a manner reasonably
related to a lawful dramatic performance; but if the weapon is the
type described in Paragraphs (1), (3) or (5) of Subsection (A) of this
Section it must be in such a non-functioning condition that it cannot
readily be made operable. No barreled rifle, short-barreled
shotgun, or machine gun may be possessed, manufactured,
37.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.255
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.255
100:211
Section 215.260. Defacing Firearm.
A person commits the offense of defacing a firearm if he/she knowingly
defaces any firearm.
Section 215.270. Unlawful Transfer of Weapons.38
Section 215.275. Possession of Concealable Firearm Unlawful For
Certain Persons.39
transported, repaired or sold as a curio, ornament, or keepsake
unless such person is an importer, manufacturer, dealer, or
collector licensed by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the
Gun Control Act of 1968, U.S.C. Title 18, or unless such firearm
is an "antique firearm" as defined in Subsection (3) of Section
571.080, RSMo., or unless such firearm has been designated a
"collectors item" by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the
U.S.C. Title 26, Section 5845(a).
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful transfer of weapons if he/she:
1. Knowingly sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers a blackjack to
a person less than eighteen (18) years old without the consent of
the child's custodial parent or guardian or recklessly, as defined in
Section 562.016, RSMo., sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers
any firearm to a person less than eighteen (18) years old without
the consent of the child's custodial parent or guardian; provided
that this does not prohibit the delivery of such weapons to any
Peace Officer or member of the Armed Forces or National Guard
while performing his/her official duty; or
2. Recklessly, as defined in Section 562.016, RSMo., sells, leases,
loans, gives away or delivers a firearm or ammunition for a firearm
to a person who is intoxicated.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of a concealable
firearm if he/she has any concealable firearm in his/her possession and:
1. He/she has pled guilty to or has been convicted of a dangerous
felony, as defined in Section 556.061, RSMo., or of any attempt to
commit a dangerous felony, or of a crime under the laws of any
State or of the United States which, if committed within this State,
would be a dangerous felony, or confined therefor in this State or
elsewhere during the five (5) year period immediately preceding
the date of such possession; or
2. He/she is a fugitive from justice, is habitually in an intoxicated or
drugged condition, or is currently adjudged mentally incompetent.
38.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
39.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.255
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.280
100:212
Section 215.280. Carrying Concealed Firearms Prohibited —
Penalty For Violation.
A. It shall be a violation of this Section, punishable as hereinafter
provided, for any person to carry any concealed firearm into:
1. Any Police, Sheriff or Highway Patrol office or station without the
consent of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer in charge of that
office or station. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises of the office or station shall not be a criminal offense so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises.
2. Within twenty-five (25) feet of any polling place on any election day.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of the polling
place shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not
removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the
premises.
3. The facility of any adult or juvenile detention or correctional
institution, prison or jail. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises of any adult, juvenile detention or correctional institution,
prison or jail shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises.
4. Any courthouse solely occupied by the Circuit, Appellate or
Supreme Court, or any courtrooms, administrative offices, libraries
or other rooms of any such court whether or not such court solely
occupies the building in question. This Subdivision shall also
include, but not be limited to, any juvenile, family, drug or other
court offices, any room or office wherein any of the courts or offices
listed in this Subdivision are temporarily conducting any business
within the jurisdiction of such courts or offices, and such other
locations in such manner as may be specified by Supreme Court
Rule pursuant to Subdivision (6) of this Subsection. Nothing in this
Subdivision shall preclude those persons listed in Subsection (B)(1)
of Section 215.250 while within their jurisdiction and on duty, those
persons listed in Subsections (B)(2) and (3) of Section 215.250, or
such other persons who serve in a law enforcement capacity for a
court as may be specified by Supreme Court Rule pursuant to
Subdivision (6) of this Subsection from carrying a concealed
firearm within any of the areas described in this Subdivision.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any of the
areas listed in this Subdivision shall not be a criminal offense so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises.
5. Any meeting of the City Council. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle
on the premises shall not be a criminal offense so long as the
Section
215.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.280
100:213
firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the
vehicle is on the premises.
6. Any building owned, leased or controlled by the City of O'Fallon
identified by signs posted at the entrance to the building. This
Subsection shall not apply to any building used for public housing
by private persons, highways or rest areas, firing ranges, and
private dwellings owned, leased, or controlled by the City of
O'Fallon. Persons violating this Subsection may be denied entrance
to the building, ordered to leave the building and, if employees of
the City, be subjected to disciplinary measures for violation.
7. Any establishment licensed to dispense intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating
beer for consumption on the premises, which portion is
primarily devoted to that purpose, without the consent of the owner
or manager. The provisions of this Subdivision shall not apply to the
licensee of said establishment. The provisions of this Subdivision
shall not apply to any bona fide restaurant open to the general
public having dining facilities for not less than fifty (50) persons
and that receives at least fifty-one percent (51%) of its gross annual
income from the dining facilities by the sale of food. This
Subdivision does not prohibit the possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the establishment and shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. Nothing
in this Subdivision authorizes any individual who has been issued a
concealed carry endorsement to possess any firearm while
intoxicated.
8. Any area of an airport to which access is controlled by the
inspection of persons and property. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the airport shall not be a violation so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises.
9. Any place where the carrying of a firearm is prohibited by Federal
law.
10. Any higher education institution or elementary or secondary school
facility without the consent of the Governing Body of the higher
education institution or a school official or the district school board.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any higher
education institution or elementary or secondary school facility
shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed
from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
11. Any portion of a building used as a child care facility without the
consent of the manager. Nothing in this Subdivision shall prevent
the operator of a child care facility in a family home from owning or
possessing a firearm or a driver's license or non-driver's license
containing a concealed carry endorsement.
Section
215.280
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.280
100:214
12. Any riverboat gambling operation accessible by the public without
the consent of the owner or manager pursuant to rules
promulgated by the Gaming Commission. Possession of a firearm in
a vehicle on the premises of a riverboat gambling operation shall
not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
13. Any gated area of an amusement park. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the amusement park shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
14. Any church or other place of religious worship without the consent
of the minister or person or persons representing the religious
organization that exercises control over the place of religious
worship. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall
not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
15. Any private property whose owner has posted the premises as
being off-limits to concealed firearms by means of one (1) or more
signs displayed in a conspicuous place of a minimum size of eleven
(11) inches by fourteen (14) inches with the writing thereon in
letters of not less than one (1) inch. The owner, business or
commercial lessee, manager of a private business enterprise, or
any other organization, entity or person may prohibit persons
holding a concealed carry endorsement from carrying concealed
firearms on the premises and may prohibit employees, not
authorized by the employer, holding a concealed carry
endorsement from carrying concealed firearms on the property of
the employer. If the building or the premises are open to the public,
the employer of the business enterprise shall post signs on or about
the premises if carrying a concealed firearm is prohibited.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. An
employer may prohibit employees or other persons holding a
concealed carry endorsement from carrying a concealed firearm in
vehicles owned by the employer.
16. Any sports arena or stadium with a seating capacity of five
thousand (5,000) or more. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on
the premises shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises.
17. Any hospital accessible by the public. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of a hospital shall not be a criminal offense
so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or
brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
Section
215.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.280
100:215
Section 215.285. Discharging Air Gun, Etc.
Any person within the limits of this City who shall discharge any BB gun
which expels a projectile by means of a spring, air or any other means,
paintball gun or air gun or shall shoot any pebble, bullet, slug, arrow or
other hard substance by means of a sling, crossbow, rubber band or bow or
any other means shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation.
Section 215.286. "Turkey Shoots" and Other Charitable Events.
The discharge of firearms in connection with any turkey shoots or other
charitable event may be authorized by the City Council.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection (A) of this
Section shall be punished as follows:
1. If the violator holds a concealed carry endorsement issued
pursuant to State law, the violator may be subject to denial to the
premises or removal from the premises. If such person refuses to
leave the premises and a Peace Officer is summoned, such person
may be issued a citation for an amount not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the first (1st) offense. If a second (2nd)
citation for a similar violation occurs within a six (6) month period,
such person shall be fined an amount not to exceed two hundred
dollars ($200.00). If a third (3rd) citation for a similar violation is
issued within one (1) year of the first (1st) citation such person
shall be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00). Upon conviction of charges arising from a citation
issued pursuant to this Section, the court shall notify the Sheriff of
the County which issued the certificate of qualification for a
concealed carry endorsement and the Department of Revenue.
2. If the violator does not hold a current valid concealed carry
endorsement issued pursuant to State law, upon conviction of a
charge of violating this Section the defendant shall be punished as
provided in Section 100.010 of this Code of Ordinances.
3. Employees of the City of O'Fallon may, in addition to any other
punishment hereby, be subject to disciplinary action.
C. It shall be a violation of this Section, punishable by a citation for an
amount not to exceed thirty-five dollars ($35.00), for any person issued
a concealed carry endorsement pursuant to State law to fail to carry the
concealed carry endorsement at all times the person is carrying a
concealed firearm, or to fail to display the concealed carry endorsement
upon the request of any Peace Officer.
Section
215.280
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.286
100:216
ARTICLE VII
Offenses Concerning Property
Section 215.290. Tampering.40
Section 215.300. Property Damage.41
Section 215.305. Depositing, Etc., Dirt, Rock, Etc., Upon Public
Roads or Property. [R.O. 2007 §220.290; Ord. No. 1180 §§2—8,
12-4-1984]
A. A person commits the offense of tampering if he/she:
1. Tampers with property of another for the purpose of causing
substantial inconvenience to that person or to another;
2. Unlawfully rides in or upon another's automobile, airplane,
motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle;
3. Tampers or makes connection with property of a utility; or
4. Tampers with, or causes to be tampered with, any meter or other
property of an electric, gas, steam or water utility, the effect of
which tampering is either:
a. To prevent the proper measuring of electric, gas, steam or
water service; or
b. To permit the diversion of any electric, gas, steam or water
service.
B. In any prosecution under paragraph (4) of Subsection (A), proof that a
meter or any other property of a utility has been tampered with, and the
person or persons accused received the use or direct benefit of the
electric, gas, steam or water service with one (1) or more of the effects
described in paragraph (4) of Subsection (A), shall be sufficient to
support an inference which the trial court may submit to the trier of fact
from which the trier of fact may conclude that there has been a
violation of such subdivision by the person or persons who use or
receive the direct benefit of the electric, gas, steam or water service.
A. A person commits the offense of property damage if:
1. He/she knowingly damages property of another; or
2. He/she damages property for the purpose of defrauding an insurer.
A. No person shall engage in any land disturbing activity or any other
action which causes or permits any soil, mud, earth, sand, gravel, rock,
stone, concrete, or other materials, or liquids to be deposited, dropped
40.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
41.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.305
100:217
Section 215.310. Claim of Right.
Section 215.320. Trespass in The First Degree.42
upon, or to roll, flow, stand, or wash upon or over any public street,
street improvement, road, sewer, storm drain, watercourse, right-ofway,
or any other public property in a manner to interfere with the use
of such property, or which creates a nuisance or a hazardous condition
which is detrimental to the property, health, safety and welfare of the
public.
B. No person shall, when hauling soil, earth, sand, gravel, mud, rock,
stone, concrete, building materials or any other materials or liquids,
over any public street, road, alley, allow such materials or liquids to
blow, drop, be placed or spill over and upon such street, road, alley,
public property without permission from the City.
C. The operator of equipment engaged in hauling shall not permit soil,
mud, earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone, concrete, or other materials to fall
from the vehicle or equipment, upon any street, road, alley or public
property without written permission from the City.
D. No person shall operate a vehicle hauling rock, sand, gravel, dirt or
similar material over any street or roadway unless there is a tarp, or
similar covering, pulled over the load, or unless permission is obtained
from the City.
E. All matter or objects described in this Section shall be immediately
removed in a prompt and on-going manner as it occurs, and not as a
cumulative effort at the end of the day or project.
F. Any person who causes any soil, mud, earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone,
concrete or other materials or liquids to be deposited or to roll, flow,
wash or drop onto any public street, road, alley or other public property
shall be directed to immediately remove such materials or liquids; and
any person failing or refusing to do so shall be issued a summons or
warrant to appear in O'Fallon Municipal Court.
G. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this Section shall
be subject upon conviction, to a penalty as prescribed in Section
100.010 of this Code, as well as the costs of removal of the materials or
liquids from the street, road or public property. Each person and each
vehicle load involved will constitute a separate violation.
A. A person does not commit an offense by damaging, tampering with,
operating, riding in or upon or making connection with property of
another if he/she does so under a claim of right and has reasonable
grounds to believe he/she has such a right.
B. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of claim of
right.
Section
215.305
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.320
100:218
Section 215.330. Trespass in The Second Degree.
Section 215.335. Trespass of A School Bus.
A person commits the offense of trespass of a school bus if he/she knowingly
and unlawfully enters any part of or unlawfully operates any school bus.
Section 215.340. Reckless Burning or Exploding.
A person commits the offense of reckless burning or exploding when he/
she knowingly starts a fire or causes an explosion and thereby recklessly
damages or destroys a building or an inhabitable structure of another.
Section 215.350. Negligent Burning or Exploding.
A person commits the offense of negligent burning or exploding when he/
she with criminal negligence causes damage to property of another by fire
or explosion.
Section 215.360. Stealing.43
A. A person commits the offense of trespass in the first degree if he/she
knowingly enters unlawfully or knowingly remains unlawfully in a
building or inhabitable structure or upon real property.
B. A person does not commit the offense of trespass by entering or
remaining upon real property unless the real property is fenced or
otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or as to
which notice against trespass is given by:
1. Actual communication to the actor; or
2. Posting in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of
intruders.
A. A person commits the offense of trespass in the second degree if he/she
enters unlawfully upon real property of another. This is an offense of
absolute liability.
B. Trespass in the second degree is an infraction.
A. A person commits the offense of stealing if he/she appropriates
property or services of another with the purpose to deprive him/her
thereof, either without his/her consent or by means of deceit or
coercion.
B. Evidence of the following is admissible in any prosecution pursuant to
this Section on the issue of the requisite knowledge or belief of the
alleged stealer that:
42.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
43.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.360
100:219
Section 215.365. Theft of Motor Fuel.
Section 215.370. Receiving Stolen Property.44
1. He/she failed or refused to pay for property or services of a hotel,
restaurant, inn or boarding house;
2. He/she gave in payment for property or services of a hotel,
restaurant, inn or boarding house a check or negotiable paper on
which payment was refused;
3. He/she left the hotel, restaurant, inn or boarding house with the
intent to not pay for property or services;
4. He/she surreptitiously removed or attempted to remove his/her
baggage from a hotel, inn or boarding house; or
5. He/she, with intent to cheat or defraud a retailer, possesses, uses,
utters, transfers, makes, alters, counterfeits or reproduces a retail
sales receipt, price tag or universal price code label or possesses,
with intent to cheat or defraud, the device that manufactures
fraudulent receipts or universal price code labels.
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle so as to cause it to leave the
premises of an establishment at which motor fuel offered for retail sale
was dispensed into the fuel tank of such motor vehicle unless payment
or authorized charge for motor fuel dispensed has been made.
B. A person found guilty or pleading guilty to stealing pursuant to Section
215.360 for the theft of motor fuel as described in Subsection (A) shall
have his/her driver's license suspended by the court beginning on the
date of the court's order of conviction. The person shall submit all of
his/her operator's and chauffeur's licenses to the court upon conviction
and the court shall forward all such driver's licenses and the order of
suspension of driving privileges to the Department of Revenue for
administration of such order.
A. A person commits the offense of receiving stolen property if, for the
purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest therein, he/she
receives, retains or disposes of property of another knowing that it has
been stolen or believing that it has been stolen.
B. Evidence of the following is admissible in any criminal prosecution
pursuant to this Section to prove the requisite knowledge or belief of
the alleged receiver that:
1. He/she was found in possession or control of other property stolen
on separate occasions from two (2) or more persons;
44.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.360
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.370
100:220
Section 215.375. Financial Exploitation of The Elderly and
Disabled.45
2. He/she received other stolen property in another transaction within
the year preceding the transaction charged;
3. He/she acquired the stolen property for a consideration which he/
she knew was far below its reasonable value; or
4. He/she obtained control over stolen property knowing the property
to have been stolen or under such circumstances as would
reasonably induce a person to believe the property was stolen.
A. A person commits the offense of financial exploitation of an elderly or
disabled person if such person knowingly and by deception,
intimidation or force obtains control over the elderly or disabled
person's property with the intent to permanently deprive the elderly or
disabled person of the use, benefit or possession of his/her property
thereby benefiting such person or detrimentally affecting the elderly or
disabled person. Financial exploitation of an elderly or disabled person
is an ordinance violation if the value of the property is less than fifty
dollars ($50.00).
B. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these
prescribed meanings:
DECEPTION — A misrepresentation or concealment of material fact
relating to the terms of a contract or agreement entered into with the
elderly or disabled person or to the existing or pre-existing condition of
any of the property involved in such contract or agreement or the use or
employment of any misrepresentation, false pretense or false promise
in order to induce, encourage or solicit the elderly or disabled person
to enter into a contract or agreement.
"Deception" includes:
Creating or confirming another person's impression which is false
and which the offender does not believe to be true.
1.
Failure to correct a false impression which the offender previously
has created or confirmed.
2.
Preventing another person from acquiring information pertinent to
the disposition of the property involved.
3.
Selling or otherwise transferring or encumbering property, failing
to disclose a lien, adverse claim or other legal impediment to the
enjoyment of the property, whether such impediment is or is not
valid or is or is not a matter of official record.
4.
Promising performance which the offender does not intend to
perform or knows will not be performed. Failure to perform
5.
45.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.370
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.375
100:221
Section 215.380. Fraudulent Use of A Credit or Debit Device.46
DISABLED PERSON — A person with a mental, physical or
developmental disability that substantially impairs the person's ability
to provide adequately for the person's care or protection.
ELDERLY PERSON — A person sixty (60) years of age or older.
INTIMIDATION — A threat of physical or emotional harm to an elderly
or disabled person, or the communication to an elderly or disabled
person that he/she will be deprived of food and nutrition, shelter,
prescribed medication, or medical care and treatment.
standing alone is not sufficient evidence to prove that the offender
did not intend to perform.
C. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the remedies
available to the victim pursuant to any State law relating to domestic
violence.
D. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to impose criminal liability on
a person who has made a good faith effort to assist the elderly or
disabled person in the management of his/her property, but through no
fault of his/her own has been unable to provide such assistance.
E. Nothing in this Section shall limit the ability to engage in bona fide
estate planning, to transfer property, and to otherwise seek to reduce
estate and inheritance taxes; provided that such actions do not
adversely impact the standard of living to which the elderly or disabled
person has become accustomed at the time of such actions.
F. It shall not be a defense to financial exploitation of an elderly or
disabled person that the accused reasonably believed that the victim
was not an elderly or disabled person.
A. A person commits the offense of fraudulent use of a credit device or
debit device if the person uses a credit device or debit device for the
purpose of obtaining services or property knowing that:
1. The device is stolen, fictitious or forged;
2. The device has been revoked or canceled;
3. For any other reason his/her use of the device is unauthorized; or
4. Uses a credit device or debit device for the purpose of paying
property taxes and knowingly cancels said charges or payment
without just cause. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this Section if a person cancels said charges or payment after
obtaining a property tax receipt to obtain license tags from the
Missouri Department of Revenue.
46.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.375
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.390
100:222
Section 215.390. Deceptive Business Practice.
Section 215.400. Alteration or Removal of Item Numbers With
Intent To Deprive Lawful Owner.47
Section 215.410. Failure To Return Rented Personal Property —
Enforcement Procedure — Penalty — Venue.48
A. A person commits the offense of deceptive business practice if in the
course of engaging in a business, occupation or profession he/she
recklessly:
1. Uses or possesses for use a false weight or measure or any other
device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity;
2. Sells, offers or exposes for sale or delivers less than the
represented quantity of any commodity or service;
3. Takes or attempts to take more than the represented quantity of
any commodity or service when as buyer he/she furnishes the
weight or measure;
4. Sells, offers or exposes for sale adulterated or mislabeled
commodities; or
5. Makes a false or misleading written statement for the purpose of
obtaining property or credit.
A. A person commits the offense of alteration or removal of item numbers
if he/she with the purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest
therein:
1. Destroys, removes, covers, conceals, alters, defaces or causes to be
destroyed, removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced the
manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing
owner-applied number or mark on any item which bears a serial
number attached by the manufacturer or distinguishing number or
mark applied by the owner of the item for any reason whatsoever;
2. Sells, offers for sale, pawns or uses as security for a loan any item
on which the manufacturer's original serial number or other
distinguishing owner-applied number or mark has been destroyed,
removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced; or
3. Buys, receives as security for a loan or in pawn, or in any manner
receives or has in his/her possession any item on which the
manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing
owner-applied number or mark has been destroyed, removed,
covered, concealed, altered or defaced.
47.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
48.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.390
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.410
100:223
A. A person commits the offense of failing to return leased or rented
property if, with the intent to deprive the owner thereof, he/she
purposefully fails to return leased or rented personal property to the
place and within the time specified in an agreement in writing providing
for the leasing or renting of such personal property. In addition, any
person who has leased or rented personal property of another, who
conceals the property from the owner or who otherwise sells, pawns,
loans, abandons or gives away the leased or rented property is guilty of
the offense of failing to return leased or rented property. The provisions
of this Section shall apply to all forms of leasing and rental agreements
including, but not limited to, contracts which provide the consumer
options to buy the leased or rented personal property, lease-purchase
agreements and rent-to-own contracts. For the purpose of determining
if a violation of this Section has occurred, leasing contracts which
provide options to buy the merchandise are owned by the owner of the
property until such time as the owner endorses the sale and transfer of
ownership of the leased property to the lessee.
B. It shall be prima facie evidence of the offense of failing to return leased
or rented property when a person who has leased or rented personal
property of another willfully fails to return or make arrangements
acceptable with the lessor to return the personal property to its owner
at the owner's place of business within ten (10) days after proper notice
following the expiration of the lease or rental agreement, except that if
the motor vehicle has not been returned within seventy-two (72) hours
after the expiration of the lease or rental agreement, such failure to
return the motor vehicle shall be prima facie evidence of the intent of
the offense of failing to return leased or rented property. Where the
leased or rented property is a motor vehicle, if the motor vehicle has not
been returned within seventy-two (72) hours after the expiration of the
lease or rental agreement, the lessor may notify the local law
enforcement agency of the failure of the lessee to return such motor
vehicle, and the local law enforcement agency shall cause such motor
vehicle to be put into any appropriate State and local computer system
listing stolen motor vehicles. Any Law Enforcement Officer which stops
such a motor vehicle may seize the motor vehicle and notify the lessor
that he/she may recover such motor vehicle after it is photographed and
its vehicle identification number is recorded for evidentiary purposes.
Where the leased or rented property is not a motor vehicle, if such
property has not been returned within the ten (10) day period
prescribed in this Subsection, the owner of the property shall report the
failure to return the property to the local law enforcement agency, and
such law enforcement agency may within five (5) days notify the person
who leased or rented the property that such person is in violation of this
Section, and that failure to immediately return the property may
subject such person to arrest for the violation.
C. This Section shall not apply if such personal property is a vehicle and
such return is made more difficult or expensive by a defect in such
vehicle which renders such vehicle inoperable if the lessee shall notify
Section
215.410
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.410
100:224
Section 215.420. Passing Bad Checks.49
the lessor of the location of such vehicle and such defect before the
expiration of the lease or rental agreement or within ten (10) days after
proper notice.
D. Proper notice by the lessor shall consist of a written demand addressed
and mailed by certified or registered mail to the lessee at the address
given at the time of making the lease or rental agreement. The notice
shall contain a statement that the failure to return the property may
subject the lessee to criminal prosecution.
E. Any person who has leased or rented personal property of another who
destroys such property so as to avoid returning it to the owner shall be
guilty of property damage pursuant to Section 215.300 in addition to
being in violation of this Section.
F. Venue shall lie in the County where the personal property was originally
rented or leased.
A. A person commits the offense of passing a bad check when:
1. With purpose to defraud, the person makes, issues or passes a
check or other similar sight order or any other form of presentment
involving the transmission of account information for the payment
of money knowing that it will not be paid by the drawee or that
there is no such drawee; or
2. The person makes, issues or passes a check or other similar sight
order or any other form of presentment involving the transmission
of account information for the payment of money, knowing that
there are insufficient funds in or on deposit with that account for
the payment of such check, sight order or other form of
presentment involving the transmission of account information in
full and all other checks, sight orders or other forms of
presentment involving the transmission of account information
upon such funds then outstanding, or that there is no such account
or no drawee and fails to pay the check or sight order or other form
of presentment involving the transmission of account information
within ten (10) days after receiving actual notice in writing that it
has not been paid because of insufficient funds or credit with the
drawee or because there is no such drawee.
B. As used in Subparagraph (2) of Subsection (A) of this Section, "actual
notice in writing" means notice of the non-payment which is actually
received by the defendant. Such notice may include the service of
summons or warrant upon the defendant for the initiation of the
prosecution of the check or checks which are the subject matter of the
prosecution if the summons or warrant contains information of the ten
49.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.410
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.420
100:225
Section 215.425. Shoplifting — Detention of Suspect By Merchant
— Liability Presumption.
(10) day period during which the instrument may be paid and that
payment of the instrument within such ten (10) day period will result
in dismissal of the charges. The requirement of notice shall also be
satisfied for written communications which are tendered to the
defendant and which the defendant refuses to accept.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT — Any mercantile place of business
in, at or from which goods, wares and merchandise are sold, offered for
sale or delivered from and sold at retail or wholesale.
MERCHANDISE — All goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale
or displayed by a merchant.
MERCHANT — Any corporation, partnership, association or person
who is engaged in the business of selling goods, wares and merchandise
in a mercantile establishment.
WRONGFUL TAKING — Includes stealing of merchandise or money and
any other wrongful appropriation of merchandise or money.
B. Any merchant, his/her agent or employee, who has reasonable grounds
or probable cause to believe that a person has committed or is
committing a wrongful taking of merchandise or money from a
mercantile establishment, may detain such person in a reasonable
manner and for a reasonable length of time for the purpose of
investigating whether there has been a wrongful taking of such
merchandise or money. Any such reasonable detention shall not
constitute an unlawful arrest or detention, nor shall it render the
merchant, his/her agent or employee criminally or civilly liable to the
person so detained.
C. Any person willfully concealing unpurchased merchandise of any
mercantile establishment, either on the premises or outside the
premises of such establishment, shall be presumed to have so
concealed such merchandise with the intention of committing a
wrongful taking of such merchandise within the meaning of Subsection
(A), and the finding of such unpurchased merchandise concealed upon
the person or among the belongings of such person shall be evidence of
reasonable grounds and probable cause for the detention in a
reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time of such person
by a merchant, his/her agent or employee in order that recovery of such
merchandise may be effected, and any such reasonable detention shall
not be deemed to be unlawful nor render such merchant, his/her agent
or employee criminally or civilly liable.
Section
215.420
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.425
100:226
ARTICLE VIII
Offenses Concerning Prostitution and Morals
Section 215.430. Article Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:
PATRONIZING PROSTITUTION — A person patronizes prostitution if:
PROSTITUTION — A person commits prostitution if he/she engages or
offers or agrees to engage in sexual conduct with another person in return
for something of value to be received by the person or by a third (3rd)
person.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Occurs when there is:
SOMETHING OF VALUE — Money or property or any token, object or
article exchangeable for money or property.
Section 215.440. Prostitution.50
A person commits the offense of prostitution if the person performs an act
of prostitution.
Section 215.450. Patronizing Prostitution.51
Pursuant to a prior understanding, he/she gives something of value to
another person as compensation for that person or a third (3rd) person
having engaged in sexual conduct with him/her or with another;
1.
He/she gives or agrees to give something of value to another person on
an understanding that in return therefor that person or a third (3rd)
person will engage in sexual conduct with him/her or with another; or
2.
He/she solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual conduct
with him/her or with another, or to secure a third (3rd) person to
engage in sexual conduct with him/her or with another, in return for
something of value.
3.
Sexual intercourse. Any penetration, however slight, of the female sex
organ by the male sex organ, whether or not an emission results.
1.
Deviate sexual intercourse. Any sexual act involving the genitals of one
(1) person and the mouth, hand, tongue or anus of another person.
2.
Sexual contact. Any touching, manual or otherwise, of the anus or
genitals of one (1) person by another done for the purpose of arousing
or gratifying sexual desire of either party.
3.
A. A person commits the offense of patronizing prostitution if he/she
patronizes prostitution.
50.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
51.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.430
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.450
100:227
Section 215.460. Prostitution and Patronizing Prostitution — Sex of
Parties No Defense, When.
Section 215.463. Prostitution Houses Deemed Public Nuisances.
Section 215.465. Prohibiting Urination and Defecation in Any Place
Open To Public View. [R.O. 2007 §215.350; Ord. No. 4508 §1,
4-21-2003]
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any place open
to public view other than in proper receptacles of public or private comfort
stations, restrooms, toilets or other similar facilities.
Section 215.467. Public Indecency. [R.O. 2007 §215.355; Ord. No.
4576 §§1—3, 10-15-2003]
B. It shall not be an affirmative defense that the defendant believed that
the person he/she patronized for prostitution was eighteen (18) years of
age or older.
A. In any prosecution for prostitution or patronizing a prostitute, the sex of
the two (2) parties or prospective parties to the sexual conduct engaged
in, contemplated or solicited is immaterial, and it is no defense that:
1. Both persons were of the same sex; or
2. The person who received, agreed to receive or solicited something
of value was a male and the person who gave or agreed or offered
to give something of value was a female.
A. Any room, building or other structure regularly used for sexual contact
for pay as defined in Section 215.430 or any unlawful prostitution
activity prohibited by this Article is a public nuisance.
B. The City Prosecuting Attorney may, in addition to all other sanctions,
prosecute a suit in equity to enjoin the nuisance. If the court finds that
the owner of the room, building or structure knew or had reason to
believe that the premises were being used regularly for sexual contact
for pay or unlawful prostitution activity, the court may order that the
premises shall not be occupied or used for such period as the court may
determine, not to exceed one (1) year.
C. All persons, including owners, lessees, officers, agents, inmates or
employees, aiding or facilitating such a nuisance may be made
defendants in any suit to enjoin the nuisance, and they may be enjoined
from engaging in any sexual contact for pay or unlawful prostitution
activity anywhere within the jurisdiction of the court.
D. Appeals shall be allowed from the judgment of the court as in other civil
actions.
Section
215.450
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.467
100:228
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in a public place or in public
view, to engage in human sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, masturbation, urination or defecation, exhibition of the
genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or
exhibition of the breasts of a female. These activities are banned at all
times in a City park, whether in the public view or not. Anyone who
commits any act proscribed by Subsection (A) shall be guilty of unlawful
public indecency.
B. Subsection (A) shall not apply to artistic or dramatic performances,
which are not unlawful under State law or Municipal Code, or to
exposure necessarily incident to breastfeeding an infant, nor to the
exposure of the breast of a pre-pubescent female.
C. The offense of "public indecency" shall be an ordinance violation and
shall be punishable as provided in Section 100.010 of the Municipal
Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
Section
215.467
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.467
100:229

ARTICLE IX
Sexual Offenses
Section 215.470. Article Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
DEVIATE SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any act involving the genitals of one
person and the hand, mouth, tongue, or anus of another person or a sexual
act involving the penetration, however slight, of the male or female sex
organ or the anus by a finger, instrument or object done for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person or for the purpose of
terrorizing the victim.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Sexual intercourse, deviate sexual intercourse or
sexual contact.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Any touching of another person with the genitals or
any touching of the genitals or anus of another person, or the breast of a
female person, or such touching through the clothing, for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying sexual desire of any person.
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any penetration, however slight, of the female
sex organ by the male sex organ, whether or not an emission results.
Section 215.475. Indecent Exposure (Sexual Misconduct).
Section 215.480. Sexual Misconduct.52
A person commits the offense of sexual misconduct in the first degree if
such person purposely subjects another person to sexual contact without
that person's consent.
Section 215.485. Residency and Loitering Limitations For Sex
Offenders. [R.O. 2007 §215.255; Ord. No. 5075 §1, 9-28-2006; Ord.
No. 5639 §1, 11-18-2010]
A. A person commits the offense of indecent exposure (sexual misconduct)
if such person:
1. Exposes his/her genitals under circumstances in which he/she
knows that his/her conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm;
2. Has sexual contact in the presence of a third (3rd) person or
persons under circumstances in which he/she knows that such
conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm; or
3. Has sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse in a public
place in the presence of a third (3rd) person.
52.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.470
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.485
100:231
A. Any person who,
1. Since September 28, 2006, has been or hereafter has pleaded
guilty or nolo contendere to, or been convicted of, or been found
guilty of violating any of the provisions of:
a. Chapter 566, RSMo.; or
b. The provisions of Subsection (2) of Section 568.020, RSMo.,
incest; or
c. Section 568.045, RSMo., endangering the welfare of a child in
the first degree; or
d. Subsection (2) of Section 568.080, RSMo., use of a child in a
sexual performance; or
e. Section 568.090, RSMo., promoting a sexual performance by a
child; or
f. Section 573.023, RSMo., sexual exploitation of a minor; or
g. Section 573.025, RSMo., promoting child pornography in the
first degree; or
h. Section 573.035, RSMo., promoting child pornography in the
second degree; or
i. Section 573.037, RSMo., possession of child pornography; or
j. Section 573.040, RSMo., furnishing pornographic material to
minors; and
2. Any person required to register with the Chief Law Enforcement
Official of the County in which such person resides pursuant to the
provisions of Sections 589.400 et seq., RSMo., shall not reside
within three thousand (3,000) feet of any public school as defined in
Section 160.011, RSMo., or any private school giving instruction in
a grade or grades not higher than the twelfth (12th) grade, or
public library, or public park, or pool open to the general public, or
within two thousand (2,000) feet of any child care facility as defined
in Section 215.201, RSMo., which is in existence at the time the
individual begins to reside at the location.
B. If such person has already established a residence and a public school,
a private school, a child care facility, a public library, a public park or a
pool open to the general public is subsequently built or placed within
the requisite distance of such person's residence, then such person
shall, within one (1) week of the opening of such public school, private
school, public library, public park, pool or child care facility, notify the
Chief of Police that he or she is now residing within three thousand
(3,000) feet of such public school, private school, public library, public
park or pool, or within two thousand (2,000) feet of such child care
Section
215.485
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.485
100:232
facility and shall provide verifiable proof to the Chief that he or she
resided there prior to the opening of such public school, private school,
public library, public park, pool or child care facility.
C. For purposes of this Section:
1. "Resides" means sleeps in a residence, which may include more
than one (1) location and may be mobile or transitory; and
2. The requisite distance between the relevant facility and the
residence in question shall be measured by the straight line
distance between the nearest point on the property boundary line
of the property upon which the relevant facility is located and the
nearest point on the boundary line of the property upon which the
residence is located.
D. Any person who since September 28, 2006 has pleaded guilty or nolo
contendere to, or been convicted of, or been found guilty of violating
any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or the provisions of
Subsection (2) of Section 568.020, RSMo., incest; Section 568.045,
RSMo., endangering the welfare of a child in the first degree;
Subsection (2) of Section 568.080, RSMo., use of a child in a sexual
performance; Section 568.090, RSMo., promoting a sexual performance
by a child; Section 573.023, RSMo., sexual exploitation of a minor;
Section 573.025, RSMo., promoting child pornography; or Section
573.040, RSMo., furnishing pornographic material to minors shall not
be present in or loiter within five hundred (500) feet of any school
building, on real property comprising any school, or in any conveyance
owned, leased or contracted by a school to transport students to or
from school or a school-related activity when persons under the age of
eighteen (18) are present in the building, on the grounds or in the
conveyance, unless the offender is a parent, legal guardian or custodian
of a student present in the building and has met the conditions set forth
in Subsection (E) of this Section.
E. No parent, legal guardian or custodian who has pleaded guilty or nolo
contendere to, or been convicted of, or been found guilty of violating
any of the offenses listed in Subsection (D) of this Section shall be
present in any school building, on real property comprising any school,
or in any conveyance owned, leased or contracted by a school to
transport students to or from school or a school-related activity when
persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present in the building, on
the grounds or in the conveyance unless the parent, legal guardian or
custodian has permission to be present from the Superintendent or
school board or, in the case of a private school, from the principal. In
the case of a public school, if permission is granted, the Superintendent
or school board President must inform the principal of the school where
the sex offender will be present. Permission may be granted by the
Superintendent, school board or, in the case of a private school, from
the principal for more than one (1) event at a time, such as a series of
events; however, the parent, legal guardian or custodian must obtain
Section
215.485
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.485
100:233
permission for any other event he or she wishes to attend for which he
or she has not yet had permission granted.
F. Any person who since June 6, 2006 has pleaded guilty or nolo
contendere to, or been convicted of, or been found guilty of violating
any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or the provisions of
Subsection (2) of Section 568.020, RSMo., incest; Section 568.045,
RSMo., endangering the welfare of a child in the first degree;
Subsection (2) of Section 568.080, RSMo., use of a child in a sexual
performance; Section 568.090, RSMo., promoting a sexual performance
by a child; Section 573.023, RSMo., sexual exploitation of a minor;
Section 573.025, RSMo., promoting child pornography in the first
degree; Section 573.035, RSMo., promoting child pornography in the
second degree; Section 573.037, RSMo., possession of child
pornography, or Section 573.040, RSMo., furnishing pornographic
material to minors; shall not knowingly be physically present in or loiter
within five hundred (500) feet of or to approach, contact or
communicate with any child under eighteen (18) years of age in any
child care facility as defined in Section 201.201, RSMo., on the real
property comprising any child care facility when persons under the age
of eighteen (18) are present in the building on the grounds, or in the
conveyance, unless the offender is a parent, legal guardian or custodian
of a student present in the building or on the grounds.
G. Any person who since August 28, 2009 has pleaded guilty to, or been
convicted of, or been found guilty of violating any of the provisions of
Chapter 566, RSMo., or the provisions of Subsection (2) of Section
568.020, RSMo., incest; Section 568.045, RSMo., endangering the
welfare of a child in the first degree; Subsection (2) of Section 568.080,
RSMo., use of a child in a sexual performance; Section 568.090, RSMo.,
promoting a sexual performance by a child; Section 573.023, RSMo.,
sexual exploitation of a minor; Section 573.025, RSMo., promoting child
pornography; or Section 573.040, RSMo., furnishing pornographic
material to minors; shall not serve as an athletic coach, manager or
athletic trainer for any sports team in which a child less than seventeen
(17) years of age is a member.
H. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be
punished as provided in Section 100.010 of this Code of Ordinances.
Section
215.485
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.485
100:234
ARTICLE X
Offenses Concerning Pornography
Section 215.487. Authority. [R.O. 2007 §217.010; Ord. No. 4084 §1,
7-14-2000]
The City of O'Fallon has the authority, pursuant to the provisions of Sections
79.450 and 573.010 et seq., RSMo., to adopt and enforce reasonable
regulations of businesses within its City limits in regard to the display, lease
or sale of patently obscene materials.
Section 215.490. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §217.020; Ord. No. 4084
§2, 7-14-2000]
When used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set
out herein:
DISPLAYS PUBLICLY — Exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting or in any
fashion displaying in any public location, whether public or private, an item
in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character
distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street, highway or
public sidewalk, or from the property of others, or from any portion of the
person's store or the exhibitor's store or property when items and material
other than this material are offered for sale or rent to the public.
EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIAL — Any pictorial or three (3) dimensional
material depicting human masturbation, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual
intercourse, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals,
sadomasochistic abuse, or emphasizing the depiction of post-pubertal
human genitals; provided however, that works of art or of anthropological
significance shall not be deemed to be within the foregoing definition.
FURNISH — To issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer,
circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or otherwise provide.
MATERIAL — Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture film, videotape or videotape production, or
pictorial representation, or any statue or other figure, or any recording or
transcription, or any mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or
anything which is or may be used as a means of communication. "Material"
includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates and other latent
representational objects.
MINOR — Any person under the age of eighteen (18).
NUDITY — The showing of post-pubertal human genitals or pubic area,
buttocks, with less than a fully opaque covering.
OBSCENE — Any material or performance if:
Applying contemporary community standards, its predominant appeal
is to prurient interest in sex;
1.
Section
215.487
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.490
100:235
PERFORMANCE — Any play, motion picture film, videotape, dance or
exhibition performed before an audience of one (1) or more.
PORNOGRAPHIC FOR MINORS — Any material or performance if:
PROMOTE — To manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer,
transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or
advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Actual or simulated, normal or perverted acts of
human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse; sexual intercourse, or
physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, or the breast of a female in an act of apparent sexual stimulation
or gratification, or acts including animals or any latent objects in an act of
apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Section 215.500. Promoting Pornography For Minors or
Obscenity.53
Taken as a whole with the average person applying contemporary
community standards, it depicts or describes sexual conduct in a
patently offensive way; and
2.
Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value.
3.
The average person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the material or performance has an appeal to a prurient
interest of minors;
1.
The material or performance depicts or describes nudity, sexual
conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse in a way which is
patently offensive to the average person applying contemporary adult
community standards with respect to what is suitable to minors; and
2.
The material or performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value for minors.
3.
A. A person commits the offense of promoting pornography for minors or
obscenity if, knowing its content or character, he/she:
1. Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any obscene
materials for pecuniary gain;
2. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any obscene
performance for pecuniary gain;
53.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.490
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.500
100:236
Section 215.503. Public Display/Promotion To Minors. [R.O. 2007
§217.030; Ord. No. 4084 §3, 7-14-2000]
Section 215.505. Furnishing Pornographic Materials To Minors.
3. Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any material
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain;
4. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain; or
5. Promotes, possesses with the purpose to promote, produces,
presents, directs or participates in any performance that is
pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet
or computer network if the person made the matter available to a
specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor.
A. A person commits the offense of public display of material pornographic
for minors if he or she knowingly:
1. Displays material pornographic for minors;
2. Fails to take prompt action to remove such a display from property
in his or her possession after learning of its existence;
3. Fails to seal any material pornographic for minors in wrappers only
to be removed for adult inspection; or
4. Fails to reasonably cover any material pornographic for minors on
its outside cover with opaque wrapping or binder boards.
B. Each day of violation of this Section shall constitute a separate offense.
C. A person commits the offense of promoting pornography to minors if,
knowing its content or character, he or she:
1. Promotes or possesses, with the purpose to promote, any material
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain; or
2. Promotes, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain.
A. A person commits the offense of furnishing pornographic material to
minors if, knowing its content and character, he/she:
1. Furnishes any material pornographic for minors knowing that the
person to whom it is furnished is a minor or acting in reckless
disregard of the likelihood that such person is a minor;
2. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors that is furnished to a minor knowing that
any person viewing such performance is a minor or acting in
reckless disregard of the likelihood that a minor is viewing the
performance; or
Section
215.500
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.505
100:237
Section 215.507. Promoting Obscenity. [R.O. 2007 §217.040; Ord.
No. 4084 §4, 7-14-2000]
Section 215.510. Notice. [R.O. 2007 §217.050; Ord. No. 4084 §5,
7-14-2000]
Upon a complaint being filed with the City of O'Fallon's Chief of Police about
alleged violation of any provision of this Chapter, a ten (10) day notice shall
be sent to the alleged violator by certified mail listing the specific materials
enumerated in the complaint, and if the complaint is not resolved promptly,
prosecution may proceed upon the determination of the City or County
Prosecutor.
Section 215.513. Evidence. [R.O. 2007 §217.060; Ord. No. 4084 §6,
7-14-2000]
Section 215.515. Presumptions. [R.O. 2007 §217.070; Ord. No. 4084
§7, 7-14-2000]
3. Furnishes, produces, presents, directs, participates in any
performance or otherwise makes available material that is
pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet
or computer network if the person made the matter available to a
specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor.
A. A person commits the offense of promoting pornography or obscenity if,
knowing its content or character, he or she:
1. Promotes or possesses, with the purpose to promote, any obscene
material for pecuniary gain; or
2. Promotes, presents, directs or participates in obscene performance
for pecuniary gain.
A. In any prosecution under this Chapter, evidence shall be admissible to
show:
1. What the predominant appeal of the material or performance would
be for ordinary adults, especially susceptible adults or minors;
2. The literary, artistic, political or scientific value of the material or
performance;
3. The degree of public acceptance in this State and in the local
community;
4. The appeal to prurient interest in advertising or other promotion of
the material or performance;
5. The purpose of the promoter or furnisher of the material or
performance.
A. In any prosecution of any Section of this Chapter, it is presumed that:
Section
215.505
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.515
100:238
Section 215.517. Penalties. [R.O. 2007 §217.080; Ord. No. 4084 §8,
7-14-2000]
Section 215.519. Location and Distance Regulations. [R.O. 2007
§217.090; Ord. No. 4084 §9, 7-14-2000]
The location and distance of businesses that provide, sell or lease
pornography, or other obscene material, are regulated pursuant to the
O'Fallon Zoning Code.
1. Promotion or possession of material, with the intent to promote it in
the course of doing business, is presumed to have been done so
knowingly.
2. Possession of six (6) or more identical or similar materials is
presumed to be intent to promote.
A. In any conviction of an offense under any Section of this Chapter,
punishment shall be assessed by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by the imprisonment of not more than three (3)
months, or both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Any person or entity operating a business pursuant to a license issued
by the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, who is convicted of violating any
provision of this Chapter or a similar State Statute shall lose said
license for a period of one (1) year from the date of conviction and will
be otherwise ineligible to reapply for said license until the expiration of
said one (1) year period. For purposes of this Chapter, a plea bargain
from the original charge to a lesser or unrelated charge, or a suspended
imposition of sentence, shall be deemed a conviction for violating this
Chapter.
Section
215.515
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.519
100:239

ARTICLE XI
Offenses Concerning Alcohol and Drugs
Section 215.520. Open Container of An Alcoholic Beverage in A
Public Place. [Ord. No. 5145.1 §1, 2-22-2007]
Section 215.525. Possession of Marijuana and Synthetic
Marijuana.54 [Ord. No. 5664 §1, 1-13-2011; Ord. No. 5837 §1,
12-13-2012]
A. For purposes of this Section, the phrase "public place" shall be defined
as any place in a non-residential zoning district to which the general
public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or
other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted
solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or
immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of
business and also public grounds, areas or parks.
B. Subject to the exceptions in Subsections (C) and (D) of this Section, a
person commits the violation of "open container of an alcoholic
beverage in a public place" if such person has in his or her possession
an opened container of beer, wine or intoxicating liquor while in any
public place.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection (B), this Section does not apply to the
possession of any open container of an alcoholic beverage within any
premises licensed to serve the same for consumption on the premises or
licensed to conduct tasting or samplings of the same.
D. Notwithstanding Subsection (B), this Section does not apply to the
possession of any open container of an alcoholic beverage:
1. On any portion of a public park other than parking areas;
2. On the grounds upon which a public festival, concert, sporting
event or performing arts event is being conducted; or
3. On the premises of any convention facility or reception hall.
E. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation punishable in accordance with Municipal Code
Section 100.010.
A. Except as authorized by Sections 195.005 to 195.425, RSMo., it is
unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, give, or publicly display for
sale, grow, cultivate, process, possess, compound or have under his/her
control marijuana as defined in Section 195.010, RSMo., or any illegal
smoking product.
54.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.520
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.525
100:241
Section 215.530. Possession or Control of A Controlled Substance.55
Except as authorized by Sections 195.005 to 195.425, RSMo., it is unlawful
for any person to possess or have under his/her control a controlled
substance as defined by Section 195.010, RSMo.
Section 215.535. Limitations On The Retail Sale of
Methamphetamine Precursor Drugs.
Section 215.540. Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia.56
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia as defined by Section 195.010, RSMo., to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance as defined by Section 195.010, RSMo., or an imitation controlled
substance as defined by Section 195.010, RSMo., in violation of Sections
195.005 to 195.425, RSMo.
B. As used in this Section, "illegal smoking product" shall include any
controlled substance, controlled substance analogue, counterfeit
substance, imitation controlled substance and synthetic cannabinoid as
those terms are defined by Section 195.010, RSMo.
A. The retail sale of methamphetamine precursor drugs shall be limited to:
1. Sales in packages containing not more than a total of three (3)
grams of one (1) or more methamphetamine precursor drugs
calculated in terms of ephedrine base, pseudoephedrine base and
phenylpropanolamine base; and
2. For non-liquid products, sales in blister packs, each blister
containing not more than two (2) dosage units, or where the use of
blister packs is technically infeasible, sales in unit dose packets or
pouches.
B. Any person holding a retail sales license pursuant to Chapter 144,
RSMo., who knowingly violates Subsection (A) of this Section is guilty of
an ordinance violation.
C. Any person who is considered the general owner or operator of the
outlet where ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine
products are available for sale who violates Subsection (A) of this
Section shall not be penalized pursuant to this Section if such person
documents that an employee training program was in place to provide
the employee with information on the State and Federal regulations
regarding ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine.
55.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
56.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.525
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.550
100:242
Section 215.550. Inhalation or Inducing Others To Inhale Solvent
Fumes To Cause Certain Reactions, Prohibited — Exceptions.
No person shall intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any solvent,
particularly toluol, or induce any other person to do so for the purpose
of causing a condition of, or inducing symptoms of, intoxication, elation,
euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis,
stupefaction, or dulling of senses or nervous system, or for the purpose of,
in any manner, changing, distorting or disturbing the audio, visual or mental
processes; except that this Section shall not apply to the inhalation of any
anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.
Section 215.560. Inducing, or Possession With Intent To Induce,
Symptoms By Use of Solvents, Prohibited.
Section 215.570. Possession or Purchase of Solvents To Aid Others
in Violations, Prohibited — Violations of Sections 215.550 To
215.560 — Penalty.
A. No person shall intentionally or willfully induce the symptoms of
intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational
behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses
or nervous system, distortion of audio, visual or mental processes by
the use of any solvent, particularly toluol.
B. No person shall intentionally possess any solvent, particularly toluol,
for the purpose of using it in the manner prohibited by Section 215.550
and this Section.
A. No person shall intentionally possess or buy any solvent, particularly
toluol, for the purpose of inducing or aiding any other person to violate
the provisions of Sections 215.550 and 215.560 hereof.
B. Any person who violates any provision of Sections 215.550—215.570 is
guilty of an ordinance violation.
Section
215.550
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.570
100:243

ARTICLE XII
Offenses Concerning Minors
Section 215.580. Article Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §215.230A]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
CURFEW HOURS — Means:
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN — Means:
MINOR — Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
PARENT — Either a natural parent or a parent by adoption.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT — Any person twenty-one (21) years of age or over.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access and includes,
but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools,
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
Section 215.590. Curfew Hours For Minors. [R.O. 2007
§215.230(B—E); CC 1978 §225.030; Ord. No. 287 §§1—4,
10-18-1966; Ord. No. 3667 §§2—6, 3-10-1998]
11:00 P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday
until 5:00 A.M. of the following day.
1.
12:00 Midnight on any Friday and Saturday until 5:00 A.M. of the
following day.
2.
A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor.
1.
A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
2.
A. Offenses.
1. A minor commits the offense of curfew violation if he/she is in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the
corporate limits of the City of O'Fallon during curfew hours.
2. A parent or guardian of a minor commits the offense of allowing a
minor to commit curfew violation if he/she knowingly permits, or by
criminal negligence allows, the minor in any public place or on the
Section
215.580
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.590
100:245
premises of any establishment within the corporate limits of the
City of O'Fallon during curfew hours.
B. Exceptions. An offense is not committed under Subsection (B) if the
minor was:
1. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or other
responsible adult to whom a parent or guardian has expressly given
permission to accompany the minor.
2. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from employment activity, without any detour or stop.
3. Attending an official school, religious or recreational activity
supervised by adults, or going to or returning home from same,
without any detour or stop.
4. Acting in an emergency situation.
C. Notice To Parent, Guardian Or Other Adult Persons. Any O'Fallon Police
Officer finding a minor violating the provisions of Subsection (B) of this
Section shall serve a written notice upon the parent, guardian or adult
person having custody or control of said minor, setting forth the manner
in which Subsection (B) of this Section was violated and the liabilities
for said parent, guardian or adult person upon subsequent violations of
Subsection (B) by the minor.
D. Penalties And Enforcement.
1. Any minor violating the provisions of this Section shall be dealt
with in accordance with the laws and procedures applicable to
minors.
2. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and
custody of a minor who violates this Section after having been
previously warned of said violation pursuant to Subsection (D) of
this Section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day a violation occurs or continues.
3. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and
custody of a minor who violates this Section after having been
previously charged and found guilty of violating this Section shall
be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisoned in the St. Charles County Jail for a term not to exceed
three (3) months, or be both fined and imprisoned. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day a violation occurs
or continues.
4. Enforcement of this Section as such may be required against a
parent, guardian or other adult person having custody or control of
any minor shall be the responsibility of the City Prosecutor.
Section
215.590
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.600
100:246
Section 215.600. Parental Responsibility.
A. Whenever a minor shall be arrested or detained for the commission of
any offense within the City, the Police Department shall, as soon as
possible thereafter, deliver written notice to the minor's parent of the
arrest or detention, and such notice shall advise the parent of his/her
responsibility under this Section. The notice shall be in such a form as
to be signed by the notified parent signifying receipt thereof. If the
parent refuses to sign said notice, the notifying Law Enforcement
Officer shall indicate such refusal on the notice.
B. No parent shall fail to exercise customary and effective control over a
minor so as to contribute to, cause or tend to cause a minor to commit
any offense. Written parental notice as defined in Subsection (A) of this
Section shall be prima facie evidence of parental neglect if the minor
commits a second (2nd) or successive violation of any offense.
C. Each violation of the provisions of this Section shall constitute a
separate offense. Any person who shall violate this Section shall be
subject to imprisonment for not more than three (3) months and/or a
fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first (1st)
violation, not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second
(2nd) violation, and not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any
successive violation. In addition, the court may, as a condition of any
probation granted to any parent found guilty of violating Subsection (B)
of this Section, order the defendant to make restitution to any person
who has been damaged by the misconduct of the minor in an amount
not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
Section
215.600
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.600
100:247

ARTICLE XIII
Offenses Concerning Tobacco
Section 215.610. Definitions. [Ord. No. 5779 §1, 4-12-2012]
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
DISTRIBUTE — A conveyance to the public by sale, barter, gift or sample.
MINOR — A person under the age of eighteen (18).
PROOF OF AGE — A driver's license or other generally accepted means of
identification that contains a picture of the individual and appears on its
face to be valid.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — A retail store used primarily for the sale of
tobacco products and accessories and where more than seventy percent
(70%) of the volume of trade or business carried on there is that of the
blending of tobaccos or sales of tobaccos, cigarettes, pipes, cigars or
smoking sundries and in which the sale of other products is incidental. A
"retail tobacco store" shall not include a tobacco department used primarily
for the sale of smoking materials as part of a larger commercial
establishment such as a department store, discount store or bar or retail
store.
ROLLING PAPERS — Paper designed, manufactured, marketed or sold for
use primarily as a wrapping or enclosure for tobacco which enables a
person to roll loose tobacco into a smokeable cigarette.
SAMPLE — A tobacco product distributed to members of the general public
at no cost or at nominal cost for product promotional purposes.
SAMPLING — The distribution to members of the general public of tobacco
product samples.
TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA — Any instrument, utensil or device used for
smoking or inhaling tobacco or similar plant products including, but not
limited to, rolling papers; metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or
ceramic pipes; water pipes; hookahs; carburetion tubes and devices; and
bongs.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Any substance containing tobacco leaf including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco
or dipping tobacco.
VENDING MACHINE — Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service
device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses tobacco products.
Section 215.620. Unlawful To Sell or Distribute Tobacco Products
To Minors — Vending Machine Requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, provide or distribute tobacco
products to persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
Section
215.610
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.620
100:249
B. All vending machines that dispense tobacco products shall be located
within the unobstructed line of sight and under the direct supervision of
an adult responsible for preventing persons less than eighteen (18)
years of age from purchasing any tobacco product from such machine
or shall be equipped with a lock-out device to prevent the machines
from being operated until the person responsible for monitoring sales
from the machines disables the lock. Such locking device shall be of a
design that prevents it from being left in an unlocked condition and
which will allow only a single sale when activated. A locking device
shall not be required on machines that are located in areas where
persons less than eighteen (18) years of age are not permitted or
prohibited by law. An owner of an establishment whose vending
machine is not in compliance with the provisions of this Subsection
shall be subject to the penalties contained in Subsection (E) of this
Section. A determination of non-compliance may be made by a local law
enforcement agency or the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco Control.
Nothing in this Section shall apply to a vending machine if located in a
factory, private club or other location not generally accessible to the
general public.
C. No person or entity shall sell, provide or distribute any tobacco product
or rolling papers to any minor or sell any individual cigarettes to any
person in this State. This Subsection shall not apply to the distribution
by family members on property that is not open to the public.
D. Any person, including, but not limited to, a sales clerk, owner or
operator, who violates Subsections (A), (B) or (C) of this Section or
Section 215.650 of this Article shall be penalized as follows:
1. For the first (1st) offense, twenty-five dollars ($25.00);
2. For the second (2nd) offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00); and
3. For a third (3rd) and subsequent offense, two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
E. Any owner of the establishment where tobacco products are available
for sale who violates Subsection (C) of this Section shall not be
penalized pursuant to this Section if such person documents the
following:
1. An in-house or other tobacco compliance employee training
program was in place to provide the employee with information on
the State and Federal regulations regarding tobacco sales to
minors. Such training program must be attended by all employees
who sell tobacco products to the general public;
2. A signed statement by the employee stating that the employee has
been trained and understands the State laws and Federal
regulations regarding the sale of tobacco to minors; and
Section
215.620
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.620
100:250
Section 215.630. Minors Prohibited From Purchase or Possession of
Tobacco — Misrepresentation of Age.
3. Such in-house or other tobacco compliance training meets the
minimum training criteria, which shall not exceed a total of ninety
(90) minutes in length, established by the Division of Alcohol and
Tobacco Control.
F. The exemption in Subsection (E) of this Section shall not apply to any
person who is considered the general owner or operator of the outlet
where tobacco products are available for sale if:
1. Four (4) or more violations per location of Subsection (C) of this
Section occur within a one (1) year period; or
2. Such person knowingly violates or knowingly allows his/her
employees to violate Subsection (C) of this Section.
G. If a sale is made by an employee of the owner of an establishment in
violation of this Article, the employee shall be guilty of an offense
established in Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this Section. If a vending
machine is in violation of Section 215.650, the owner of the
establishment shall be guilty of an offense established in Subsections
(C) and (D) of this Section. If a sample is distributed by an employee of a
company conducting the sampling, such employee shall be guilty of an
offense established in Subsections (C) and (D) of this Section.
H. A person cited for selling, providing or distributing any tobacco product
to any individual less than eighteen (18) years of age in violation of
Subsections (A), (B) or (C) of this Section shall conclusively be
presumed to have reasonably relied on proof of age of the purchaser or
recipient, and such person shall not be found guilty of such violation if
such person raises and proves as an affirmative defense that:
1. Such individual presented a driver's license or other governmentissued
photo identification purporting to establish that such
individual was eighteen (18) years of age or older.
I. Any person adversely affected by this Section may file an appeal with
the Administrative Hearing Commission which shall be adjudicated
pursuant to the procedures established in Chapter 621, RSMo.
A. No person less than eighteen (18) years of age shall purchase, attempt
to purchase or possess cigarettes or other tobacco products unless such
person is an employee of a seller of cigarettes or tobacco products and
is in such possession to effect a sale in the course of employment or an
employee of the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco Control for
enforcement purposes pursuant to Subsection (5) of Section 407.934,
RSMo.
B. Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age shall not misrepresent
his/her age to purchase cigarettes or tobacco products.
Section
215.620
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.630
100:251
Section 215.635. Restrictions On Sale and Distribution of Tobacco
Paraphernalia. [Ord. No. 5779 §2, 4-12-2012]
Section 215.640. Retail Sales Tax License Required For Sale of
Tobacco Products.
No person shall sell cigarettes or tobacco products unless the person has a
retail sales tax license.
Section 215.650. Required Sign Stating Violation of State Law To
Sell Tobacco To Minors Under Age Eighteen — Display of Sign
Required Where.
Section 215.660. Restrictions On Sales of Individual Packs of
Cigarettes.
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be
penalized as follows:
1. For the first (1st) violation, the person is guilty of an infraction and
shall have any cigarettes or tobacco products confiscated;
2. For a second (2nd) violation and any subsequent violations, the
person is guilty of an infraction, shall have any cigarettes or
tobacco products confiscated and shall complete a tobacco
education or smoking cessation program, if available.
A. The on-site display, sale or distribution of tobacco paraphernalia to
consumers is hereby prohibited except in retail tobacco stores.
B. No person shall display, sell or distribute tobacco paraphernalia except
as provided in this Section.
A. The owner of an establishment at which tobacco products or rolling
papers are sold at retail or through vending machines shall cause to be
prominently displayed in a conspicuous place at every display from
which tobacco products are sold and on every vending machine where
tobacco products are purchased a sign that shall:
1. Contain in red lettering at least one-half (½) inch high on a white
background the following:
"IT IS A VIOLATION OF STATE LAW FOR CIGARETTES OR OTHER
TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO BE SOLD OR OTHERWISE PROVIDED
TO ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN OR FOR SUCH
PERSON TO PURCHASE, ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE OR POSSESS
CIGARETTES OR OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS"; and
2. Include a depiction of a pack of cigarettes at least two (2) inches
high defaced by a red diagonal diameter of a surrounding red circle
and the words "Under 18".
Section
215.630
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.660
100:252
Section 215.670. Proof of Age Required, When Defense To Action
For Violation Is Reasonable Reliance On Proof — Liability.
A. No person or entity shall sell individual packs of cigarettes or smokeless
tobacco products unless such packs satisfy one (1) of the following
conditions prior to the time of sale:
1. It is sold through a vending machine; or
2. It is displayed behind the checkout counter or it is within the
unobstructed line of sight of the sales clerk or store attendant from
the checkout counter.
A. A person or entity selling tobacco products or rolling papers or
distributing tobacco product samples shall require proof of age from a
prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would
conclude on the basis of appearance that such prospective purchaser or
recipient may be under the age of eighteen (18).
B. The operator's or chauffeur's license issued pursuant to the provisions
of Section 302.177, RSMo., or the operator's or chauffeur's license
issued pursuant to the laws of any State or possession of the United
States to residents of those States or possessions, or an identification
card as provided for in Section 302.181, RSMo., or the identification
card issued by any uniformed service of the United States, or a valid
passport shall be presented by the holder thereof upon request of any
agent of the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco Control or any owner or
employee of an establishment that sells tobacco for the purpose of
aiding the registrant, agent or employee to determine whether or not
the person is at least eighteen (18) years of age when such person
desires to purchase or possess tobacco products procured from a
registrant. Upon such presentation, the owner or employee of the
establishment shall compare the photograph and physical
characteristics noted on the license, identification card or passport with
the physical characteristics of the person presenting the license,
identification card or passport.
C. Any person who shall, without authorization from the Department of
Revenue, reproduce, alter, modify or misrepresent any chauffeur's
license, motor vehicle operator's license or identification card shall be
deemed guilty of an ordinance violation.
D. Reasonable reliance on proof of age or on the appearance of the
purchaser or recipient shall be a defense to any action for a violation of
Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of Section 215.620 of this Article. No
person shall be liable for more than one (1) violation of Subsections (B)
and (C) of Section 215.620 on any single day.
Section
215.660
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.670
100:253

ARTICLE XIV
Miscellaneous Offenses
Section 215.680. Regulations Concerning Laser Pointers. [R.O.
2007 §215.075; Ord. No. 3863 §§1—7, 4-22-1999]
A. Definition. A "laser pointer" shall be defined as any device which emits
light amplified by the stimulated emission of radiation that is visible to
the humane eye and designed to be used as a pointer or highlighter, to
indicate, mark or identify a specific position or place, including, but not
limited to, Class 2 lasers, Class 3a and 3b lasers, and Class 4 lasers. For
purposes of this Section, any laser presently being used for medical
educational or other legitimate commercial use is not a "laser pointer".
B. Possession By Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of eighteen (18) to possess a laser pointer except in the
residence of that person, or except when outside the person's residence
the minor is under the direct supervision of adult school personnel,
parent, guardian or employer. Outside the home of the minor, the adult
providing direct supervision shall be physically present in the location
where the minor is present. Except as allowed herein, all laser pointers
in the possession of a minor are deemed to be contraband and are
subject to seizure by any duly authorized Law Enforcement Officer and
shall be subject to forfeiture. No Law Enforcement Officer seizing such
contraband shall be required to have a warrant or other legal process
prior to effecting the seizure.
C. Illumination Of Persons Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam illuminates
on another person or animal in the area of the head or body in such a
manner as to harass or create a reasonable fear by that person that
their sight or safety may be endangered.
D. Illumination Of Vehicle Operators Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam
illuminates the driver or passenger of a motor vehicle.
E. Illumination Of Law Enforcement Officers Prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the
laser beam illuminates a uniformed Law Enforcement Officer or duly
identified non-uniformed Law Enforcement Officer.
F. Illumination Of Inanimate Objects Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to use
a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam illuminates any
inanimate object with the intent or result that a person will be annoyed
or harassed by said illumination.
G. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this Section shall
be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of up to five hundred dollars
($500.00), or to imprisonment in the St. Charles County Jail for up to
three (3) months, or to both such fine and imprisonment.
Section
215.680
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.690
100:255
Section 215.690. Sale, Use and Distribution of Fireworks
Regulated. [R.O. 2007 §215.175; Ord. No. 3384 §2, 5-21-1996; Ord.
No. 4542 §1, 7-10-2003; Ord. No. 5201 §1, 7-17-2007; Ord. No. 5771
§1, 2-23-2012; Ord. No. 6601, 9-12-201957]
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall mean:
COMMON FIREWORKS — Explosive devices designed primarily to
produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or
detonation. This term includes aerial devices containing no more than
two (2) grains (130 mg) of explosive composition or ground devices
containing no more than fifty (50) milligrams of explosive composition,
all of which are classified as Class "C" explosives by regulation of the
United States Department of Transportation.
MANUFACTURE — Any person, organization or business engaged in
the manufacture, assembly or construction of fireworks of any kind
within the City limits of the City of O'Fallon.
SALE — An exchange of articles of fireworks for money, including
barter, exchange, gift or offer thereof, and each such transaction made
by any person, whether as a principal proprietor, salesman, agent,
association, co-partnership or one (1) or more individuals.
SPECIAL FIREWORKS — Explosive devices designed primarily to
produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or
detonation. This term includes devices containing more than two (2)
grains (130 mg) of explosive composition intended for public display.
These devices are classified as Class "B" explosives by regulation of the
United States Department of Transportation.
WHOLESALE — Any person, organization or business engaged in the
business of making sales of fireworks to any other person, organization
or business engaged in the business of making sales of fireworks.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) to
possess, set off, use, burn, explode or fire off any firecrackers,
fireworks, torpedoes, bombs, rockets, pin wheels, fire balloons, Roman
candles, toy cannons, toy pistols or other fireworks of a like kind,
including, but not limited to, common fireworks and special fireworks
within the City limits of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, except on private
property with the consent of the owner thereof on July 3, 4 or 5 between
the hours of 12:00 P.M. and 11:00 P.M. while in the company of and
subject to the constant supervision of a responsible adult at least
twenty-one (21) years of age.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, organization or business to possess
or set off, use, burn, explode or fire off any firecrackers, fireworks,
torpedoes, bombs, rockets, pin wheels, fire balloons, Roman candles,
toy cannons, toy pistols or other fireworks of a like kind, including, but
57.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 6601 also changed the title of this Section from "Sale, Use and
Distribution of Fireworks Prohibited" to "Sale, Use and Distribution of Fireworks
Regulated."
Section
215.690
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
215.690
100:256
Section 215.700. Fortunetelling, Etc. [R.O. 2007 §215.300; CC 1978
§230.050; Ord. No. 323 §1, 2-20-1968]
not limited to, common fireworks and special fireworks within the City
limits of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, without a permit issued as
hereinafter provided, except on private property with the consent of the
owner thereof on July 3,4 or 5 between the hours of 12:00 P.M. and
11:00 P.M.
D. A permit for a fireworks display may be issued by the Mayor or City
Administrator for parks or other public places in the charge of
competent persons, provided that such permitted displays shall be
prohibited after 10:00 P.M. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or
Thursday and after 11:00 P.M. on July third (3rd), July fourth (4th), July
fifth (5th), or any Friday or Saturday.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person, organization or business to sell,
offer for sale, distribute, manufacture, wholesale or to store any
firecrackers, fireworks, torpedoes, bombs, rockets, pin wheels, fire
balloons, Roman candles, toy cannons, toy pistols or other fireworks of
a like kind, including, but not limited to, common fireworks and special
fireworks, within the City limits of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, before
June 15 or after July 5; provided, however, that this Section shall not
apply to the storage of special fireworks by any person or company
holding a permit for public displays issued by the Mayor or City
Administrator of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
A. No person shall pursue or practice within the City the avocation,
profession or art of fortuneteller, clairvoyant, spirit medium,
necromancer, seer, astrologist, palmist, prophet or other like crafty or
occult art, or art of divination, or pretended art of telling past events of
another's life or affairs; or in anywise revealing things of the past, or the
future, of a secret or hidden nature; of giving advice or assistance in
matters of business or affairs of any other kind or nature by means of
such art; or of purporting so to tell, foretell, reveal or give advice or
assistance by means of such art.
B. Any person who shall so pursue or practice within the City such
avocations or professions, or any of the aforesaid, whether for a price or
gratuity, and whether by offer or upon request, shall be deemed guilty
of an offense, and the maintenance, display, posting or advertisement,
or the causing to be maintained, displayed, posted or advertised, any
sign, card, bill or announcement of any kind whatever indicating the
pursuit or practice of any such avocation, profession or art aforesaid, or
indicating an offer to render service in such pursuit or practice shall
upon proof thereof, be sufficient evidence against the person so
maintaining, displaying, posting or advertising, or so causing the same
to be done, and so charged, of a violation of this Section.
Section
215.690
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.700
100:257
Chapter 217
ABANDONED PROPERTY
Cross References — As to maximum charges for towing and storage,
§395.050; as to sale of abandoned property by city, §395.060; as to crime
inquiry and inspection reports required by state law, §395.040.
Section 217.010. Definitions.58
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set out
herein:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any unattended or unlicensed motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel removed or subject
to removal from public or private property as provided in this Chapter,
whether or not operational. For any vehicle towed from the scene of an
accident at the request of law enforcement and not retrieved by the
vehicle's owner within five (5) days of the accident, the agency requesting
the tow shall be required to write an abandoned property report or a
criminal inquiry and inspection report.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation or other legal entity.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire width of land between the boundary lines of a
public road or State highway, including any roadway.
ROADWAY — That portion of a public road or State highway ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
TOWING COMPANY — Any person or entity which tows, removes or stores
abandoned property.
Section 217.020. Abandoned Vehicles or Trailers Prohibited.59
No person shall abandon any motor vehicle or trailer on any private real
property owned by another without his/her consent.
Section 217.030. Open Storage of Inoperable Vehicles or Public
Safety Hazards Prohibited.60
The open storage of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles or other vehicles
deemed by the City to constitute a public safety hazard is prohibited.
Nothing in this Section shall apply to a vehicle which is completely enclosed
within a locked building or locked fenced area and not visible from adjacent
public or private property, nor to any vehicle upon the property of a
business licensed as salvage, swap, junk dealer, towing or storage facility so
long as the business is operated in compliance with its business license and
the property is in compliance with applicable zoning ordinances.
58.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §304.001, RSMo.
59.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §577.080, RSMo.
60.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §304.159, RSMo.
Section
215.700
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
217.040
100:258
Section 217.040. Towing of Abandoned Property On Private Real
Property.61
A. Generally. The City, including the City Police Department, may tow
motor vehicles from real property which are deemed a public safety
hazard pursuant to Section 217.030 or are derelict, junk, scrapped,
disassembled or otherwise harmful to the public health. The City shall
perform such tow pursuant to the terms of Section 217.050. When a
City agency other than the Police Department authorizes a tow under
this Subsection, it shall report the tow to the Police Department within
two (2) hours with a crime inquiry and inspection report.
B. Towing Authorized By City Police Department. If a person abandons
property on any real property owned by another without the consent of
the owner or person in possession of the real property, at the request of
the person in possession of the real property, any City Police Officer
may authorize a towing company to remove such abandoned property
from the property in the following circumstances:
1. The abandoned property is left unattended for more than fortyeight
(48) hours; or
2. In the judgment of a Police Officer, the abandoned property
constitutes a safety hazard or unreasonably interferes with the use
of the real property by the person in possession.
C. Towing Authorized By Real Property Owner, Lessee Or Property Or
Security Manager.
1. The owner of real property or lessee in lawful possession of the real
property or the property or security manager of the real property
may authorize a towing company to remove abandoned property or
property parked in a restricted or assigned area without
authorization by a Law Enforcement Officer only when the owner,
lessee or property or security manager of the real property is
present. A property or security manager must be a full-time
employee of a business entity. An authorization to tow pursuant to
this Subsection may be made only under any of the following
circumstances:
a. Sign. There is displayed, in plain view at all entrances to the
property, a sign not less than seventeen (17) by twenty-two
(22) inches in size, with lettering not less than one (1) inch in
height, prohibiting public parking and indicating that
unauthorized abandoned property or property parked in a
restricted or assigned area will be removed at the owner's
expense, disclosing the maximum fee for all charges related to
towing and storage, and containing the telephone number of
the local traffic law enforcement agency where information can
61.State Law References—For similar provisions, §§304.157.1—2, 304.157.4—9, 304.158.2—4,
304.158.8—9, RSMo.
Section
217.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
217.040
100:259
be obtained or a twenty-four (24) hour staffed emergency
information telephone number by which the owner of the
abandoned property or property parked in a restricted or
assigned area may call to receive information regarding the
location of such owner's property.
b. Unattended on owner-occupied residential property. The
abandoned property is left unattended on owner-occupied
residential property with four (4) residential units or less and
the owner, lessee or agent of the real property in lawful
possession has notified the City Police Department, and ten
(10) hours have elapsed since that notification.
c. Unattended on other private real property. The abandoned
property is left unattended on private real property and the
owner, lessee or agent of the real property in lawful possession
of real property has notified the City Police Department, and
ninety-six (96) hours have elapsed since that notification.
2. Pursuant to this Section, any owner or lessee in lawful possession
of real property that requests a towing company to tow abandoned
property without authorization from a City Police Officer shall at
that time complete an abandoned property report which shall be
considered a legal declaration subject to criminal penalty pursuant
to Section 575.060, RSMo. The report shall be in the form
designed, printed and distributed by the Missouri Director of
Revenue and shall contain the following:
a. The year, model, make and abandoned property identification
number of the property, and the owner and any lienholders, if
known;
b. A description of any damage to the abandoned property noted
by owner, lessee or property or security manager in possession
of the real property;
c. The license plate or registration number and the State of
issuance, if available;
d. The physical location of the property and the reason for
requesting the property to be towed;
e. The date the report is completed;
f. The printed name, address and telephone number of the
owner, lessee or property or security manager in possession of
the real property;
g. The towing company's name and address;
h. The signature of the towing operator;
Section
217.040
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
217.040
100:260
i. The signature of the owner, lessee or property or security
manager attesting to the facts that the property has been
abandoned for the time required by this Section and that all
statements on the report are true and correct to the best of the
person's knowledge and belief and that the person is subject to
the penalties for making false statements;
j. Space for the name of the law enforcement agency notified of
the towing of the abandoned property and for the signature of
the Law Enforcement Official receiving the report; and
k. Any additional information the Missouri Director of Revenue
deems appropriate.
3. Any towing company which tows abandoned property without
authorization from the City Police Department pursuant to
Subsection (B) of this Section shall deliver a copy of the abandoned
property report to the City Police Department. The copy may be
produced and sent by facsimile machine or other device which
produces a near exact likeness of the print and signatures required,
but only if the City Police Department has the technological
capability of receiving such copy and has registered the towing
company for such purpose. The report shall be delivered within two
(2) hours if the tow was made from a signed location pursuant to
Subsection (C)(1)(a) of this Section, otherwise the report shall be
delivered within twenty-four (24) hours.
4. The City Police Department, after receiving such abandoned
property report, shall record the date on which the abandoned
property report is filed with the Police Department and shall
promptly make an inquiry into the National Crime Information
Center (NCIC) and any statewide Missouri law enforcement
computer system to determine if the abandoned property has been
reported as stolen. The Police Department shall enter the
information pertaining to the towed property into the statewide law
enforcement computer system and a Police Officer shall sign the
abandoned property report and provide the towing company with a
signed copy.
5. The City Police Department, after receiving notification that
abandoned property has been towed by a towing company, shall
search the records of the Missouri Department of Revenue and
provide the towing company with the latest owner and lienholder
information on the abandoned property, and if the tower has online
access to the Department of Revenue's records, the tower shall
comply with the requirements of Section 304.155, RSMo. If the
abandoned property is not claimed within ten (10) working days,
the towing company shall send a copy of the abandoned property
report signed by a Law Enforcement Officer to the Department of
Revenue.
Section
217.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
217.040
100:261
6. No owner, lessee or property or security manager of real property
shall knowingly authorize the removal of abandoned property in
violation of this Section.
7. Any owner of any private real property causing the removal of
abandoned property from that real property shall state the grounds
for the removal of the abandoned property if requested by the
registered owner of that abandoned property. Any towing company
that lawfully removes abandoned property from private property
with the written authorization of the property owner or the
property owner's agent who is present at the time of removal shall
not be held responsible in any situation relating to the validity of
the removal. Any towing company that removes abandoned
property at the direction of the landowner shall be responsible for:
a. Any damage caused by the towing company to the property in
the transit and subsequent storage of the property; and
b. The removal of property other than the property specified by
the owner of the private real property from which the
abandoned property was removed.
D. Damage To Property. The owner of abandoned property removed from
private real property may recover for any damage to the property
resulting from any act of any person causing the removal of, or
removing, the abandoned property.
E. Real Property Owner Liability. Any owner of any private real property
causing the removal of abandoned property parked on that property is
liable to the owner of the abandoned property for double the storage or
towing charges whenever there has been a failure to comply with the
requirements of this Chapter.
F. Written Authorization Required—Delegation Of Authority To Tow.
1. Except for the removal of abandoned property authorized by the
City Police Department pursuant to this Section, a towing company
shall not remove or commence the removal of abandoned property
from private real property without first obtaining written
authorization from the real property owner. All written
authorizations shall be maintained for at least one (1) year by the
towing company.
2. General authorization to remove or commence removal of
abandoned property at the towing company's discretion shall not
be delegated to a towing company or its affiliates except in the case
of abandoned property unlawfully parked within fifteen (15) feet of
a fire hydrant or in a fire lane designated by a Fire Department or
the State Fire Marshal.
G. Towing Company Liability. Any towing company, or any affiliate of a
towing company, which removes, or commences removal of, abandoned
Section
217.040
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
217.040
100:262
Section 217.050. General Provisions and Procedures.62
property from private property without first obtaining written
authorization from the property owner or lessee, or any employee or
agent thereof, who is present at the time of removal or commencement
of the removal, except as permitted in Subsection (F) of this Section,
is liable to the owner of the property for four (4) times the amount of
the towing and storage charges, in addition to any applicable ordinance
violation penalty, for a violation of this Section.
A. Payment Of Charges. The owner of abandoned property removed as
provided in this Chapter shall be responsible for payment of all
reasonable charges for towing and storage of such abandoned property
as provided in Section 395.050.
B. Crime Inquiry And Inspection Report. As to Crime Inquiry and
Inspection Reports required by State Law, see Chapter 395 of this
Code, Section 395.040.
C. Reclaiming Property. The owner of such abandoned property, or the
holder of a valid security interest of record, may reclaim it from the
towing company upon proof of ownership or valid security interest of
record and payment of all reasonable charges for the towing and
storage of the abandoned property.
D. Lienholder Repossession. If a lienholder repossesses any motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel without the
knowledge or cooperation of the owner, then the repossessor shall
notify the City Police Department within two (2) hours of the
repossession and shall further provide the Police Department with any
additional information the Police Department deems appropriate. The
City Police Department shall make an inquiry with the National Crime
Information Center and the Missouri statewide law enforcement
computer system and shall enter the repossessed vehicle into the
statewide law enforcement computer system.
E. Notice To Owner/Tow Lien Claim. Any towing company which comes
into possession of abandoned property pursuant to this Chapter and
who claims a lien for recovering, towing or storing abandoned property
shall give notice to the title owner and to all persons claiming a lien
thereon, as disclosed by the records of the Missouri Department of
Revenue or of a corresponding agency in any other State. The towing
company shall notify the owner and any lienholder within ten (10)
business days of the date of mailing indicated on the notice sent by the
Missouri Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 304.156, RSMo.,
by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain the
following:
62.State Law References—For similar provisions, §§304.155.5—6, 304.155.11—12, 304.158.1,
304.158.5, 304.158.7, RSMo.
Section
217.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
217.050
100:263
1. The name, address and telephone number of the storage facility;
2. The date, reason and place from which the abandoned property
was removed;
3. A statement that the amount of the accrued towing, storage and
administrative costs are the responsibility of the owner, and that
storage and/or administrative costs will continue to accrue as a
legal liability of the owner until the abandoned property is
redeemed;
4. A statement that the storage firm claims a possessory lien for all
such charges;
5. A statement that the owner or holder of a valid security interest of
record may retake possession of the abandoned property at any
time during business hours by proving ownership or rights to a
secured interest and paying all towing and storage charges;
6. A statement that, should the owner consider that the towing or
removal was improper or not legally justified, the owner has a right
to request a hearing as provided in this Section to contest the
propriety of such towing or removal;
7. A statement that if the abandoned property remains unclaimed for
thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the notice, title to the
abandoned property will be transferred to the person or firm in
possession of the abandoned property free of all prior liens; and
8. A statement that any charges in excess of the value of the
abandoned property at the time of such transfer shall remain a
liability of the owner.
F. Physical Search Of Property. In the event that the Missouri Department
of Revenue notifies the towing company that the records of the
Department of Revenue fail to disclose the name of the owner or any
lienholder of record, the towing company shall attempt to locate
documents or other evidence of ownership on or within the abandoned
property itself. The towing company must certify that a physical search
of the abandoned property disclosed no ownership documents were
found and a good faith effort has been made. For purposes of this
Section, "good faith effort" means that the following checks have been
performed by the company to establish the prior State of registration
and title:
1. Check of the abandoned property for any type of license plates,
license plate record, temporary permit, inspection sticker, decal or
other evidence which may indicate a State of possible registration
and title;
Section
217.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
217.050
100:264
2. Check the law enforcement report for a license plate number or
registration number if the abandoned property was towed at the
request of a law enforcement agency;
3. Check the tow ticket/report of the tow truck operator to see if a
license plate was on the abandoned property at the beginning of
the tow, if a private tow; and
4. If there is no address of the owner on the impound report, check
the law enforcement report to see if an out-of-state address is
indicated on the driver license information.
G. Petition In Circuit Court. The owner of the abandoned property
removed pursuant to this Chapter or any person claiming a lien, other
than the towing company, within ten (10) days after the receipt of
notification from the towing company pursuant to Subsection (E) of this
Section may file a petition in the Associate Circuit Court in the County
where the abandoned property is stored to determine if the abandoned
property was wrongfully taken or withheld from the owner. The petition
shall name the towing company among the defendants. The petition
may also name the agency ordering the tow or the owner, lessee or
agent of the real property from which the abandoned property was
removed. The Missouri Director of Revenue shall not be a party to such
petition but a copy of the petition shall be served on the Director of
Revenue.
H. Notice To Owner. Notice as to the removal of any abandoned property
pursuant to this Chapter shall be made in writing within five (5)
working days to the registered owner and any lienholder of the fact of
the removal, the grounds for the removal, and the place to which the
property has been removed by either:
1. The public agency authorizing the removal; or
2. The towing company, where authorization was made by an owner
or lessee of real property.
If the abandoned property is stored in any storage facility, a copy
of the notice shall be given to the operator of the facility. The
notice provided for in this Section shall include the amount of
mileage if available shown on the abandoned property at the time
of removal.
I. Tow Truck Requirements. Any towing company which tows abandoned
property for hire shall have the towing company's name, City and State
clearly printed in letters at least three (3) inches in height on the sides
of the truck, wrecker or other vehicle used in the towing.
J. Storage Facilities. Persons operating or in charge of any storage facility
where the abandoned property is stored pursuant to this Chapter shall
accept cash for payment of towing and storage by a registered owner or
the owner's agent claiming the abandoned property.
Section
217.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
217.050
100:265
Chapter 220
NUISANCES
Cross References — As to dangerous buildings as a nuisance, ch. 505; as to
prostitution houses deemed a nuisance, §215.463.
K. Disposition Of Towed Property. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 301.227, RSMo., any towing company who has complied with
the notification provisions in Section 304.156, RSMo., including notice
that any property remaining unredeemed after thirty (30) days may be
sold as scrap property may then dispose of such property as provided in
this Subsection. Such sale shall only occur if at least thirty (30) days has
passed since the date of such notification, the abandoned property
remains unredeemed with no satisfactory arrangements made with the
towing company for continued storage, and the owner or holder of a
security agreement has not requested a hearing as provided in Section
304.156, RSMo. The towing company may dispose of such abandoned
property by selling the property on a bill of sale as prescribed by the
Director of Revenue to a scrap metal operator or licensed salvage
dealer for destruction purposes only. The towing company shall forward
a copy of the bill of sale provided by the scrap metal operator or
licensed salvage dealer to the Director of Revenue within two (2) weeks
of the date of such sale. The towing company shall keep a record of
each such vehicle sold for destruction for three (3) years that shall be
available for inspection by law enforcement and authorized Department
of Revenue officials. The record shall contain the year, make,
identification number of the property, date of sale, and name of the
purchasing scrap metal operator or licensed salvage dealer and copies
of all notifications issued by the towing company as required in this
Chapter. Scrap metal operators or licensed salvage dealers shall keep a
record of the purchase of such property as provided in Section 301.227,
RSMo. Scrap metal operators and licensed salvage dealers may obtain a
junk certificate as provided in Section 301.227, RSMo., on vehicles
purchased on a bill of sale pursuant to the Section.
Section
217.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
217.050
100:266
ARTICLE I
Generally
Section 220.010. Nuisances Prohibited. [Ord. No. 5315 §1,
4-10-2008]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant or any agent, servant,
representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant having
control of any occupied lot or land or any part thereof in the City of
O'Fallon or within one-half (½) mile of the corporate limits of the City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, to cause, permit or maintain a nuisance on any such lot
or land. Additionally, it is unlawful for any person or his/her agent, servant,
representative or employee to cause or maintain a nuisance on the land or
property of another with or without permission. Each day that a nuisance
shall be maintained is a separate offense.
Section 220.020. Conditions and Acts Which Constitute A Nuisance.
[Ord. No. 5315 §1, 4-10-2008; Ord. No. 5589 §1, 4-22-2010; Ord. No.
5657 §1, 1-13-2011; Ord. No. 5886 §1, 5-24-2013]
A. The following conditions, acts and business operations are hereby
declared to be nuisances affecting public health:
1. Stagnant water and water collected and allowed to stand for more
than thirty-six (36) hours and the presence of containers, old tires,
debris or other conditions which lend themselves to the collection
and retention of pools or puddles of water which may become
stagnant. This Subsection shall not include swimming pools,
decorative or patio ponds or fountains or other containers where
the water is continuously filtered, cleaned or cycled.
2. Accumulations, wheresoever they may occur, of manure, rubbish,
garbage, refuse and human and industrial, noxious or offensive
waste, except the normal storage on a farm of manure for
agricultural purposes.
3. Any storage or accumulation on any premises or any open lot of any
lumber, bricks, stones, gravel, concrete, dirt, sand or similar
materials, unless the same shall be stored in permanently
constructed structure which is fully enclosed.
4. The presence of debris of any kind including, but not limited to,
weed cuttings, cut and fallen trees and shrubs, rubbish and trash,
rocks or bricks, tin, steel, parts of derelict cars or trucks, broken
furniture, any flammable material which may endanger public
safety, or any material which is unhealthy or unsafe.
5. Any accumulation, deposit or outside storage or any vehicular or
equipment parts, inoperable appliances and other equipment, junk
or material of any nature where said accumulation, deposit or
outside storage may constitute an attractive nuisance danger to
Section
220.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.020
100:267
children, provide a breeding or nesting area for vermin, rodents
and other animals, or collect stagnant water.
6. Any and all infestation of flies, fleas, roaches, lice, ticks, rats, mice,
fly maggots, mosquito larvae and hookworm larvae.
7. The keeping of animals and fowls in any area within the City where
the keeping of such animals is not permitted or in any unclean or
filthy pen, shed or other enclosure.
8. All diseased animals running at large.
9. Carcasses of dead animals not buried or destroyed within twentyfour
(24) hours after death.
10. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, grass, brush, vegetation
and weeds more than eight (8) inches in height along any public or
private street for a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet back from
the outer edge of the curbing or the outer edge of the pavement if
no curbing exists; and eight (8) inches in height elsewhere on
improved property on which a building or structure is located, and
eight (8) inches in height elsewhere on property on which no
building or structure is located; provided however, that these
height limitations shall not apply:
a. On land designated as being within a floodplain pursuant to
Chapter 415 of this Code of Ordinances;
b. Within fifteen (15) feet of the top of the bank of a creek or
larger waterway; and
c. On land which has a slope of more than 2.5 to 1.
Whenever private property abuts a public right-of-way or
easement belonging to the City of O'Fallon or any public
entity, and there exists in such right-of-way or easement a
lawn or grassy area between the private property line and the
midline of said right-of-way or easement, then such lawn or
grassy area shall be considered, for purposes of this Section
requiring the cutting of grass and weeds, to be a part of the
private lot which abuts the right-of-way or easement, and it
shall be the duty of those responsible for the maintenance of
the private lot to equally maintain the lawn or grassy area
within the abutting right-of-way or easement, and all of the
provisions of this Section shall apply with equal force and
effect to said lawn or grassy area.
11. Dead or dying trees.
12. The shining of artificial light onto public or private property as to
be an annoyance, hurt, injury or inconvenience to other persons.
Section
220.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
220.020
100:268
13. Any noise which exceeds the limitations or which is otherwise in
violation of the provisions of Section 215.237 or Section 400.555 of
this Code.
14. The presence on any property of any steel-jawed animal traps or
similar devices, unless authorized by the Police Department.
15. Buildings in such a state of disrepair as to affect the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of O'Fallon or which are maintained in
violation of the zoning or building codes of the City.
16. Any accumulation or storage of firewood in the front yard of any lot,
other than in a commercially manufactured decorative firewood
rack on the front porch, or in the rear yard of any lot unless evenly
piled or stacked either on open racks elevated not less than six (6)
inches above the ground or on a durably paved surface.
17. The maintenance, storage or use of any furniture outside a fully
enclosed structure, unless the furniture is designed and built for
exterior use and to resist damage and deterioration by the
elements.
18. Water or other liquid diverted from a sump pump which flows onto
streets and sidewalks.
19. Any land disturbance activity or area where vegetation has been
cleared or has not been maintained or other condition which
results in the runoff of mud, dirt, rocks or any other material onto
sidewalks, streets or other rights-of-way or into creeks, streams,
drainage ditch or any stormwater system or facility.
20. The discharge onto any street, sidewalk or right-of-way or into any
creek, stream, drainage ditch or stormwater system of any waste
materials, liquids, vapor, fat, gasoline, benzene, naphtha, oil or
petroleum product, mud, straw, lawn clippings, tree limbs or
branches, metal or plastic objects, rags, garbage or any other
substance which is capable of causing an obstruction to the flow of
water drainage or the storm system or interfere with the proper
operation of the system or which will pollute the natural creeks or
waterways or cause a hazard to the public.
21. Every privy, privy vault, cess pool, septic tank or other receptacle of
any kind containing human excrement which is overflowing, full,
insecure or in a defective condition or which emits offensive,
noxious or unhealthful odor to the neighborhood or which permits
discharges in violation of State law or ordinance.
22. Garbage and recycle cans which are not securely covered, which
are leaking, which are unsanitary or which do not prevent the entry
of flies, insects and rodents and garbage and recycle cans which
have been left or stored along public roads, sidewalks and rights-ofway
in the City of O'Fallon for anytime outside the thirty-six (36)
Section
220.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.020
100:269
hours beginning at 6:00 P.M. on the evening prior to that resident's
scheduled service day and ending at 6:00 A.M. the day following
the scheduled service. Holidays occurring during the week can
affect the resident's normally scheduled service day.
23. The pollution of any well, cistern, spring, underground water,
stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage or industrial wastes
or other substances harmful to human beings.
24. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders in
unreasonable quantities, or the presence of any gas, vapor, fume,
smoke, dust or any other toxic substance on, in or emitted from the
equipment of any premises in quantities sufficient to be toxic,
harmful or injurious to the health of any employee or to the
premises, occupant or to any other person.
25. Any vehicle used for septic tank cleaning which does not meet the
requirements of the Code of Ordinances for the City of O'Fallon.
26. Any vehicle used for garbage or rubbish disposal which is not
equipped with a watertight metal body and provided with a tight
metal cover or covers and so constructed as to prevent any of the
contents from leaking, spilling, falling or blowing out of such
vehicle at any time, except while being loaded, or not completely
secured and covered so as to prevent offensive odors from escaping
therefrom or exposing any part of the contents at any time.
27. The parking or storage of any derelict, unlicensed or non-functional
vehicle, trailer, boat, camper or other recreational vehicle unless
such storage is within an enclosed garage.
28. The parking or storage of any vehicle, trailer, boat, camper or other
recreational vehicle anywhere other than on a durably-paved
surface; for the purposes of this Section, "durably-paved surface"
shall mean asphalt or concrete. However, any residence or business
establishment with a legally permitted gravel parking surface may
use such surface for parking of licensed and functional vehicles.
29. All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public or
offered to the public at no charge.
30. Common drinking cups, roller towels, combs, brushes or eating
utensils in public or semi-public places where not properly
sanitized after use.
31. Unlicensed dumps and licensed dumps not operated or maintained
in compliance with the ordinances of the City of O'Fallon or State
law.
32. The presence of any graffiti displayed on exterior surfaces of
property. "Graffiti" is hereby defined as any word, phrase, motto,
name, design, symbol or picture written, scribbled, painted, drawn,
Section
220.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
220.020
100:270
Section 220.030. Inspections. [Ord. No. 5315 §1, 4-10-2008]
Section 220.040. Notice of Nuisance and Hearing. [Ord. No. 5315
§1, 4-10-2008]
etched or scratched directly onto any portion of public property or
onto an exterior surface on private property.
33. Any obstruction or encumbrance of any street, curb, alley, cul-desac,
sidewalk or right-of-way within the City by placing or causing
to be placed barricades, objects or other obstructions including,
but not limited to, signs, boxes, stones, junk, portable basketball
hoops, etc., on such streets, curbs, alleys, cul-de-sacs, sidewalks or
right-of-way unless such placement is permitted by the City or
permitted under the provisions of this Code.
34. Any business operation or establishment, although licensed or
permitted, which is operating in violation of any law, ordinance or
permit or plan condition or which is causing or maintaining any
condition which is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of
the inhabitants of the area.
35. All other acts, practices, conduct, business, occupation callings,
trades, uses of property and all other things detrimental or certain
to be detrimental to the health of the inhabitants of the City of
O'Fallon.
A. For the purpose of examining the sanitary condition thereof and for the
discovery and abatement of public nuisances therein, any Code
Enforcement Officer, Police Officer or other official, agent or employee
of the City are hereby authorized to:
1. Inspect property from any adjoining public property or from
adjoining private property if the owner of the neighboring private
property has given consent to such entry; and
2. Enter and inspect all property, buildings and parts of buildings and
other premises pursuant to lawful authority which shall include
consent of the owner of the property, valid administrative search
warrant or in areas where the owner of which has no expectation of
privacy.
A. Before any action is taken with respect to any nuisance, the Code
Enforcement Official shall give written notice to the person or persons
causing or maintaining such nuisance and shall order such person or
persons to abate the same within a reasonable time to be specified in
such notice. If the City contemplates abatement of the nuisance, then
the notice shall also set forth the date, time and place for hearing and
shall order such person to appear before the Director of Community
Development, or his or her designee, at such time and place as the Code
Section
220.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.040
100:271
Section 220.045. Penalty For Causing or Maintaining A Nuisance —
Proceedings in Municipal Court. [Ord. No. 5315 §1, 4-10-2008]
Official may direct to show cause, if any, why the nuisance should not
be abated.
B. Such notice may be served by the Code Enforcement Officer or any
Police Officer of the City. A copy of such notice shall be kept by the
officer serving the same who shall make his or her written return
thereon stating how, when, on whom and where he or she served the
same and subscribe his or her name thereto. Such notice may be served
by delivering the same to the person or persons to be notified or a copy
thereof left at the usual place of abode of such person with a member of
the family over the age of fifteen (15) years, unless otherwise provided
in this Chapter.
C. Provided that if the nuisance is being maintained upon property to
which record title is held by a person or corporation not a resident of
this City, a notice prescribed in this Section may be served by posting a
copy thereof in plain view upon such property at least ten (10) days
before any further action be taken by the City with regard to said
nuisance and mailing a copy to the person maintaining the nuisance at
the address as reflected in the County tax or real estate records.
A. Every person, occupant, tenant, owner or every officer or agent or
employee of any corporation or other entity who shall cause or maintain
any nuisance and who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same
within the reasonable time required and specified in the notice of the
Code Enforcement Officer shall be deemed guilty of an offense and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
100.010 of this Code. Each and every day such nuisance is maintained
after such notice shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable in such manner.
B. Any Code Enforcement Officer or Police Officer of this City is hereby
authorized to issue a citation requiring an appearance before the
Municipal Judge at the date and time as specified in the citation. The
citation shall, in sufficient detail, describe the nuisance and state the
name of the person to appear. The form of the citation shall be approved
by the Municipal Judge. In lieu of a citation, any Code Enforcement
Officer or Police Officer of this City is hereby authorized to file a
complaint with the municipal prosecutor detailing the circumstances of
the nuisance and the person responsible therefor; such complaint shall
serve as a basis to file and issue an appropriate Information and
Summons to the person maintaining a nuisance in order to charge and
proceed in all respects in the Municipal Court as in other cases
involving violations of City ordinance.
Section
220.040
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
220.050
100:272
Section 220.050. Ordinances Not To Be Construed As Limiting Any
Official's Power of Abatement. [Ord. No. 5315 §1, 4-10-2008]
Nothing in this Chapter or other ordinances relating to public nuisances,
including the failure to set forth a particular condition as constituting
a nuisance, or denominated by a particular ordinance as offenses or
prescribing penalties therefore shall be construed as limiting or interfering
with the duties and powers of any City Official relative to the condemnation
and abatement of any matter which in law constitutes a public nuisance.
Section 220.060. Authority To Abate Emergency Conditions. [Ord.
No. 5315 §1, 4-10-2008]
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is an immediate danger
to the health, safety or welfare of the public due to the existence of a
nuisance, the City shall have authority to immediately abate the nuisance in
an appropriate manner.
Section 220.070. Abatement of Nuisances, Generally. [Ord. No.
5315 §1, 4-10-2008]
A. In addition to other remedies and enforcement procedures set forth in
this Code, the City may proceed to abate the nuisance in accordance
with the provisions of this Section.
1. Nuisances caused by high grass, weeds, brush and vegetation may
be abated in accordance with the separate procedure for such
nuisance as set forth in this Chapter or in accordance with the
provisions of this Section.
2. Nuisances caused by an accumulation of trash, litter and debris
may be abated in accordance with the specific procedure for such
nuisance as set forth in this Chapter or in accordance with the
provisions of this Section.
3. For all other nuisances, the City shall proceed as follows:
a. The Code Official shall have issued a notice of the violation in
accordance with the provisions of Section 220.040 of this
Chapter and shall have included notice of hearing. Every
person required to appear shall have at least ten (10) days'
notice thereof.
b. The hearing shall be conducted by the Director of Community
Development or his or her designee. If, after hearing all the
evidence, it is determined that a nuisance exists, the Director
of Community Development shall order the person to abate the
nuisance within twenty (20) days or within such other time as
the Director may deem reasonable. Such order shall be served
in the manner provided in this Section for service of the notice
of violation. The order may further provide that the
appropriate City Official be directed to abate the nuisance if
Section
220.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.070
100:273
the order is not obeyed within the time period established, and
that a special tax bill be issued for the costs of abating the
nuisance.
c. The decision of the Director of Community Development may
be appealed by filing an appeal, on such forms as prescribed by
the City, with the City Administrator within seven (7) days from
the Director's decision. The appeal form shall set forth, at a
minimum, the detailed grounds for such appeal and such
further information as requested on the appeal form. The City
Administrator shall review the decision of the Director of
Community Development either, within the Administrator's
sole discretion, upon the record previously made or upon a new
hearing and shall issue a written decision to all parties; such
decision may be subject to judicial review in the Circuit Court
of St. Charles County by filing an appropriate petition for
judicial review within fifteen (15) days of the Administrator's
decision.
d. If the nuisance has not been abated within the established time
period, the appropriate City Official shall proceed to abate the
nuisance in the manner provided by the order of the Director
or the City Administrator, and the cost of same shall be
assessed as a special tax against the property so improved or
upon which such work was done and shall be a lien against said
property. The City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall cause a
special tax bill to be issued therefor against the owner thereof
when known, and if not known then against the unknown
persons, and the certified bills of such assessment shall
describe therein the property upon which the work was done.
The costs and expenses incurred by the City shall include
the actual costs billed by third (3rd) parties performing the
abatement and paid by the City; costs billed by the City
Attorney related to the abatement and paid by the City; costs
of mailing or publication of notices; and costs related to time
spent by City personnel in performing tasks related to the
abatement and in preparation of the tax bill, lien or other
paperwork (these costs shall be based on the time spent in
quarter of an hour increments multiplied by the hourly rate of
pay for the employee).
All City departments shall determine and document the costs
and expenses related to abatement of a nuisance which shall
be provided to the City Clerk or his or her designee, for proper
billing of such costs and expenses and for general oversight
purposes.
e. If the bill is not paid within the time period established for
payment, notice of a special tax lien shall be recorded with the
Recorder of Deeds office.
Section
220.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
220.070
100:274
Section 220.080. Authority To Suspend or Revoke Business License
or Other Permits As Means To Abate Nuisance Caused By Business
Establishment. [Ord. No. 5315 §1, 4-10-2008]
f. The cost of abating nuisances on private property shall be
levied and assessed on each lot in proportion to the amount of
work done and material used in abating the nuisance located
on each such lot.
A. In addition to the other methods of abatement and enforcement as
provided in this Code, a business license or other permit may be
suspended or revoked in the event that a business operation or
establishment is found to be maintaining a nuisance.
B. The Code Official shall issue a notice of violation to the operation or
establishment that has caused or is maintaining the nuisance that such
nuisance exists and order the property owner and owner or operator of
the business (if different than the property owner) to appear before the
Director of Finance, or his or her designee, at such time and place as
determined by the Director of Finance to show cause, if any, why the
business license or other permit should not be suspended or revoked.
Every person required to appear shall have at least ten (10) days' notice
thereof.
C. Such notice shall be signed by the Code Official or Chief of Police and
shall be served upon that person by delivering a copy thereof to the
person, or by leaving a copy at his/her residence with some member of
the family or household over fifteen (15) years of age, or upon any
corporation by delivering the copy thereof to the registered agent or to
any other officer at any business office of the corporation within the
City. If the notice cannot be given for the reason that the person named
in the notice or his/her agent cannot be found in the City, of which fact
the return upon such notice of the officer serving the same shall be
conclusive evidence, such notice shall be mailed to such person and
posted at the property which is the site of the nuisance or mailed to
such person and published in a newspaper within the City once at least
seven (7) days before time fixed for the parties to appear. The cost of
the mailing and publication shall be assessed against the property
owner and/or business owner.
D. If, after hearing all the evidence, it is determined that a nuisance exists,
the Director of Finance, or his or her designee, shall order the property
owner and the owner or operator of the business to abate the nuisance
within twenty (20) days or within such other time as the Administrator
may deem reasonable. Such order shall be served in the manner
provided in this Section for service of the notice of violation. The order
may further provide that if the nuisance is not abated within the time
prescribed, then the business license or other permit shall be
suspended for a certain period of time or revoked without further
proceedings.
Section
220.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.080
100:275
Section 220.090. Equitable and Other Relief. [Ord. No. 5315 §1,
4-10-2008]
In addition to the other remedies provided in this Code, if a person has
violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Chapter, the City may
petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person
from activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. In addition,
the City may utilize any other remedy, at law or in equity, in order to enforce
the provisions of this Chapter. The City shall recover all attorneys' fees,
court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this Section.
E. The decision of the Director of Finance may be appealed by filing an
appeal, on such forms as prescribed by the City, with the City
Administrator within seven (7) days from the Director's decision. The
appeal form shall set forth, at a minimum, the detailed grounds for such
appeal and such further information as requested on the appeal form.
The City Administrator shall review the decision of the Director of
Finance either, within the Administrator's sole discretion, upon the
record previously made or upon a new hearing and shall issue a written
decision to all parties; such decision may be subject to judicial review in
the Circuit Court of St. Charles County by filing an appropriate petition
for judicial review within fifteen (15) days of the Administrator's
decision.
F. If the nuisance is not abated or other provisions of the order are not
obeyed within the established time period, the business license or other
permit shall, in the discretion of the Director of Finance, be suspended
for a certain period of time or revoked without further proceedings.
G. Upon suspension or revocation of a business license, the owner and/or
operator of the business shall immediately cease operation of the
business at the location set forth in the order.
Section
220.080
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
220.090
100:276
ARTICLE II
Procedures For Certain Nuisances
Section 220.100. Weeds. [R.O. 2007 §220.260; Ord. No. 2020
§§2—10, 4-3-1992; Ord. No. 3016 §§2—3, 4-1-1993; Ord. No. 4332 §1,
1-29-2002; Ord. No. 5589 §§3—4, 4-22-2010; Ord. No. 5657 §2,
1-13-2011]
A. Whenever "weeds", as defined herein, are allowed to grow on any
property within the City limits of O'Fallon, Missouri, the owner of the
ground or, in the case of multiple owners, each owner and the
occupants of such property shall be jointly and severally responsible.
The City Code Enforcement Officer shall determine whether the ground
contains weeds, as defined herein, by measuring four (4) separate areas
selected at random. If the Code Enforcement Officer does not
determine "weeds" to be present at the selected areas, then the ground
shall be considered in substantial compliance with this Section.
B. The City Code Enforcement Officer shall give a hearing after four (4)
days' notice thereof, either personally or by United States mail to the
owner or owners and the occupants or the agents for either the owners
or occupants or by posting such notice on the premises.
C. Upon such notice the Code Enforcement Officer may declare the weeds
to be a nuisance and order the same to be removed within five (5)
business days; and if the weeds are not removed within said five (5)
business days, the Code Enforcement Officer has the authority to cause
the weeds to be immediately cut down and removed and shall certify
the costs of same to the City Clerk.
D. The City Clerk shall then cause a special tax bill therefor against the
property to be prepared and to be collected by the Collector with other
taxes assessed against the property.
E. Such special tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be a first (1st)
lien on the property until paid and shall be prima facie evidence of the
recitals therein and of its validity; and no mere clerical error or
informality in the same, or in the proceedings leading up to its issuance,
shall be a defense thereto.
F. Each special tax bill shall be issued by the City Clerk and delivered to
the Collector on or before the first (1st) day of June of each year. Such
tax bills if not paid when due shall bear interest at the rate of eight
percent (8%) per annum.
G. Whenever weeds in violation of this Section are allowed to grow on any
part of any detention basin and/or common ground area, the trustees of
the subdivision and/or developer of the subdivision shall be responsible.
H. If the weeds in the detention basin and/or common ground area are not
cut down within five (5) business days, the trustees and/or developer
shall be subject to prosecution in the O'Fallon Municipal Court and,
Section
220.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.100
100:277
upon conviction, subject to a penalty as set out in Section 100.010
of this Code. Each day after five (5) days shall constitute a separate
violation.
I. The term "weeds", as used in this Section, shall mean any weed, brush,
vegetation or grass more than eight (8) inches in height along any
public or private street for a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet back
from the outer edge of the curbing or the outer edge of the pavement if
no curbing exists; and eight (8) inches in height elsewhere on improved
property on which a building or structure is located; and eight (8)
inches in height elsewhere on property on which no building or
structure is located; provided however, that these height limitations
shall not apply:
1. On land designated as being within a floodplain pursuant to
Chapter 415 of this Code of Ordinances;
2. Within fifteen (15) feet of the top of the bank of a creek or larger
waterway; and
3. On land which has a slope of more than 2.5 to 1.
J. The requirements of this Section shall not apply to any real property
within the City limits which is:
1. Zoned as agricultural and primarily used for agricultural purposes
and devoted primarily to the raising and harvesting of crops; or
2. Used for agricultural purposes and devoted primarily to the raising
and harvesting of crops and not improved with any building or
structure and where such agricultural use is compatible with the
environment, enjoyment or use of nearby property and does not or
otherwise constitute a nuisance;
provided however, that a maximum weed, grass or vegetation
height of eight (8) inches shall be maintained along all sides of
said property along both public and private streets for a minimum
depth of twenty (20) feet back from the outer edge of the curbing
or the outer edge of the pavement if no curbing exists. The
agricultural exemption of this Subsection shall not apply to any
property which has been zoned and platted for residential use
after a residence has been constructed within the same plat as the
property in question.
K. The requirements of this Section shall not apply to any real property
within the City limits which meets all of the following requirements:
1. Is not improved with any building or structure;
2. Is more than two (2) acres in size;
3. Is maintained as a natural forested area or natural grassland
containing native or prairie grasses; and
Section
220.100
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
220.100
100:278
Section 220.102. Trash, Rubbish and Debris. [Ord. No. 5589 §5,
4-22-2010]
4. Where the growth of such vegetation is compatible with the
environment, enjoyment or use of nearby property and does not
otherwise constitute a nuisance;
Provided however, that a maximum weed, grass or vegetation
height of eight (8) inches shall be maintained along all sides of
said property along both public and private streets for a minimum
depth of twenty (20) feet back from the outer edge of the curbing
or the outer edge of the pavement if no curbing exists. For purpose
of this Subsection, the size of such property shall be measured
by lot or parcel lines designated on a plat or otherwise; multiple
parcels or lots owned by the same property owner shall not be
combined for purposes of calculating the two (2) acre size
minimum.
L. Whenever private property abuts a public right-of-way or easement
belonging to the City of O'Fallon, or any public entity, and there exists in
such right-of-way or easement a lawn or grassy area between the
private property line and the midline of said right-of-way or easement,
then such lawn or grassy area shall be considered, for purposes of this
Section requiring the cutting of grass and weeds, to be a part of the
private lot which abuts the right-of-way or easement, and it shall be the
duty of those responsible under this Section for the maintenance of the
private lot to equally maintain the lawn or grassy area within the
abutting right-of-way or easement, and all of the provisions of this
Section shall apply with equal force and effect to said lawn or grassy
area.
A. For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall mean:
DEBRIS — Includes weed cuttings, cut and fallen branches, parts of
dead trees and shrubs and other yard waste.
RUBBISH — Includes non-putrescible solid wastes including, but not
limited to, paper, plastic, tin, steel, cloth, parts of derelict vehicles,
broken furniture or equipment, glass, and any other material which is
unhealthy or unsafe.
SOLID WASTE — Items which have been discarded or abandoned or
which are not stored properly and serving no particular purpose.
TRASH — Includes putrescent and non-putrescent solid waste
including, but not limited to, normal household waste and food stuffs
and packaging.
B. Whenever trash, rubbish or debris are allowed to accumulate on any
property within the City limits of O'Fallon, Missouri, the owner of the
ground or, in the case of multiple owners, each owner and the
occupants of such property shall be jointly and severally responsible.
Section
220.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.102
100:279
C. The City Code Enforcement Officer shall give a hearing after four (4)
days' notice thereof, either personally or by United States mail to the
owner or owners and the occupants, or the agents of such owners or
occupants, or by posting such notice on the premises.
D. Upon such notice the Code Enforcement Officer may declare the trash,
rubbish or debris to be a nuisance and order the same to be removed
within five (5) business days; and if the trash, rubbish and debris is not
removed within said five (5) business days, the Code Enforcement
Officer has the authority to cause the trash, rubbish or debris removed
and shall certify the costs of same to the City Clerk who shall prepare a
special tax bill for such costs.
E. Such special tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be a first (1st)
lien on the property until paid and shall be prima facie evidence of the
recitals therein and of its validity; and no mere clerical error or
informality in the same, or in the proceedings leading up to its issuance,
shall be a defense thereto.
Section
220.102
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
220.102
100:280
ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Nuisances
Section 220.105. Obstructions To View At Intersections. [R.O. 2007
§220.300; CC 1978 §300.060; Ord. No. 247 Art. IV §9, 8-13-1962;
Ord. No. 5578 §1, 3-25-2010; Ord. No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
Section 220.110. Graffiti. [R.O. 2007 §220.310; Ord. No. 3137
§§1—8, 8-4-1994]
A. It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for the owner of any lot alongside
any intersecting street or alongside any street which enters or runs into
another street to have or permit any fence, sign, signboard or billboard
to be erected nearer than twenty-five (25) feet to the curb of such street
or to erect such structure to a greater height than two (2) feet above the
crown of the street at the point of intersection.
B. (Reserved)
C. In the event any such obstruction to the view of any street intersection
shall be maintained in violation of this Section, the City, after due notice
to the owner to abate or remove such nuisance, may enter upon such
real estate and remove any such plants, flowers, shrubs, bushes, weeds,
trees or other vegetation which does not meet the requirements of this
Section.
A. Purpose. The O'Fallon City Council finds and determines that graffiti is
a nuisance and that it is appropriate that the City provide for the
removal of such graffiti from both public and private property under the
procedures set forth in this Section.
B. Definitions. Whenever the following terms are used in this Section, they
shall have the meanings established by this Section:
GRAFFITI — The defacing, damaging or destroying by the spraying of
paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public
and private buildings, structures and places.
GRAFFITI ABATEMENT PROCEDURE — A procedure which identifies
graffiti, issues notice to the landowner to abate the graffiti and provides
remedies in the absence of a response.
PRIVATE CONTRACTOR — Any person with whom the City shall have
duly contracted to remove graffiti.
C. The City Council hereby declares as a matter of legislative
determination that:
1. Graffiti on public and private property depreciates the value of the
property, as well as the adjacent and surrounding properties, and
negatively impacts upon the entire community.
Section
220.105
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.110
100:281
2. The application of graffiti upon walls, rocks, bridges, buildings,
fences, gates, other structures, trees and other real and personal
property within the corporate boundaries of the City of O'Fallon
constitutes a nuisance; and in the interest of the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents and taxpayers of the City,
immediate steps must be taken to remove this nuisance.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint or draw upon any
wall, rock, bridge, building, fence, gate, other structure, tree or
other real or personal property, either publicly or privately owned,
any drawing, inscription, figure or mark of the type which is
commonly known and referred to as graffiti within the City.
4. When appropriate and in addition to a fine and/or imprisonment,
the courts should require those who commit acts of defacement of
public or private property through the application of graffiti to
restore the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed.
5. The public is hereby encouraged to cooperate in the elimination of
graffiti by reporting to the O'Fallon Police Department the incidents
of the application of graffiti which they observe.
6. Any person who provides useful information leading to the arrest
and prosecution of person(s) who applies graffiti, as outlined in this
Section within the City limits, shall be eligible for a reward of up to
fifty dollars ($50.00) as determined appropriate by the City
Attorney and the City Administrator.
D. Notice Of Removal.
1. Whenever the Chief of Police determines that graffiti exists on any
public and private buildings, structures and places which are
visible to any person utilizing any public or private right-of-way in
this City, be this road, parkway, alley or otherwise, and that
seasonal temperatures permit the painting of exterior surfaces, the
Chief of Police shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such
nuisance. The property owner shall have ten (10) days after the
date of the notice to remove the graffiti, or the conditions will be
subject to abatement by the City.
2. The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to this Section shall cause a
written notice to be served upon the owner(s) of the affected
premises, as such owner's name and address appears on the last
property tax assessment rolls of the County. If there is no known
address for the owner, the notice shall be sent or posted in care of
the property address. The notice required by this Section may be
served in any one (1) of the following manners:
a. By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge
or control of the property.
Section
220.110
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
220.110
100:282
Section 220.120. Individual Lot, Residential Use, Storage Units and
Bulk Refuse Containers. [Ord. No. 5216 §1, 8-23-2007]
b. By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the
owner's last known address. If this address is unknown, the
notice will be sent or posted to the property address.
3. The notice shall be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI
Date:
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required by law
at your expense to remove or paint over the graffiti located
on the property located at ____________________, O'Fallon,
Missouri, which is visible to public view, within ten (10)
days after the date of this notice; or if the graffiti is not
removed or painted over, City employees or private
contractors employed by the City will enter upon your
property and abate the public nuisance by removal or
painting over the graffiti. Double the cost of the abatement
by the City employees or its private contractors will be
assessed upon your property and such doubled costs, if not
paid by you within ten (10) days of the abatement, will
constitute a lien upon the land until paid.
E. Upon failure of persons(s) to comply with the notice by the designated
date, the Chief of Police is authorized to cause the graffiti to be abated
by City employees or private contract, and the City or its private
contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such
purposes.
All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be
taken by the City. If City employees accomplish the removal of the
graffiti or other inscribed material, they shall not authorize nor
undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive
area than that where the graffiti or other inscribed material is located.
F. Any and all costs incurred by the City in the abatement of the graffiti
nuisance under the provisions of this Section may constitute a lien
against the property upon which nuisance existed.
A. Units Permitted. Residential homeowners (and only homeowners, these
regulations do not apply to developers or commercial builders) may
maintain on their lot, during periods of active construction, portable,
weather-resistant receptacles designed for the storage of building
materials, supplies and equipment; or bulk containers transported to
and from the residence by trucks or trailers for the collection and
eventual disposal of construction waste. Structures will include, but not
be limited to: utility and storage sheds; other small temporary
structures or shelters; commercial or industrial shipping containers; or
Section
220.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.120
100:283
other ground-mounted units designed for long-term storage; semitrailers;
carriers; or haulers; and other items designed for transport as
well as storage.
B. Permits. Residential lot owners may maintain a (p.o.d.s.) type unit
(portable on demand storage) or construction dumpster on site for up to
five (5) days without a permit. Any use that will require the unit to stay
on the residential lot for more than five (5) days shall require a permit.
Where permits are required, the permit shall be issued for a thirty (30)
day period of time. If the activities on the lot require the use of a
receptacle for more than thirty (30) days, then the applicant may apply
for an extension. As part of the application for an extension, the
applicant shall provide a timetable for completion of the project and
shall call out any conditions needed to insure that health, safety and
traffic concerns are addressed in a manner as is reasonable and
appropriate under the circumstances. The primary responsibility for
securing the necessary permits shall be the property owner(s).
However, a duly authorized agent, purchaser, lessee, devisee or
judiciary may be allowed to represent the owner with proper consent.
C. Performance Standards. No temporary storage unit or bulk refuse
container allowed on a residential lot shall be set up or operated in any
manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious or otherwise
objectionable condition so as to adversely affect the surrounding area
or adjoining premises.
1. Storage units/bulk containers must be located on the same lot
where the construction work is being done.
2. Storage units/bulk containers must be located on a hard (concrete,
asphalt or other improved) surface.
3. Storage units/bulk containers must be maintained on the ground;
stacking of storage units will not be permitted.
4. Storage units/bulk containers shall not block access to utilities or
public services (i.e., manholes, meters, fire hydrants, etc.).
5. Storage units/bulk containers shall not encroach on any public
right-of-way, roadway or sidewalk; all units must be fully contained
on the subject property.
6. The property owner shall maintain the integrity of the storage unit/
bulk container while it is on site.
a. If the storage unit/bulk container is breached, the property
owner is responsible for insuring that trash, debris or any
other materials are not deposited on the surrounding lots.
b. The unit exteriors shall be kept clean and shall be painted.
c. The unit exteriors shall be free of rust and corrosion.
Section
220.120
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
220.120
100:284
Section 220.130. Drug Activity — Public Nuisance. [Ord. No. 5315
§2, 4-10-2008; Ord. No. 5808 §1, 9-13-2012]
d. Units exhibiting more than normal wear and tear shall be
removed and repaired.
D. Schedule Of Fees, Costs And Expenses. The City Council shall establish
a Schedule of Fees, Costs and Expenses for all matters pertaining to the
Sign Code. The Schedule of Fees, Costs and Expenses is identified
within Appendix B of Title IV: Land Use and shall be filled with the City
Clerk and posted in the offices of the Community Development
Department. The schedule shall only be amended by the City Council
and shall not require a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The processing fee is applicable regardless of approval of
the permit. A permit approved by the Planning and Engineering
Department is not valid until the permit fee has been paid in full.
A. Nuisance Prohibited. Every person who owns, resides in, uses or is
responsible for an inhabitable structure shall take all possible action to
prevent said inhabitable structure from being the site of any illegal use,
possession or selling of a controlled substance or the site of the
possession of methamphetamine precursors and/or chemicals used in
the manufacture of methamphetamine for the purpose of
manufacturing methamphetamine and related substances or the site
where any controlled substance is manufactured illegally, and any
inhabitable structure which is the site of such activity is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
B. Definitions. For this purpose of this Section, the following terms shall
be defined as follows:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — Any substance so classified under
Section 102(6) of the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. Section
802W and includes all substances listed in Schedules I through V of
21 CFR Part 1308 as they may be revised from time to time; and any
controlled substance as defined in Chapter 195, RSMo., in effect upon
the passage of or as amended and any controlled substance defined as
such in this Code.
INHABITABLE STRUCTURE — Any structure or portion of a structure,
regardless of whether any person is actually present, in which:
1. Any person lives or carries on business or other calling;
People assemble for purposes of business, government, education,
religion, entertainment or public transportation; or
2.
Persons are accommodated overnight.
The following terms related to the production or manufacture
of methamphetamine and related drugs shall mean:
3.
Section
220.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.130
100:285
CHEMICAL USED IN THE MANUFACTURE OF METHAMPHETAMINE
— A chemical or substance which is commonly used in the manufacture
of methamphetamine or related drugs and is an immediate chemical
intermediary used or likely to be used in the manufacture of
methamphetamine and related drugs including, but not limited to:
Anthranilic acid, its esters and its salts; Benzyl cyanide; Ergotamine
and its salts; Ergonovine and its salts; N-Acetylanthranilic acid, its
esters and its salts; Phenylacetic acid, its esters and its salts; Piperidine
and its salts; 3,4,-Methylenedioxyphenyl-2-propanone; Acetic
anhydride; Acetone; Benzyl Chloride; Ethyl ether; Hydriodic acid;
Potassium permanganate; 2-Butanone (or Methyl Ethyl Ketone or
MEK); Thluene; Ephedrine, its salts, optical isomers, and salts of optical
isomers; Norpseudoephedrine, its salts, optical isomers, and salts of
optical isomers; Phenyipropanolamine, its salts, optical isomers, and
salts of optical isomers; Pseudoephedrine, its salts, optical isomers,
and salts of optical isomers; Methylamine and its salts; Ethylamine
and its salts; Propionic anhydride; Isosafrole; Safrole; Piperonal; NMethylephedrine,
its salts, optical isomers and salts of optical isomers;
N-Methylpseudoephedrine, its salts, optical isomers and salts of optical
isomers; Benzaldehyde; Nitroethane; Methyl Isobutyl Ketone (MIBIO);
Sulfuric acid; Iodine; Red phosphorous; Gamma butyrolactone; 1,4
Butanediol.
MANUFACTURE OF METHAMPHETAMINE — The production,
preparation, propagation, compounding or processing of
methamphetamine and/or related drugs by way of either directly or
by extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by
means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and
chemical synthesis. The possession of more than twenty-four (24)
grams of any methamphetamine precursor drug or combination of
methamphetamine precursor drugs shall be prima facie evidence of the
manufacturing or production of methamphetamine.
METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUG — Any drug containing
ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine or any of their
salts, optical isomers or salts of optical isomers.
PRODUCTION — The manufacture of a controlled substance.
C. Notice Of Public Nuisances. Whenever the City Attorney or the
Prosecuting Attorney of the City receives notice that:
1. A search warrant has been issued and executed for any inhabitable
structure in the City and that controlled substances have been
confiscated as a result of said search warrant; or
2. An arrest has been made in any inhabitable structure in the City
and that controlled substances have been confiscated as a result of
said arrest; or
3. A search warrant has been issued and executed for any inhabitable
structure in the City and that a methamphetamine precursor drug
Section
220.130
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
220.130
100:286
and two (2) or more chemicals used in the manufacture of
methamphetamine were discovered as a result of said search
warrant,
then the City Attorney or the Prosecuting Attorney may cause
a "notice of public nuisance" to be served on the owners and
tenants of said inhabitable structure, advising them that the
property may be declared a public nuisance by the Building
Official or his/her designee either immediately or in the event
of any subsequent use of the inhabitable structure for the
illegal use, possession, production or sale of controlled
substance. Said notice shall be given in accordance with this
Section.
All notices sent to owners and tenants required herein shall
be served by means of certified mail, return receipt requested,
sent to the last known address of the intended recipient. In the
event said notice is not received within ten (10) days of the
original mailing, posting said notice in a conspicuous place at
the inhabitable structure described therein shall be sufficient
and notice shall be deemed received on the date of posting.
It shall be unlawful to mutilate or remove any notice posted
on or about an inhabitable structure under authority of this
Section.
D. Multiple Or Subsequent Incidents Or Involvement Of
Methamphetamine. If:
1. The City Attorney or Prosecuting Attorney believes that there have
been two (2) or more instances of illegal use, possession,
production or selling of controlled substances at the inhabitable
structure within a three (3) year period; or
2. Within three (3) years of sending the "notice of public nuisance" the
City Attorney or Prosecuting Attorney receives notice of a
subsequent use of the inhabitable structure for the illegal use,
possession, production or sale of controlled substances; or
3. The City Attorney or Prosecuting Attorney believes that the
evidence shows that methamphetamine precursor drugs and
chemicals used in the manufacture of methamphetamine found at
the inhabitable structure were for the purpose of manufacturing
methamphetamine,
the City Attorney or Prosecuting Attorney shall notify the
Building Official or his/her designee of said fact. The Building
Official shall thereafter send a notice to all owners and tenants
that a public nuisance may exist under this Chapter and that
any such nuisance must be abated within thirty (30) days of
sending of the notice. Said notice shall be given in accordance
with Subsection (C) this Section.
Section
220.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.130
100:287
E. Failure To Abate Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity
that is sent or receives notice of a public nuisance under this Chapter to
fail to take all possible action to abate and bring about termination and
non-resumption of said public nuisance.
F. Determination Of Nuisance And Abatement.
1. If the Building Official believes that a public nuisance may exist at
the expiration of the thirty (30) day period after sending the notice
or posting of the notice, he/she shall give notice to all owners and
tenants by certified mail that the Building Official shall hold a
hearing at the time and place specified therein for the purpose of
determining whether a public nuisance exists. Any such notice shall
be given at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the scheduled
hearing and shall also be posted on the inhabitable structure which
shall be sufficient and notice shall be deemed received on the date
of posting.
2. Each interested person shall be given an opportunity at the hearing
to present evidence under oath and to be represented by counsel.
The Building Official shall have the power, on his/her own motion,
to subpoena witnesses and to take testimony, under oath,
pertaining to all relevant matters. The Building Official may
continue all or part of a hearing, if necessary, to conclude the
investigation.
3. If, based on all the evidence adduced, the Building Official shall
determine that the use of the inhabitable structure for the illegal
use, production, sale or possession of drugs, methamphetamine
precursor drugs or chemicals used in the manufacture of
methamphetamine or the attempted manufacture of
methamphetamine is a significant, continuous and unreasonable
interference with the rights common to all members of the
community in general, such as public health, safety, peace, morals
or convenience, he/she may:
a. Order the discontinuance of such use of the inhabitable
structure where a public nuisance exists; and/or
b. Order the closing of said inhabitable structure as necessary to
abate the public nuisance, as described hereafter.
4. In determining whether an inhabitable structure should be closed
as a result of the existence of a public nuisance under this Chapter,
the Building Official shall consider, in addition to other relevant
factors, the impact of the closure on innocent parties; however, the
lack of knowledge of, acquiescence in, participation in or
responsibility for a public nuisance on the part of the owners,
lessors, lessees, mortgagees and all other persons in possession or
having charge of as agent or otherwise or having an interest in the
inhabitable structure used in conducting or maintaining the public
nuisance shall not be a defense by such persons or entities.
Section
220.130
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
220.130
100:288
5. Results of the hearing shall be mailed to the owners and tenants by
means of certified mail, return receipt requested. Any interested
person or organization present at the hearing may request a copy
of the Building Official's order. A copy of said order shall also be
posted on the inhabitable structure within seventy-two (72) hours
of the decision. Thirty (30) calendar days after the posting of an
order issued pursuant to this Section, officers of the O'Fallon Police
Department are authorized to act upon and enforce such orders.
G. Appeal Of Building Official's Order. The decision of the Building Official
may be appealed by filing an appeal, on such forms as prescribed by the
City, with the City Administrator within seven (7) days from the Building
Official's decision. The appeal form shall set forth, at a minimum, the
detailed grounds for such appeal and such further information as
requested on the appeal form. The City Administrator shall review the
decision of the Building Official either, within the Administrator's sole
discretion, upon the record previously made or upon a new hearing and
shall issue a written decision to all parties. Such decision shall be
subject to judicial review pursuant to Chapter 536, RSMo., in the
Circuit Court of St. Charles County by filing an appropriate petition for
judicial review within fifteen (15) days of the Administrator's decision.
H. Enforcement Of Closure Order.
1. When the Building Official orders the closing of an inhabitable
structure under this Chapter, such closing shall be for a period as
the Building Official may direct, but in no event shall the closing be
for a period longer than one (1) year from the date of the posting of
the order. If the owner, lessor or lessee shall submit proof
satisfactory to the Building Official that the public nuisance has
been abated for a period of thirty (30) days, then the Building
Official may vacate or modify the provisions of the order directing
closure.
2. A closing directed by the Building Official pursuant to this Chapter
shall not constitute an act of possession, ownership or control of
the closed inhabitable structure by the City of O'Fallon.
3. In the event that an inhabitable structure ordered closed by the
Building Official is not closed by the owners or others in control of
it, the Building Official shall take all appropriate steps to undertake
and complete the work necessary to secure the inhabitable
structure and shall charge the owners of the inhabitable structure
therefor. In the event that the owners do not promptly reimburse
the City for necessary steps taken, the Building Official shall report
the charges to the City's Collector of Revenue and/or Finance
Director who shall order the assessment against the property so
benefited.
Section
220.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.130
100:289
4. Additionally, the City Attorney may commence procedures through
the appropriate court to recover costs incurred by the City for
closure of the inhabitable structure.
I. Use Of A Closed Habitable Structure Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to
use or occupy, or to permit the use or occupancy of, any inhabitable
structure ordered closed by the Building Official pursuant to this
Chapter.
J. Promulgation Of Rules. The City Attorney may promulgate rules and
regulations to carry out and give full effect to the provisions of this
Section.
Section
220.130
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
220.130
100:290
Chapter 225
CITY PARK AND RECREATION FACILITY REGULATIONS
Section
220.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.130
100:291

ARTICLE I
General Rules And Regulations
Section 225.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 6535, 1-10-201963]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the plural number include
the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle designed and
manufactured for off-highway use which is fifty (50) inches or less in width,
with unladen dry weight of six hundred (600) pounds or less, traveling on
three (3) or more low-pressure tires, with a seat designed to be straddled
by the operator, and handlebars for steering control.
BOARD — The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board of the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri.
CITY — The City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
DIRECTOR — Includes any person immediately in charge of any park areas
and its activities, to whom all park attendants of such areas are responsible.
ELECTRIC RIDE-ON TOYS — Any three- or four-wheeled device designed
for children to ride, the device moves by way of a small motor and a twelvevolt
battery with a maximum speed of five (5) miles per hour.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively
upon tracks, except farm tractors and motorized bicycles.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Any two-wheeled or three-wheeled device, except
motorized scooters, having an automatic transmission and a motor with
cylinder capacity of not more than fifty (50) cubic centimeters which
produces less than three (3) gross brake horsepower and is capable of
propelling the device at a maximum speed of not more than thirty (30) miles
per hour on level ground.
MOTORIZED SCOOTER — Any two-, three-, or four-wheeled device having
handlebars that are attached to a footboard, which is designed to be ridden
in a standing or seated position and is powered by a motor that is capable
of propelling the device with or without human propulsion. This shall not
include legitimate devices for use by physically disabled persons, such as
electric wheelchairs or scooters, when operated by a physically disabled
person.
OFF-ROAD VEHICLE — Any vehicle designed for or capable of crosscountry
travel on or immediately over land, water, ice, snow, marsh,
swampland, or other natural terrain without benefit of a road or trail,
63.Editor's Note: Section 1 of this ordinance repealed former Ch. 225, City Park Regulations,
adopted and/or amended 11-8-2007 by Ord. No. 5250 § 1, and as further amended.
Section
225.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.010
100:293
including, but not limited to, the following: jeeps, all-terrain vehicles, dune
buggies, multiwheel-drive or low-pressure-tire vehicles, a vehicle using an
endless belt, or tread or treads, or a combination of tread and low-pressure
tires, motorcycles, trail bikes, minibikes and related vehicles, and any other
means of transportation deriving power from any source other than muscle
or wind and capable of cross-country travel as described above.
PARK PERSONNEL — Any person employed by the City of O'Fallon Parks
and Recreation Department, with responsibilities over park areas and
activities.
PARK PROPERTY — Any park preservation, playground, recreation center,
building or structure, or any other area owned or used by the City and
devoted to passive or active recreation, and historical or memorial
purposes.
PARK USAGE — The use of a park for the intent for which it was designed
or designated for a special event.
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
POLICE — A person authorized and commissioned by the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri, as a Law Enforcement Officer.
RANGER — A person authorized and employed by the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri, to enforce any and all provisions of Chapter 225 of the Code of the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri, and to regulate and direct traffic in and adjacent
to any City of O'Fallon, Missouri, park or any other area if so directed by the
Police.
SPECIAL EVENT — A festival or event sponsored, permitted or authorized
in one of O'Fallon's parks by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
VEHICLE — Any conveyance, whether motor powered, animal drawn or
self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or
description. Exception is made for vehicles in the service of the City parks.
Section 225.015. Failure To Obey Park Ranger. [Ord. No. 6535,
1-10-2019]
It shall be unlawful to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of any City of O'Fallon, Missouri, Ranger or other City
employee.
Section 225.020. Park Property. [Ord. No. 6535, 1-10-2019]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person while in or about any park property,
which includes any park preservation, playground, recreation center,
building or any other area owned or used by the City and devoted to
passive or active recreation, and historical or memorial purposes, to:
1. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any building, playground equipment, bridge, table, bench,
Section
225.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
225.020
100:294
Section 225.030. Sanitation. [Ord. No. 6535, 1-10-2019]
fireplace, railing, paving or paving materials, water line or other
public utility or parts or appurtenances thereof, sign, notice or
placard whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post
or other boundary marker, or other structure or equipment, facility
or park land property or appurtenances whatsoever.
2. Intentionally act in a manner which results in restrooms and
washrooms not being left in a neat and sanitary condition. No
person over the age of six (6) years shall use or enter the restrooms
and washrooms designated for the opposite sex. This Section does
not apply to children with special needs who may require the
assistance of their parent or guardian or City employees or agents
of the City performing cleaning.
3. Damage or remove any rock, stone, tree, shrub or plant, down
timber or other wood or materials or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting, or other means or agency except on special
written permit as provided for in this Chapter.
4. Construct or erect any building or structure, or plant or place any
plant, tree or shrub of whatever kind, whether permanent or
temporary in nature, or run or string any public service utility into,
upon or across such lands, except on special written permit as
provided for in this Chapter.
5. Climb on any tree, building or pavilion or walk, stand or sit upon
any monument, vase, fountain, railing or fence or upon any other
property not designated or customarily used for such purposes.
6. Feed, hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or
throw projectiles of any kind or nature at any animal, fish, reptile or
bird; nor shall be/she remove or have in his/her possession the
young of any wild animal or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile
or bird; nor shall he/she collect, remove, have in his/her possession,
give away, sell or offer to sell, or buy or offer to buy, or accept as a
gift any specimen alive or dead of any of the group of tree snails or
in any manner violate the Missouri Wildlife Code.
7. Give, offer or attempt to give any animal or bird any food, beverage
or any known noxious substances.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person while in or about any park property,
which includes any park preservation, playground, recreation center,
building or any other area owned or used by the City and devoted to
passive or active recreation, and historical or memorial purposes, to:
1. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed any solid
or liquid in the waters of any fountain, swimming pool, spray pad,
pond, lake, stream, or any other body of water in or adjacent to any
park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into
Section
225.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.030
100:295
Section 225.040. Traffic. [Ord. No. 6535, 1-10-2019]
such water, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters
or damage to equipment, individuals, animals or fish.
2. Dump, deposit or leave any cigarette butts, syringes or medical
equipment, ashes, glass or glass bottles, papers, boxes, cans,
rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash in any City park or
facility other than in authorized receptacles in conjunction with
authorized park usage. Nor shall such refuse or trash be placed in
any waters in or contiguous to any park.
3. Bring any glass containers onto park property or into any parks and
recreation facility.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person while in or about any park property,
which includes any park preservation, playground, recreation center,
building or any other area owned or used by the City and devoted to
passive or active recreation, and historical or memorial purposes, to:
1. Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the State laws and
City ordinances and regulations pertaining to equipment and
operation of motor vehicles.
2. Fail to obey the reasonable instructions of Police Officers, Rangers
and park personnel; such persons being hereby authorized and
instructed to direct traffic whenever needed in the City parks.
3. Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction,
caution, stopping or parking, as well as all other signs posted to
control traffic and to safeguard life and property.
4. Drive, ride or park a vehicle as follows:
a. Drive or ride a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding fifteen (15)
miles per hour, except as otherwise posted.
b. Drive or park any motor vehicle on any park area except the
paved park roads or designated parking areas, unless
authorized for a special event.
c. The closing of park driveways or parks, or any section thereof
of parks, shall only be at the direction of the City Council,
Police or the Director of Parks and Recreation.
d. The closing of park driveways or any section thereof shall be
accomplished by the erection of a suitable barrier or other
visible marker across the driveway.
5. Drive a truck in excess of one (1) ton upon the driveways, parking
lot or any other area, except when making deliveries of operation
or maintenance supplies to the park or for some social function
under permit of the Director.
Section
225.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
225.040
100:296
Section 225.050. Parking. [Ord. No. 6535, 1-10-2019]
Section 225.060. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 6535, 1-10-2019]
Section 225.070. Recreational Activities — Unlawful Activities, Etc.
[Ord. No. 6535, 1-10-2019]
6. Repair or service a vehicle except those in need of emergency
repair.
7. Operate a vehicle in a careless and imprudent manner on any park
drive, parking lot or area.
8. Operate any vehicle in any City park without any required operator
or vehicle license, except for authorized children's battery-powered
toys.
9. Operate a motorized scooter or motorized bicycle.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person while in or about any park property,
which includes any park preservation, playground, recreation center,
building or any other area owned or used by the City and devoted to
passive or active recreation, and historical or memorial purposes, to:
1. Park a vehicle contrary to the directions and instructions of any
park personnel or Police Officer who may be present.
2. Park any motor vehicle on any park area except the paved park
roads or designated parking areas, unless authorized for a special
event.
3. No personal or commercial vehicle can be parked overnight in any
park with the exception of those on site for authorized and
permitted special events and tournaments, medical emergencies or
vehicles requiring emergency repairs. Emergency repairs and
medical emergencies are limited to twenty-four (24) hours. Special
events and tournaments require a permit from the Director.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person while in or about any park property,
which includes any park preservation, playground, recreation center,
building or any other area owned or used by the City and devoted to
passive or active recreation, and historical or memorial purposes, to:
1. Bathing And Swimming.
a. Swim, wade, bathe or wash in any waters or waterway in any
park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided
for such use.
b. Congregate around any swimming pool, bathhouse, waters or
places designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing,
except between such hours of the day as shall be designated by
the Director for such purposes for each area.
Section
225.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.070
100:297
c. Undress in any area or in any vehicle, or other places, except in
bathing houses and restrooms provided for that purpose.
d. Disregard or disobey any rules regulating the use of any
swimming pool, spray pads, water feature or facility as
established by the Director and posted at the facility.
2. Firearms.
a. No person in a City park shall use, carry or possess firearms
(except as otherwise allowed by law).
b. Firearms are not permitted in any City of O'Fallon buildings
per Code Section 215.280.
c. No person in a City park shall use or possess any weapon that
can be potentially inimical to wildlife or dangerous to human
safety, any instrument that can be loaded with or fire blank
cartridges, or any kind of trapping device. This prohibition
includes but is not limited to air rifles, spring guns, bows and
arrows, slings, and similar dangerous or damaging devices.
d. Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is
forbidden.
e. The Director may from time to time permit the trapping of any
animals considered to be a nuisance or threat to safety to the
extent allowed by law.
3. Picnic Area Use. No person shall:
a. Picnic or loiter in areas closed to public access or where such
activities are prohibited.
b. Violate the regulation that use of the individual barbecue pits
together with tables and benches follows generally the rule of
first come, first served.
c. Have exclusive use of any area unless granted such permission
by the Director.
d. Leave a picnic area before a barbecue pit fire is completely
extinguished, and before all trash, papers, cans, garbage and
other refuse is placed in the receptacles provided. If no such
trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be
carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be
properly disposed of elsewhere.
4. Camping. No person shall camp in any City park area other than by
permit in the designated group camping area of O'Day Park. This
area shall only be available for camping in accordance with the
guidelines and rates determined and set by the City, collected and
enforced by the Director.
Section
225.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
225.070
100:298
5. Horseback Riding. No person shall ride a horse or pony or allow
same to run at large except in conjunction with a civic parade or
event sponsored by the City or a bona fide organization with the
permission of the Director. Such horseback riding shall be confined
to the driveways of the park. When permitted in parades, horses
shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained, ridden with
due care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended, nor
shall they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub. The person
authorized to bring in the horse is responsible to clean up after the
horse.
6. Tennis And Multiuse Courts.
a. All courts may be reserved by the Parks and Recreation
Department for games, lessons or tournaments for a definite
period of time as determined by the Director.
b. Courts may not be used for any activity other than the playing
of the sport for which they were designed.
7. Musical Instruments, Sound Equipment.
a. No person shall operate or play any musical instrument, radio,
mechanical or electronic audio or video device, loudspeaker,
public address system or sound-amplifying equipment of any
kind within the boundaries of any City park or declared festival
district in such a manner as to cause the sound emanating
therefrom to exceed a loudness of seventy-five (75) decibels
when measured on the seventy (70) D.B. scale at a distance of
fifteen (15) feet from the sound source, without a written
permit issued by the Director.
b. In the event the operation or playing of any such device shall
unduly disturb other park occupants or persons living near the
parks, the Director or Police shall have the authority to order
the person responsible for such disturbances to reduce the
sound to a level that will not disturb other park occupants or
persons living near any park, regardless of permit or sound
levels.
c. In the event the person or persons responsible for disturbing
other park occupants or persons living near any park by
operating or playing any such device fails to reduce the sound
level as directed by the Director, Police or any parks personnel
employed by the City, he/she shall be subject to arrest if he or
she is believed to have committed any offense and/or ejection
from the park regardless of any permit or sound level.
8. Boating. No person shall use or attempt to use any boat or canoe in
any body of water in any park unless authorized by the Director.
Section
225.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.070
100:299
Section 225.080. Behavior Of Visitors To Park. [Ord. No. 6535,
1-10-2019]
9. Metal Detecting. The City's parks and all of its property are owned
for the general good of the City's residents. Everything on and in
park grounds, therefore, belongs to the people of the City.
Recreational metal detecting is not permitted within restricted
areas of the parks and may only be carried on elsewhere on park
property if conducted in such a way as to protect the people's
property. Any items found or recovered from park property must be
turned in to the Parks and Recreation Department.
a. Restricted areas include:
(1) Athletic fields.
(2) Historical areas.
(3) Irrigated lawns.
(4) Archaeological sites.
(5) Landscaped areas.
(6) Any locations marked with signs prohibiting metal
detecting.
b. The only permissible subsurface probe or excavating tool is a
hand tool specifically intended for use in metal detecting and
so designed and constructed to minimize disruption to the
ground surface and maximize effective site restoration and
having a probe not greater than four (4) inches in width and
twelve (12) inches in length (for example, a commercially
available implement commonly known as a "dirt dagger").
c. All disturbed areas shall be restored to their original condition.
10. Bicycles, Rollerblades, Scooters And Skateboards. It shall be
unlawful for any person while in or about a City park to:
a. Ride a bicycle or scooter or use rollerblades or a skateboard
where signage prohibits.
b. Ride a bicycle or scooter or use rollerblades or a skateboard
without reasonable regard to the safety of one's self and
others. Anyone engaging in such activities is encouraged to
wear the appropriate safety equipment.
11. Drones. It will be unlawful for any person to fly a drone or any
remote-controlled flying device in or over any portion of a public
park when any person is present.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person while in or about any park property,
which includes any park preservation, playground, recreation center,
Section
225.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
225.080
100:300
building or any other area owned or used by the City and devoted to
passive or active recreation, and historical or memorial purposes, to:
1. Sell or distribute alcohol of any kind in any City park without a
permit from the Director and the appropriate City, State and county
liquor license. Glass bottles are prohibited.
2. Drink or consume alcoholic beverages while under the age of
twenty-one (21) years.
3. Be under the influence of controlled substances or drugs, consume
or use controlled substances or drugs, or have in his/her possession
controlled substances or drugs of any kind, type or description
unless prescribed by a doctor of medicine.
4. Discard smoking or other paraphernalia on the ground.
5. Have brought, or have in his/her possession, or discharge any
fireworks, rockets or explosives, or to discharge or throw them into
any park area from roadways or land adjacent thereto without
permission of the Director. This prohibition includes any
substances or compound that would be dangerous from any of the
foregoing standpoints. This Section does not regulate fireworks
displays sponsored by the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
6. Allow any dog or pet to run at large in any park.
a. Pets should be retained at all times on an adequate leash not
greater than six (6) feet in length.
b. It is the responsibility of the pet owner to maintain direct
control of the leash at all times.
c. All pets must have a current St. Charles County rabies control
tag attached to their collars or in their owners' possession.
d. Pet owners are responsible for cleaning up after their pets,
including, but not limited to, feces. Pet waste receptacles are
located in the parks.
e. Pets may be banned from certain areas or events within the
parks, with the exception of service animals and law
enforcement animals.
f. These areas/events will be posted, and include but are not
limited to:
(1) All playground areas.
(2) Heritage and Freedom Fest.
(3) Celebration of Lights Holiday Stroll.
Section
225.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.080
100:301
Section 225.090. Merchandising, Advertising And Signs. [Ord. No.
6535, 1-10-2019]
7. Occupy any seat or bench, baseball diamond, building, field, court,
horseshoe pit or enter into or loiter or remain in any pavilion or
other park structure or grounds or section thereof which may be
reserved and designated by the Director for use by other persons or
groups.
8. In order to protect the free and safe movement of attendees
throughout the park grounds, no one may solicit sales of goods or
contributions except at stands designated and authorized for that
purpose.
9. Petition for signatures for any purpose within one hundred (100)
feet of the entrance to a City-sponsored event or facility requiring
admission.
10. Build or attempt to build a fire on the ground, paving or any other
areas except under such regulations as may be designated by the
Director.
11. Engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or
indecent language; or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior
tending to be a breach of the public peace or otherwise create a
nuisance.
12. Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the Director he/she
claims to have upon request of any authorized person who shall
desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance
with any City ordinance or regulation.
13. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party
occupying any area or participating in an activity under the
authority of a permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person while in or about any park property,
which includes any park preservation, playground, recreation center,
building or any other area owned or used by the City and devoted to
passive or active recreation, and historical or memorial purposes, to:
1. Expose or offer for sale any article or item; nor shall anyone station
or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale, or
display of any such article or item other than in compliance with a
permit issued by the Director, which must be carried while vending.
2. Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any
article or service for sale or hire.
3. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any political, commercial or
personal sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever in or
Section
225.080
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
225.090
100:302
Section 225.100. Park Operating Policy. [Ord. No. 6535, 1-10-2019]
on any public land, building, wall, fence, tree, post, telephone pole
or on any such surface on or along any roadway adjacent to a park.
4. Pass out commercial handbills, pamphlets, newsletters, literature,
pictures or make speeches designed to promote the sale of any item
or thing within any City park facility or a designated festival district
without the written permission of the Director.
5. Engage in any business or conduct or provide any service, training,
instruction, practice, coaching, or enterprise of any nature in any
park or in any recreation facility. Exception is given to the activities
provided by the Parks and Recreation Department.
6. The provisions of this Section relating to merchandising,
conducting business, advertising and signs shall not apply to
licensed concessionaires or organizations participating in festivals
and civic events as approved by the Director.
A. Hours. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be
open to the public every day of the year during designated hours. The
opening and closing hours for each individual park shall generally be as
follows. Please check the website www.ofallon.mo.us/parks&rec or
contact the Parks and Recreation office at 379-5606.
1. Dawn to dusk: Fort Zumwalt Park, Knaust Park, O'Day Park, Sports
Park.
2. Dawn to 11:00 P.M.: Civic Park, Dames Park, Ozzie Smith Sport
Complex, Westhoff Park.
3. Dawn to 10:00 P.M.: Westhoff Plaza Skatepark.
B. Only persons authorized by permit of the Director may be in any park
during closed periods.
C. The finding of lost articles by park attendants shall be reported to the
Director who shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner. The
Director and park attendants shall make a reasonable effort to find
articles reported lost.
D. Permit. A permit shall be obtained from the Director or his/her designee
before hosting the following park activities: sponsorship of a public
picnic, public celebration or event, concert, organized use of picnic
grounds, baseball or softball fields, tennis/multiuse courts, soccer
fields, football fields, and any other areas or fields to be used for league
play, games or tournament play by persons, schools, companies, etc.
Guidelines and fees will be as stated in the facility use, special event
and athletic field policies.
Section
225.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.100
100:303
Section 225.110. Enforcement And Penalties. [Ord. No. 6535,
1-10-2019]
1. Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit shall file an
application with the Director. Applications are available at
www.ofallon.mo.us/parks&rec.
2. Standards For Issuance. If the facilities desired by the applicant
have not been reserved for another use during the time sought in
the application, he Director shall issue a permit if he/she finds:
a. The proposed activity or use of the park:
(1) Will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the
general public enjoyment of the park;
(2) Will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the
promotion of public health, welfare and safety and
recreation;
(3) Is not anticipated to incite disorderly conduct, violence or
crime;
(4) Will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome
expense or Police supervision by the City;
b. The facility desired has not already been reserved for another
use during or adjacent to this request.
3. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in
the permit itself. The permittee agrees that all persons involved in
the event will observe the terms and conditions of the permit when
issued and will comply with requests of the Director concerning
traffic arrangements, sound and crowd control measures, and use
of park facilities.
4. The permittee shall be liable to any person by reason of the
negligence of the permittee.
5. The Director and Police shall have the authority to revoke a permit
upon determination of violation of any rule or ordinance or for
other good cause.
A. Officials. The Director, Police or other officials employed by the City
shall in connection with their duties imposed by law enforce the rules
and regulations of this Chapter 225.
B. Arrest Or Ejectment. The Director, Police or other officials employed by
the City shall have the authority to have arrested or ejected from the
park any person acting in violation of rules and regulations or any
ordinances governing the parks of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
Section
225.100
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
225.110
100:304
C. Seizure Of Property. The Director, Police or any other officials employed
by the City shall have the full authority to seize and confiscate any
property, thing, animal or device used in the park in violation of these
rules and regulations.
D. In addition to the provisions of Subsections (A) through (C) of this
Section, any person who has been found to be in violation of any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon
conviction thereof may be punished as set out in Section 100.010 of this
Code.
Section
225.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.110
100:305

ARTICLE II
Additional Regulations And Restrictions Concerning The Carshield
Field Stadium
Section 225.120. Carshield Field Stadium. [Ord. No. 6535,
1-10-2019]
A. No person on stadium property or parking lots or on adjacent streets or
sidewalks, other than authorized personnel, shall at any time sell or
attempt to sell tickets for any event held at, or to be held at, the
CarShield Field Stadium.
B. No animals, with the exception of service animals and Police canines,
shall be allowed in the stadium or onto the playing field, playing
diamond, playing court, track, ring, stage, or any other playing or
exhibition area, or any other restricted area immediately adjacent
therein at the CarShield Field Stadium, unless specifically authorized
by the City of O'Fallon.
C. No person who is a spectator at any athletic event or exhibition shall
shoot, throw, toss or deposit any bottle, can, metal, paper or debris or
thing of any type or nature whatsoever onto the playing field, playing
diamond, playing court, track, ring, stage, or any other playing or
exhibition area, or any other restricted area immediately adjacent
therein, or at any person participating as a player, official or promoter
or employee thereof.
D. No person who is a spectator at an athletic event or exhibition shall
disturb the peace of others by riotous or disorderly conduct; or by
profane, obscene, indecent, lewd or offensive language calculated to
provoke a breach of the peace; or by violent, tumultuous, offensive or
obstreperous conduct; or by assaulting, striking or fighting another.
E. No person who is a spectator at any athletic event or exhibition shall go
onto the playing field, playing diamond, playing court, track, ring,
stage, or any other playing or exhibition area, or any other restricted
area immediately adjacent thereto, designated as restricted by the
promoter of the event or exhibition, without first obtaining the
permission of the promoter thereof.
F. No person shall bring any food, beverage(s) or cooler(s) of any kind into
the CarShield Field Stadium. An exception will be made for persons
needing such items for medical reasons, provided notification is made
to the promoter prior to entering the stadium.
G. Smoking Prohibited Within CarShield Field Stadium.
1. As used herein, the following term shall have the following
meaning:
SMOKE — Possession of burning tobacco in the form of a cigarette,
cigar, pipe or other smoking equipment.
Section
225.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.120
100:307
2. A person shall not smoke within CarShield Field Stadium.
3. Any person in violation of this Subsection shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00).
H. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this Section shall
be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of up to five hundred dollars
($500.00) or to imprisonment for up to ninety (90) days, or to both such
fine and imprisonment.
Section
225.120
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
225.120
100:308
ARTICLE III
Additional Rules, Regulations And Restrictions Of City-Sponsored
Festivals
Section 225.130. Festival District Declared. [Ord. No. 6535,
1-10-2019]
Section 225.140. Notification — Public Announcements. [Ord. No.
6535, 1-10-2019]
Whenever a festival district is declared, notification shall be, but not be
limited to, public announcements on the O'Fallon cable public access
channel and publication in one (1) Recreation Department brochure
delivered to substantially all residences within the Festival District and the
majority of other City residents. This notification shall be made at least
fifteen (15) days before the first day of the festival event. The City may
utilize other means of notification as it may deem appropriate from time to
time.
Section 225.150. Parking Violation — Impoundment Of Vehicles.
[Ord. No. 6535, 1-10-2019]
The O'Fallon Police Department is hereby authorized to tow and impound
any vehicle(s) parked in violation of any restrictions established pursuant
to this Article. It will be the responsibility of the owner of any towed or
impounded vehicle to pay for any tow or impoundment charges or fees.
Section 225.160. Parking Restrictions. [Ord. No. 6535, 1-10-2019]
Whenever a festival is declared, parking restrictions on streets and
thoroughfares within the Festival District will be in effect during the dates
and times of the festival as deemed appropriate by the City of O'Fallon Parks
and Recreation Department and Police Department and shown on signage
posted at reasonable intervals and locations in the festival district area. For
a complete list of parking restrictions please visit www.ofallon.mo.us.
A. Whenever the Mayor or City Administrator declares a festival occurring
in or around any City park, property or facility for the purpose of a
festival or event open to the public, the entire area of land will reside
within the corporate City limits of O'Fallon, including residences,
businesses and commercial establishments, streets, parks, common
ground and all other areas encompassed by the boundaries declared as
the Festival District.
B. The special restrictions, limitations and conditions described in this
Article will be in effect during the dates and times specified by the
Mayor or City Administrator in the festival declaration.
Section
225.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.170
100:309
Section 225.170. Traffic Flow Patterns — Changes. [Ord. No. 6535,
1-10-2019]
The City of O'Fallon is authorized to change traffic flow patterns, establish
one-way streets, add, delete or alter any traffic control device(s), restrict
parking, control ingress and egress from all public streets, public or private
parking lots or private roadways, or establish any other traffic control
measures deemed necessary to assist in the traffic flow and to ensure
emergency vehicle access in association with a declared festival, subject to
approval by the City Traffic Engineer and the Chief of Police. However, the
Chief of Police or his/her designee may implement or utilize any reasonable
traffic control measures without the approval of the Traffic Engineer in an
emergency situation.
Section 225.180. Restrictions. [Ord. No. 6535, 1-10-2019]
A. When the Mayor or City Administrator declares a festival and the
Festival District is established, the following restrictions shall be in
place:
1. No weapon, knife, firearm, projectile weapon, blackjack or other
weapon capable of lethal use may be carried or displayed in a
Festival District in violation of restrictions of Sections 215.250 and
215.280 of the Code of Ordinances.
2. Temporary shelters such as tents, large umbrellas, gazebos, dining
canopies, etc., will not be allowed during the festival times.
3. It is unlawful for any person(s) to bring glass containers into the
areas specified in this Section, above, during the festival times.
Non-motorized "coolers," defined as any device used to keep
beverages, foods or ice cool, may be brought into the above
indicated areas but are subject to search by law enforcement or
park personnel at any time.
4. All persons are hereby prohibited from bringing animals of any
type, with the exception of service animals or Police canine or
horses, into any area specified in this Section, above, during a
festival as declared by the Mayor or City Administrator. This
includes pets on leashes or other restraints.
5. It is unlawful for any person(s) to ride skateboards, roller blades,
in-line skates, bicycles, motorized coolers or any unauthorized
motorized vehicle, in the areas specified as the festival district
declared, during any festivals.
6. Soliciting or distribution of handbills is not allowed unless you are
an authorized vendor or sponsored with a permit to do so.
7. Fireworks, other than the City-sponsored display, are not allowed in
the festival district.
Section
225.170
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
225.180
100:310
Section 225.190. Violations And Penalties. [Ord. No. 6535,
1-10-2019]
Conviction of a violation of any provision of this Article is punishable by
a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the St.
Charles County Jail for a period up to ninety (90) days, or to both such fine
and imprisonment.
8. Any other restrictions deemed necessary by the City
Administration, Police Chief or Director of Parks and Recreation
will be posted at the entry to the festival and on the website
www.ofallon.mo.us.
Section
225.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.190
100:311

ARTICLE IV
Additional Rules And Regulations For Veterans Memorial Park
Section 225.200. Veterans Memorial Park. [Ord. No. 6535,
1-10-2019]
A. Because the Memorial Walk is a memorial to the veterans of the armed
forces of the United States and because certain acts, appropriate
elsewhere, are not appropriate in the Memorial Walk, all visitors,
including persons attending or taking part in any picnic, celebration,
parade, service or exercise, shall observe proper standards of decorum
and decency while within the Memorial Walk grounds. For the
foregoing reasons, the following acts by any person within the confines
of the Memorial Walk shall be, and the same are hereby, prohibited:
1. No company, society, organization or group of more than ten (10)
persons shall hold or conduct any picnic, celebration, parade,
service or exercise ("event") without first obtaining a permit, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to take part in any event held or
conducted contrary to the provisions hereof.
B. The Memorial Walk shall be open for use twenty-four (24) hours per day.
C. Requests by members of the public for a permit to conduct any event
shall be submitted to the Director of Parks and Recreation Department
at least thirty (30) days prior to proposed event date. Such requests
shall describe the proposed event in detail, to the extent possible, to
include the type of event, the name of the individual or organization
sponsoring the event, the names of all key individuals participating in
the event, the estimated number of persons expected to attend the
event, the date and time of the event, the expected length of the event,
the event's format and content, whether permission to use loudspeaker
systems or musical instruments or flags during the service is requested
and, if so, a description of the programs, and whether any military
organization's support or presence is requested. Events and event
participants and attendees shall obey all rules set out in Subsection (A)
and shall act in a dignified and proper manner at all times while in the
Memorial Walk. No permit request that meets the requirements stated
herein shall be unreasonably withheld.
D. Any person violating any of the provisions stated herein shall upon
conviction be fined a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
and/or confinement for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
E. The City Council, the City administration, and the Parks and Recreation
Department shall, at their request, be advised on matters concerning
the Memorial Walk by the Veterans Commission.
Section
225.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.200
100:313
Chapter 230
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note — Ord. no. 5752 §1, adopted December 8, 2011, repealed ch.
230 "preservation of trees" in its entirety. Former ch. 230 derived from R.O.
2007 §§230.010—230.080; ord. no. 1689 §§1—8, 4-6-89. See chapter 402
"Trees and Landscaping".
Section 230.010. through Section 230.080. (Reserved)
Chapter 235
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
Editor’s Note — Section 1 of Ord. No. 5926, adopted 8-8-2013, renamed
this chapter, and Section 2 of Ord. No. 5926 created Article I, to consist of
Sections 235.010 through 235.120.
Section
225.200
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
230.010
100:314
ARTICLE I
Emergency Preparedness Organization
Section 235.010. Established. [R.O. 2007 §235.010; CC 1978
§250.010; Ord. No. 815 §1, 4-21-1981]
There is hereby created within and for the territory of the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri, an Emergency Preparedness Organization to be known as the
City of O'Fallon Emergency Management Agency, which is responsible for
the preparation and implementation of emergency functions required to
prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage due to disasters, including
emergency management of resources and administration of such economic
controls as may be needed to provide for the public welfare, and emergency
activities (excluding functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible) in accordance with Chapter 44, RSMo., and the Missouri
Operations Plan and Program adopted thereunder.
Section 235.020. Organization. [R.O. 2007 §235.020; CC 1978
§250.020; Ord. No. 815 §2, 4-21-1981]
The Emergency Management Agency shall consist of a Coordinator, Deputy
Coordinator, and other members, as necessary, appointed by the Mayor
to conform to the State Organization and procedures for the conduct of
emergency operations as outlined in the Missouri Operations Plan and
Program.
Section 235.030. Functions. [R.O. 2007 §235.030; CC 1978
§250.030; Ord. No. 815 §3, 4-21-1981]
The Organization shall perform emergency management functions within
the territorial limits of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, and may conduct these
functions outside the territorial limits as directed by the Governor during
the time of emergency pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 44, RSMo.
Section 235.040. Coordinator — Appointment and Responsibilities.
[R.O. 2007 §235.040; CC 1978 §250.040; Ord. No. 815 §4,
4-21-1981]
Section 235.050. Executive Officer. [R.O. 2007 §235.050; CC 1978
§250.050; Ord. No. 815 §5, 4-21-1981]
A. The Chief of Police shall serve as Coordinator and shall recommend
appointment of the Deputy Coordinator.
B. The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration and operations of local emergency management
activities.
C. The Deputy Coordinator shall be responsible for maintaining records
and accounting for the use and disposal of all items of equipment placed
under the jurisdiction of the Emergency Management office.
Section
235.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
235.050
100:315
Section 235.060. Oath. [R.O. 2007 §235.060; CC 1978 §250.060;
Ord. No. 815 §6, 4-21-1981]
No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity with the City
of O'Fallon Emergency Management Agency advocates or has advocated a
change by force or violence in the constitutional form of the government of
the United States or in this State or the overthrow of any government in the
United States by force or violence, or who has been convicted of or is under
indictment or information charging any subversive act against the United
States. Each person who is appointed to serve with the City of O'Fallon
Emergency Management Agency shall, before entering upon his/her duties,
take an oath, in writing, before a person authorized to administer oaths in
this State, which oath shall be as follows:
"I, ____________________ do solemnly swear that I will support and defend
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Missouri, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true
faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without
any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do
further swear that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any political
party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the
United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time
A. The Mayor of the City of O'Fallon and the Coordinator, in accordance
with Chapter 44, RSMo., may:
1. Appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and
distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency
management purposes, provide for the health and safety of
persons, including emergency assistance to victims of an enemy
attack; ensure the safety of property, and direct and coordinate the
development of disaster plans and programs in accordance with the
policies and plans of Federal and State Governments;
2. Appoint, provide, or remove rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police
personnel and other emergency operation teams, units or
personnel who may serve with or without compensation;
3. In the event of enemy attack, waive the provisions of State Statutes
requiring advertisements for bids for the performance of public
works or entering into contracts;
4. With the approval of the Governor and consistent with the Missouri
Operations Plan and Program, enter into mutual-aid agreements
with other public and private agencies within and without the State
for reciprocal emergency aid;
5. Accept services, materials, equipment, supplies or funds granted or
loaned by the Federal Government for disaster planning and
operations purposes.
Section
235.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
235.060
100:316
as I am a member of the City of O'Fallon Emergency Management Agency, I
will not advocate or become a member of any political party or organization
that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United States or of
this State by force or violence."
Section 235.070. Prevailing Decision. [R.O. 2007 §235.070; CC 1978
§250.070; Ord. No. 815 §7, 4-21-1981]
Should the Mayor and the Coordinator disagree on any policy or decision,
the opinion of the Mayor shall prevail, subject to review by the City Council.
Section 235.080. Operative Time. [R.O. 2007 §235.080; CC 1978
§250.080; Ord. No. 815 §8, 4-21-1981]
The provisions of this Chapter shall be operative only during the existence
of a state of emergency (referred to in this Chapter as "emergency").
The existence of an emergency may be proclaimed by the Governor or by
resolution of the legislature, if the Governor in his/her proclamation, or the
legislature in its resolution, finds that an attack upon the United States has
occurred, or that a natural or man-made disaster of major proportions has
actually occurred within this State, and that the safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of this State and City require an invocation of the provisions of
this Chapter.
Section 235.090. Claims. [R.O. 2007 §235.090; CC 1978 §250.090;
Ord. No. 815 §9, 4-21-1981]
When any property is seized, taken or requisitioned under this Chapter, the
Circuit Court of St. Charles County may on the application of the owner
thereof or on the application of the Governor in cases where numerous
claims may be filed, appoint three (3) disinterested Commissioners in the
manner provided by Section 523.040, RSMo., to assess the damages which
the owners may have sustained by reason of the appropriation thereof.
Upon the application the amount due because of the seizure of property
shall be determined in the manner provided in Chapter 523, RSMo., for the
determination of damages in case of the exercise of the power of eminent
domain.
Section 235.100. Office Space. [R.O. 2007 §235.100; CC 1978
§250.100; Ord. No. 815 §10, 4-21-1981]
The Mayor of the City of O'Fallon is authorized to designate space in
any building owned or leased by the City for the O'Fallon Emergency
Management Command Center.
Section 235.110. Violations. [R.O. 2007 §235.110; CC 1978
§250.110; Ord. No. 815 §11, 4-21-1981]
Any person violating any rule or regulation adopted under this Chapter,
after it has become effective during an emergency or any person or officer
violating any provision of this law shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
Section
235.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
235.120
100:317
Section 235.120. Civil Preparedness Plan. [R.O. 2007 §235.120; CC
1978 §250.120; Ord. No. 863 §§1—2, 10-1-1981]
A. Under the provisions of Section 44.010 et seq., RSMo., Missouri Cities
of the Third Class, O'Fallon being such, have the authority to provide for
the civil defense as part of the public welfare, and to establish plans to
accomplish that purpose.
B. Pursuant to said statutory authority, as well as the preceding Sections
of this Chapter, the current Civil Preparedness Plan, which is
incorporated by reference herein, and a copy of which is on file in the
office of the City Clerk, is hereby adopted by the City of O'Fallon,
superseding the Disaster Survival Plan dated December 3, 1964.
Section
235.120
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
235.120
100:318
ARTICLE II
Other Emergency Procedures
Section 235.130. Storm And Disaster Debris Clean-Up. [Ord. No.
5926 §3, 8-8-2013]
A. In addition to such powers and procedures as may be provided under
the City's emergency response plans and procedures, and subject to
annual appropriation or Council approval as hereinafter provided, in
response to a qualifying weather or disaster event as hereinafter
defined, the Mayor may declare the need for emergency response in
areas of the City affected by the event and specifically defined in such
declaration and, within such areas, may:
1. Suspend the normal rules and restrictions for collection of debris,
yard waste and tree debris by the City's trash haulers and
temporarily implement different rules and restrictions allowing
greater flexibility in the collection of debris, yard waste and tree
debris; and/or
2. Waive fees for collection of excess debris, yard waste and tree
debris; and/or
3. In accordance with the City's applicable purchasing procedures,
provide for, coordinate and engage contractors or equipment to
perform special collection, transportation and disposal, at the
City's cost, of waste and natural debris (trees, shrubs, limbs and
similar vegetative debris) resulting from the qualifying weather
event.
B. Internal and third party costs associated with special collection,
transportation and disposal of storm or disaster debris shall be limited
to that amount appropriated by the City Council as part of the budget or
to that amount approved by the City Council in other action.
C. For purposes of this Section, a "qualifying weather or disaster event"
shall mean an event which:
1. Results in a declaration of disaster or emergency encompassing a
part of the City of O'Fallon by either the President of the United
States or the Governor of the State of Missouri, or
2. Results in widespread damage and destruction of property of such
severity as to affect the public generally and pose an unreasonable
risk to the public health, safety and welfare.
Section
235.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
235.130
100:319
Chapter 240
HUMAN RELATIONS
Section
235.130
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
235.130
100:320
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 240.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §240.020]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to
have the meanings indicated below:
COMMISSION — The State Commission on Human Rights.
COMPLAINANT — A person who has filed a complaint with the Commission
alleging that another person has engaged in a prohibited discriminatory
practice.
DISCRIMINATION — Any unfair treatment based on race, color, religion,
religious affiliation, national origin, ancestry, sex, handicap, or familial
status as it relates to housing.
DWELLING — Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied
as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more
families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion
thereof.
FAMILIAL STATUS — One or more individuals who have not attained the
age of eighteen (18) years being domiciled with:
HANDICAP — A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits
one or more of a person's major life activities, a condition perceived as
such, or a record of having such an impairment, which with or without
reasonable accommodation does not interfere with utilizing the place of
public accommodation, or occupying the dwelling in question. For purposes
of this Chapter, the term "handicap" does not include current, illegal use of
or addiction to a controlled substance as such term is defined by Section
195.010, RSMo., however, a person may be considered handicapped if that
person:
1. A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual; or
The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with
the written permission of such parent or other person.
The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in
the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not
attained the age of eighteen (18) years.
2.
Has successfully completed a supervised drug rehabilitation program
and is no longer engaging in the illegal use of, and is not currently
addicted to, a controlled substance or has otherwise been rehabilitated
successfully and is no longer engaging in such use and is not currently
addicted;
1.
Section
240.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
240.010
100:321
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS — Housing:
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, organizations, labor organizations, legal representatives,
mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries, or other organized groups of persons.
PLACES OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION — All places or businesses
offering or holding out to the general public, goods, services, privileges,
facilities, advantages or accommodations for the peace, comfort, health,
welfare and safety of the general public or such public places providing
food, shelter, recreation and amusement, including, but not limited to:
Is participating in a supervised rehabilitation program and is no longer
engaging in illegal use of controlled substances; or
2.
Is erroneously regarded as currently illegally using, or being addicted
to, a controlled substance.
3.
Provided under any State or Federal program that the Commission
determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly
persons, as defined in the State or Federal program; or
1.
Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two (62) years of age
or older; or
2.
Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty-five
(55) years of age or older per unit.
Housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this Chapter if:
1. The housing has significant facilities and services specifically
designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or
if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable,
that such housing is necessary to provide important housing
opportunities for older persons; and
2. At least eighty percent (80%) of the units are occupied by at least
one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit; and
3. The owner or manager of the housing has published and adhered to
policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by said owner
or manager to provide housing for persons fifty-five (55) years of
age or older.
3.
Any inn, hotel, motel, or other establishment which provides lodging to
transient guests, other than an establishment located within a building
which contains not more than five (5) rooms for rent or hire and which
is actually occupied by the proprietor of such establishment as his/her
residence;
1.
Any restaurant, cafeteria, lunchroom, lunch counter, soda fountain, or
other facility principally engaged in selling food for consumption on the
premises, including, but not limited to, any such facility located on the
premises of any retail establishment;
2.
Section
240.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
240.010
100:322
RENT — Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant;
RESPONDENT — A person who is alleged to have engaged in a prohibited
discriminatory practice in a complaint filed with the Commission;
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE — Any act that is unlawful
under this Chapter.
Any gasoline station, including all facilities located on the premises of
such gasoline station and made available to the patrons thereof;
3.
Any motion picture house, theater, concert hall, sports arena, stadium,
or other place of exhibition or entertainment;
4.
Any public facility owned, operated, or managed by or on behalf of this
state or any agency or subdivision thereof, or any public corporation;
and any such facility supported in whole or in part by public funds;
5.
Any establishment which is physically located within the premises of
any establishment otherwise covered by this Section or within the
premises of which is physically located any such covered establishment,
and which holds itself out as serving patrons of such covered
establishment;
6.
Section
240.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
240.010
100:323

ARTICLE II
Discriminatory Practices
Section 240.020. Unlawful Housing Practices.
A. It shall be an unlawful housing practice:
1. To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, to deny or otherwise
make unavailable a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status.
2. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial
status.
3. To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published
any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, sex, disability or familial status, or an intention to make
any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
4. To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status that any dwelling is
not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in
fact so available.
5. To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any
dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular
race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or
familial status.
6. To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a
disability of:
a. That buyer or renter;
b. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
c. Any person associated with that buyer or renter.
7. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a
disability of:
a. That person;
Section
240.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
240.020
100:325
b. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
c. Any person associated with that person.
B. For purposes of Sections 240.020, 240.030 and 240.040, discrimination
includes:
1. A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with the disability,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in
the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do
so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing
to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed
before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
2. A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary
to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling.
3. In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily
dwellings for first (1st) occupancy after March 13, 1991, a
failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner
that:
a. The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by persons with a disability.
b. All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by persons with a disability in wheelchairs.
c. All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
(1) An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
(2) Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
(3) Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and
(4) Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
C. As used in Subdivision (3) of Subsection (B) of this Section, the term
"covered multi-family dwelling" means:
1. Buildings consisting of four (4) or more units if such buildings have
one (1) or more elevators; and
Section
240.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
240.020
100:326
Section 240.030. Discrimination in Commercial Real Estate Loans.
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose
business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real
estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance because of race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status
to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, construction,
improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against
him/her in fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or
conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status of
such person or of any person associated with him/her in connection with
such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective
owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwellings in relation to which
such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
Section 240.040. Discrimination in Selling or Renting By Real
Estate Agencies Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers'
organization or other service organization or facility relating to the business
of selling or renting dwellings on account of race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status.
Section 240.050. Discrimination in Public Accommodations
Prohibited — Exceptions.
2. Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more
units.
D. Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American
National Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility
and usability for people with physical disabilities, commonly cited as
"ANSI A117.1", suffices to satisfy the requirements of Subsection
(B)(3)(a) of this Section.
A. All persons within the City of O'Fallon are free and equal and shall be
entitled to the full and equal use and enjoyment within this State of any
place of public accommodation, as hereinafter defined, without
discrimination or segregation on the grounds of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, ancestry or disability.
B. It is an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person, directly or
indirectly, to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person or to
attempt to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person any of the
accommodations, advantages, facilities, services or privileges made
available in any place of public accommodation, as defined in Section
240.010 and this Section, or to segregate or discriminate against any
Section
240.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
240.050
100:327
Section 240.060. Additional Unlawful Discriminatory Practices.
Section 240.070. Exemptions.
such person in the use thereof on the grounds of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, ancestry or disability.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a private club, a place of
accommodation owned by or operated on behalf of a religious
corporation, association or society or other establishment which is not
in fact open to the public, unless the facilities of such establishments
are made available to the customers or patrons of a place of public
accommodation as defined in Section 240.010 and this Section.
A. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice:
1. To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the commission of acts
prohibited under this Chapter or to attempt to do so;
2. To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any other person
because such person has opposed any practice prohibited by this
Chapter or because such person has filed a complaint, testified,
assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation,
proceeding or hearing conducted pursuant to this Chapter;
3. For the City to discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, ancestry, age, as it relates to employment,
disability or familial status as it relates to housing; or
4. To discriminate in any manner against any other person because of
such person's association with any person protected by this
Chapter.
A. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to invalidate or limit any law
of the State or of the City that requires dwellings to be designed and
constructed in a manner that affords persons with disabilities greater
access than is required by this Chapter.
B. Nothing in Sections 240.020, 240.030 and 240.040:
1. Requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose
tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of
other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
2. Limits the applicability of any reasonable local restriction
regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy
a dwelling, nor does any provision of said Sections regarding
familial status apply with respect to housing for older persons.
3. Shall prohibit conduct against a person because such person has
been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal
Section
240.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
240.070
100:328
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance, as defined
by Section 195.010, RSMo.
C. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society or any non-profit institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or
occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving
preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall
anything in this Chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the
public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its
members or from giving preference to its members.
D. Nothing in this Chapter, other than the prohibitions against
discriminatory advertising in Subsection (A)(3) of Section 240.020,
shall apply to:
1. The sale or rental of any single-family house by a private individual
owner, provided the following conditions are met:
a. The private individual owner does not own or have any interest
in more than three (3) single-family houses at any one time;
and
b. The house is sold or rented without the use of a real estate
broker, agent or salesperson or the facilities of any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings and without
publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement. If the
owner selling the house does not reside in it at the time of the
sale or was not the most recent resident of the house prior to
such sale, the exemption in this Section applies to only one (1)
such sale in any twenty-four (24) month period.
2. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one (1) of such living quarters as his/her residence.
Section
240.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
240.070
100:329
Chapter 245
SOLID WASTE
Section 245.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §245.010; CC 1978
§235.010; Ord. No. 4434 §1, 11-18-2002]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to
have the meanings indicated below:
APPROVED INCINERATOR — An incinerator which complies with all
current regulations of the responsible local and State air pollution control
agencies.
BULKY RUBBISH — Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of waste
materials from dwelling units, commercial, industrial, institutional, or
agricultural establishments which are either too large or too heavy to be
safely and conveniently loaded in solid waste transportation vehicles by
solid waste collectors, with the equipment available therefor.
CITY — The City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
COLLECTION — Removal of solid waste from its place of storage to the
transportation vehicle.
DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Waste materials from the
construction or destruction of residential, industrial or commercial
structures.
DIRECTOR — The City Administrator shall designate the Director of
Environmental Services to serve as the Director of the Solid Waste
Management Program of the City.
DISPOSABLE SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — Disposable plastic or paper
sacks with a capacity of thirty-five (35) gallons specifically designed for
storage of solid waste.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a structure,
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or are
intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food.
HAZARDOUS WASTES — Including but not limited to, pathological wastes,
explosive wastes, pesticides, pesticide containers, toxic or radioactive
materials.
MULTIPLE HOUSING FACILITY — A housing facility containing more than
one (1) dwelling unit under one (1) roof.
OCCUPANT — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
shall be in actual possession of any dwelling unit or of any other improved
real property, either as owner or as a tenant.
Section
240.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
245.010
100:330
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political
subdivision, or organization of any kind, or their legal representative, agent
or assigns.
PROCESSING — Incinerating, composting, baling, shredding, salvaging,
compacting and other processes whereby solid waste characteristics are
modified or solid waste quantity is reduced.
REFUSE — Solid waste.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials including,
but not limited to, solid and semisolid waste materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural, governmental and domestic activities,
but does not include hazardous waste as defined in Sections 260.360 to
260.432, RSMo., recovered materials, overburden, rock, tailings, matte,
slag or other waste material resulting from mining, milling or smelting.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — Receptacle used by any person to store solid
waste during the interval between solid waste collections.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL — The process of discarding or getting rid of
unwanted material. In particular the final disposition of solid waste by man.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT — The entire solid waste system of storage,
collection, transportation, processing and disposal.
SPECIAL WASTE — Solid waste that requires special handling, i.e.,
hazardous waste, derelict automobiles and dead animals.
STORAGE — Keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste from the time of
its production until the time of its collection.
TRANSPORTATION —
YARD WASTES — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden vegetation and
Christmas trees. The term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with
intact root balls.
WHITE GOODS — Refrigerators, washing machines, stoves, freezers,
driers, etc.
Section 245.020. Solid Waste Storage. [R.O. 2007 §245.020; CC
1978 §235.020; Ord. No. 480 §2, 9-17-1974; Ord. No. 4434 §2,
11-18-2002; Ord. No. 4579 §1, 10-15-2003; Ord. No. 5515 §1,
10-22-2009]
The transporting of solid waste from the place of its production until
the time of its collection.
1.
The transporting of solid waste from the place of collection or
processing to a solid waste processing facility or solid waste disposal
area.
2.
A. The occupant of every dwelling unit and of every institutional,
commercial or business, industrial or agricultural establishment
Section
245.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.020
100:331
Section 245.030. Collection of Solid Waste. [R.O. 2007 §245.030; CC
1978 §235.030; Ord. No. 480 §3, 9-17-1974; Ord. No. 4434 §3,
11-18-2002]
producing solid waste within the corporate limits of the City, shall
provide sufficient and adequate containers for the storage of all solid
waste except bulky rubbish and demolition and construction waste to
serve each such dwelling unit and/or establishment; and to maintain
such solid waste containers at all times in good repair.
B. The occupant of every dwelling unit and of every institutional,
commercial, industrial, agricultural or business establishment shall
place all solid waste to be collected in proper solid waste containers,
except as otherwise provided herein, and shall maintain such solid
waste containers and the area surrounding them in a clean, neat and
sanitary condition at all times.
C. All single-family, two-family and attached single-family residential
dwelling units shall be served by the City's trash service. Residential
solid waste for collection by the City shall be stored in containers of not
more than ninety-six (96) gallons supplied by the City. The City reserves
the right to specify other storage methods. The City shall not collect
solid waste from any containers other than those supplied by the City.
All containers shall be leak-proof, water-proof and fitted with a fly-tight
lid and shall be properly covered at all times except when depositing
waste therein or removing the contents thereof.
D. Commercial solid waste shall be stored in solid waste containers as
approved by the Director. The containers shall be water-proof,
leakproof and shall be covered at all times except when depositing
waste therein or removing the contents thereof; and shall meet all
requirements as set forth by Section 245.050.
E. Tree limbs less than four (4) inches in diameter and brush shall be
securely tied in bundles not larger than forty-eight (48) inches long and
eighteen (18) inches in diameter when not placed in storage containers.
The weight of any individual bundle shall not exceed seventy-five (75)
pounds.
F. Yard wastes shall be stored in containers or biodegradable paper bags
so constructed and maintained so as to prevent the dispersal of wastes
placed therein upon the premises served, upon adjacent premises or
upon adjacent rights-of-way. The weight of any individual container and
contents shall not exceed sixty (60) pounds.
G. Owners of solid waste containers which are not approved by the
Coordinator will be notified that containers must meet City
specifications.
A. The City shall provide for the collection of all solid waste in the City,
provided however, that the City may provide the collection service by
Section
245.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
245.030
100:332
contracting with a person, County, or other City or a combination
thereof, for the entire City or portions thereof, as deemed to be in
the best interests of the City. The City may, at its discretion, provide
commercial solid waste collection services upon specific application of
the owners or persons in charge thereof. However, in the event that
such application is not made or approved, it shall be the duty of such
establishment to provide for collection of all solid waste produced upon
any such premises in a manner approved by the City.
B. All solid waste from premises to which collection services are provided
by the City shall be collected, except bulky rubbish as defined herein,
provided however, that bulky rubbish will be collected if tied securely in
bundles not exceeding reasonable limitations of weight and bulk to be
fixed by regulations to be made and promulgated by the Director as
hereinafter provided. All solid waste collected shall, upon being loaded
into transportation equipment, become the property of the collection
agency.
C. Tree limbs and yard wastes, as described in Section 245.020(E, F) shall
be placed at the curb or alley for collection. Solid waste containers as
required by this Chapter for the storage of other residential solid waste
shall be placed at the curb or alley as near as possible to driveway for
collection. Any solid waste containers, tree limbs, yard wastes, or other
solid waste permitted by this Chapter to be placed at the curb or alley
for collection shall not be so placed until the regularly scheduled
collection day.
D. Bulky rubbish shall be collected by request to the Director. The Director
shall establish the procedure for collecting bulky rubbish.
E. Solid waste collectors, employed by the City or a solid waste collection
agency operating under contract with the City, are hereby authorized to
enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste
therefrom as required by this Chapter. Solid waste collectors shall not
enter dwelling units or other residential buildings for the purpose of
collecting residential solid waste. Commercial solid waste may be
removed from within commercial establishments upon written request
of the owner and approval by the Director.
F. All residential solid waste shall be collected once weekly.
G. Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon the residential
premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon
private property, unless the owner shall have been granted written
permission from the City to use public property for such purposes. The
storage site shall be well drained, fully accessible to collection
equipment, public health personnel and fire inspection personnel.
H. Solid waste collectors, employed by the City or a solid waste collection
agency operating under contract with the City, shall be responsible for
the collection of solid waste from the point of collection to the
transportation vehicle provided the solid waste stored is in compliance
Section
245.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.030
100:333
Section 245.040. Transportation of Solid Waste. [R.O. 2007
§245.040; CC 1978 §235.040; Ord. No. 480 §4, 9-17-1974]
Section 245.045. Collection of Certain Waste During Certain Hours.
[R.O. 2007 §245.045; Ord. No. 4893 §1, 8-16-2005]
Non-City of O'Fallon, Missouri waste haulers are hereby prohibited from
collection bulky rubbish, demolition and construction waste, garbage,
refuse, solid waste, yard wastes and white goods, (as those terms are
defined in Section 245.010 of the Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri) in
the City of O'Fallon, Missouri except between the following hours:
October 1—May 31 7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M.
June 1—September
30
6:00 A.M. to 8:00 P.M. Monday—Friday
7:00 A.M. to 8:00 P.M. Saturday and Sunday
Section 245.050. Rules and Regulations. [R.O. 2007 §245.060; CC
1978 §235.060; Ord. No. 480 §7, 9-17-1974]
with Section 245.020 of this Chapter. Any spillage or blowing litter
caused as a result of the duties of the solid waste collector shall be
collected and placed in the transportation vehicle by the solid waste
collector.
A. All transportation vehicles shall be maintained in a safe, clean and
sanitary condition, and shall be so constructed, maintained and
operated as to prevent spillage of solid waste therefrom. All vehicles to
be used for transportation of solid waste shall be constructed with
water-tight bodies and with covers which shall be an integral part of the
vehicle and shall be secured whenever the vehicle is transporting solid
waste, or, as an alternate, the entire bodies thereof shall be enclosed,
with only loading hoppers exposed. No solid waste shall be transported
in the loading hoppers.
B. Permits shall not be required for the removal, hauling or disposal of
earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities, however,
all such material shall be conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or
receptacles, so constructed and maintained that none of the material
being transported shall spill upon the public rights-of-way.
C. Transportation and disposal of demolition and construction wastes shall
be in accordance with Section 245.050.
A. The Director shall make, amend, revoke, and enforce reasonable and
necessary rules and regulations, governing, but not limited to:
1. Preparation, drainage and wrapping of garbage deposited in solid
waste containers.
Section
245.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
245.050
100:334
Section 245.060. Prohibited Practices. [R.O. 2007 §245.070; CC
1978 §235.070; Ord. No. 480 §8, 9-17-1974]
2. Specifications for solid waste containers, including the type,
composition, equipment, size and shape thereof.
3. Identification of solid waste containers and of the covers thereof,
and of equipment thereto appertaining, if any.
4. Weight limitations on the combined weight of solid waste
containers and the contents thereof, and weight and size
limitations on bundles of solid waste too large for solid waste
containers.
5. Storage of solid waste in solid waste containers.
6. Sanitation, maintenance and replacement of solid waste
containers.
7. Schedules of and routes for collection and transportation of solid
waste.
8. Collection points of solid waste containers.
9. Collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste.
10. Processing facilities and fees for the use thereof.
11. Disposal facilities and fees for the use thereof.
12. Records of quantity and type of wastes received at processing and/
or disposal facilities.
13. Handling of special wastes such as toxic wastes, sludges, ashes,
agriculture, construction, bulky items, tires, automobiles, oils,
greases, etc.
B. The City Collector or City Official who is responsible for preparing
utility and other service charge billings for the City, is hereby
authorized to make and promulgate reasonable and necessary rules and
regulations for the billing and collection of solid waste collection and/or
disposal service charges, as hereinafter provided for.
C. A copy of any and all rules and regulations made and promulgated
under the provisions hereof shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk
of the City.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container other than his/her
own, without the written consent of the owner of such container
and/or, with the intent of avoiding payment of the service charge
hereinafter provided for solid waste collection and disposal;
Section
245.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.060
100:335
Section 245.070. Service Charges. [R.O. 2007 §245.080; CC 1978
§235.080; Ord. No. 480 §9, 9-17-1974; Ord. No. 4434 §4, 11-18-2002;
Ord. No. 4579 §2, 10-15-2003; Ord. No. 4662 §1, 6-1-2004; Ord. No.
4785 §1, 3-15-2005; Ord. No. 4925 §1, 11-16-2005; Ord. No. 5349 §1,
7-10-2008; Ord. No. 5424 §1, 2-12-2009; Ord. No. 5515 §2,
10-22-2009; Ord. No. 5632 §1, 10-28-2010; Ord. No. 5755 §1,
12-8-2011; Ord. No. 5930 §1, 8-22-2013; Ord. No. 6096 § 1,
5-14-2015; Ord. No. 6162 §1, 12-10-2015; Ord. No. 6644, 1-9-2020]
2. Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection and
transportation equipment, or with solid waste collectors in the
lawful performance of their duties as such, whether such
equipment or collectors shall be those of the City, or those of a solid
waste collection agency operating under contract with the City;
3. Burn solid waste unless an approved incinerator is provided or
unless a variance has been obtained from the appropriate air
pollution control agency;
4. Dispose of solid waste at any facility or location which is not
approved by the City and the Missouri Division of Health;
5. Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or
disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the City
without a permit from the City, or operate under an expired permit,
or operate after a permit has been suspended or revoked.
6. Dispose of any items in violation of any provisions of Chapter 260,
RSMo.
A. There is hereby imposed, for the collection and disposal of solid waste
and for the improvement of the general public health and environment,
a service charge for each dwelling unit and to which such service shall
be provided under the provisions of this Chapter as follows:
Service Monthly Rate
Basic service for resident $11.48
Basic service for non-resident $22.96
Extra service for resident $16.48 (64 gal. cart)
$19.48 (96 gal. cart)
Extra service for non-resident $27.96 (64 gal. cart)
$30.96 (96 gal. cart)
Basic service with yard waste
service resident
$17.11
Basic service with yard waste
service non-resident
$34.22
Section
245.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
245.070
100:336
Service Monthly Rate
Extra service with yard waste
service resident
$22.11 (64 gal. cart)
$25.11 (96 gal. cart)
Extra service with yard waste
service non-resident
$39.22 (64 gal. cart)
$42.22 (96 gal. cart)
Basic service for HOAs $11.48
Extra service for HOAs $16.48 (64 gal. cart)
$19.48 (96 gal. cart)
Bulky rubbish service for resident $20.00
Bulky rubbish service for nonresident
$30.00
White goods service for resident
(appliances)
$20.00
White goods service for nonresident
(appliances)
$30.00
Cart exchange (for cleaning only) $15.00
Home based business $18.00 per trash cart; $9.00 per
recycle cart
Commercial rate with cart service
only
$18.00 per trash cart; $9.00 per
recycle cart
Definitions. For purposes of the charges set out above, the following
terms shall mean as follows:
BASIC SERVICE WITH YARD WASTE SERVICE — Same as basic
service for recycling and refuse with once weekly collection of yard
waste (March through December). This is billed January through
December.
EXTRA SERVICE WITH YARD WASTE SERVICE — Same as basic
service for recycling and refuse with an additional refuse container (in
lieu of twice weekly refuse service) including once weekly collection of
yard waste (March through December). This is billed January through
December.
B. The City may bill for services on a monthly, bi-monthly, quarterly or
other periodic basis, based on the rates set forth above, and may
combine bills for solid waste services with bills for City water and/or
sewer services provided to the same location. If such unified billing is
adopted, the City Administrator shall adopt a policy to establish the
sequence of the services being billed to which partial payments shall be
applied.
C. The City Administrator, in coordination with the departments of
environmental services and finance, may adopt administrative
Section
245.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.070
100:337
Section 245.080. Penalties. [R.O. 2007 §245.090; CC 1978 §235.090;
Ord. No. 480 §10, 9-17-1974]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or any lawful
rules or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, upon conviction, shall
be punished as set out in Section 100.010 of this Code.
Section 245.090. Deposits. [Ord. No. 6162 §2, 12-10-2015]
procedures to bill, receive, account for and enforce collection of all
charges and may fix a reasonable time when payments shall be due,
assess and collect reasonable fees, charges for late payment, returned
checks, rejected payments, and other collection measures, including
interest thereon at the rate allowed by law. Service may be discontinued
for non-payment of any fees or charges and restoration of service may
be withheld until all obligations owed to the City are satisfied.
D. Collection of solid waste shall be deemed to be furnished to both the
occupant and owner of all dwelling units receiving service, and the
occupant and owner of such establishments shall be severally and
jointly liable to the City for payments of the charges.
E. The service and service charge shall be suspended upon presentation of
satisfactory proof to the Director that any such dwelling unit or
establishment is unoccupied and shall be commenced upon renewed
occupancy thereof.
F. A discount equivalent to fifteen percent (15%) of the total monthly rate
(not including late fees, penalties, interest, returned check fees,
payment cancellation fees, collection costs, etc.) is available to
individual residential customers (but not HOAs or other customers)
upon proof that he/she is either over the age of sixty-five (65), or a
veteran of the United States Armed Forces with a service-connected
disability of at least twenty-five percent (25%). Proof of age must be in
the form of a driver's license, State identification card, passport, or
other government-issued ID issued by a government within the United
States. A service disability must be verified by the United States
Department of Veterans Affairs.
G. Customers receiving a bill from the City for basic residential solid waste
collection shall be given the opportunity to designate a voluntary
contribution of one dollar ($1.00), three dollars ($3.00) or five dollars
($5.00) that shall become the amount due from the customer and
payable as that customer's bill, and the voluntary contribution will be
donated to a not-for-profit organization designated by the City. The
terms for such contribution shall be set forth in an agreement executed
between the City and the designated not-for-profit organization(s) and
kept on file with the City Clerk. The designated not-for-profit
organization(s) may change without notice to the customer.
Section
245.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
245.090
100:338
Chapter 250
FOOD CODE
Section 250.010. Adoption of St. Charles County Food Code. [R.O.
2007 §250.010; Ord. No. 4443 §§1—2, 12-12-2002; Ord. No. 4990 §1,
4-14-2006]
The St. Charles County Food Service Establishment Code, as amended
as of the latest amendatory ordinance (Ordinance 04-185, 12-1-04), is
incorporated herein by reference and adopted as the City of O'Fallon
Missouri Food Service Establishment Code. A copy of said Code shall be
on file in the City offices. All fees established under the St. Charles County
Food Service Establishment Code are hereby authorized to be collected
A. Security deposits for trash service shall be as follows: [Ord. No. 6312
§ 1, 1-26-2017]
Residential trash and/or yard waste service $50.00
Commercial, business and/or industrial
trash-only service
$50.00
A maximum combined deposit that may be collected from a utility
customer which includes deposits within this Section, Section
245.090(A) and deposits referenced in Chapter 700, Public Utilities,
Section 700.200(A), Water and Sewer Security Deposits is a maximum
of $150.00.
B. Security deposits shall be paid prior to the initiation and start of
service, or the City may, at its option, add security deposits to the
customer's trash service bill. Unpaid deposits may result in service
disconnection. Deposits shall be held without interest and are held to be
applied to the final bill and any accumulated fees or charges until the
customer has twenty-four (24) consecutive months of timely payment.
For purposes of this Section, "timely payment" is no more than one (1)
late payment for assessed fee penalty for late or delayed payment, no
returned check, no rejected payment, no discontinuation of service, etc.
Security deposits may be transferred and applied to a new location,
at the City's discretion, when a customer relocates within the City's
service area.
C. All security deposits shall be maintained in a separate account. No
interest shall be paid on security deposits.
D. Liability Of Owner Of Multi-Unit Establishment. The owner of any multiunit
establishment containing two (2) or more units shall be considered
the customer and user of trash service furnished to all units in the
establishment and liable for the payment of deposit and service bills
therefore.
Section
245.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
250.010
100:339
by the St. Charles County Department of Community Health and the
Environment.
Chapter 255
AQUATIC AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES CODE
Section 255.010. Adoption of St. Charles County Aquatic and
Recreational Facilities Code. [Ord. No. 5340 §1, 6-12-2008]
The St. Charles County Aquatic and Recreational Facilities Code is
incorporated herein by reference and adopted as the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri, Aquatic and Recreational Facilities Code. A copy of said Code
shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk.
Chapter 260
O'FALLON SMOKE-FREE AIR ACT
Note — Ordinance no. 5701 set out herein was submitted by initiative to
the voters and approved in the April 5, 2011, election and certified by the
election authority on April 19, 2011.
Section 260.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 5701 §1, 4-19-2011]
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Chapter, shall be
construed as defined in this Section:
BAR — An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the
serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages
including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges and
cabarets.
BUSINESS — A sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation
or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail
establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations
and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural
or other professional services are delivered; and private clubs.
CIGAR — Any individual roll of tobacco that has a wrapper or cover
consisting only of tobacco, that measures a number forty (40) ring size or
larger, and that is sold without a filter.
CIGAR BAR — An establishment with a permit to sell alcoholic beverages
that:
Generates sixty percent (60%) or more of its quarterly gross revenue
from the sale of alcoholic beverages and twenty-five percent (25%) or
more of its quarterly gross revenue from the sale of cigars;
1.
2. Has a humidor on the premises;
Section
250.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
260.010
100:340
EMPLOYEE — A person who is employed by an employer in consideration
for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit and a person who volunteers
his or her services for a non-profit entity.
EMPLOYER — A person, business, partnership, association, corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust or non-profit entity that employs
the services of one (1) or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA — All space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed
on all sides by permanent or temporary walls or windows (exclusive of
doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY — An office or institution providing care or
treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other
medical, physiological or psychological conditions including, but not limited
to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight
control clinics, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, homes for the
aging or chronically ill, laboratories and offices of surgeons, chiropractors,
physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, dentists and all specialists
within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms,
hallways, private rooms, semi-private rooms and wards within health care
facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT — An area under the control of a public or
private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of
employment including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices,
employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms,
classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways and vehicles. A private residence
is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a licensed child care,
licensed adult day care or licensed health care facility.
PRIVATE CLUB — A not-for-profit organization incorporated under the laws
of the State of Missouri for fraternal or social purposes or for a
congressionally chartered veterans' organization, which has a defined
membership and restricts admission to members of the club and their
guests and which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social,
patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary
gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation.
The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of
Federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. Section 501. Private club
shall not include an establishment that is generally open to members of the
general public upon payment of a fee. A private club shall be considered a
Is located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the cigar bar
and does not open into any enclosed area where smoking is prohibited
by this Chapter; and
3.
Does not allow minors to enter the premises.
Revenue generated from other tobacco sales, including cigarette
vending machine sales, shall not be used to determine whether an
establishment satisfies the definition of a cigar bar.
4.
Section
260.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
260.010
100:341
"public place" when it is the site of a meeting, event or activity that is open
to the public.
PUBLIC PLACE — An enclosed area to which the public is invited or in
which the public is permitted including, but not limited to, banks, bars,
educational facilities, gaming facilities, health care facilities, hotels and
motels, laundromats, public transportation vehicles and facilities, reception
areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments,
retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas,
theaters and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a "public place"
unless it is used as a licensed child care, licensed adult day care or licensed
health care facility.
RESTAURANT — An eating establishment, including, but not limited to,
coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands and private and public school
cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or
employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is
prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant"
shall include a bar area within the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — A retail store used primarily for the sale of
tobacco products and accessories and where more than seventy percent
(70%) of the volume of trade or business carried on there is that of the
blending of tobaccos or sales of tobaccos, cigarettes, pipes, cigars or
smoking sundries and in which the sale of other products is incidental. Does
not include a tobacco department of a larger commercial establishment
such as a department store, discount store or bar or retail stores used
primarily for the sale of smoking materials.
SERVICE LINE — An indoor line in which one (1) or more persons are
waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service
involves the exchange of money including, but not limited to, ATM lines,
concert lines, food vendor lines, movie ticket lines and sporting event lines.
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette or pipe in any manner or in any form.
SPORTS ARENA — Sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas,
boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and
other similar places where members of the general public assemble to
engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness
sports or other events.
Section 260.020. Application of Chapter To O'fallon Facilities. [Ord.
No. 5701 §2, 4-19-2011]
All enclosed facilities, including buildings leased or operated by the City
of O'Fallon, shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter. Smoking is
prohibited in City vehicles.
Section 260.030. Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed Public Places.
[Ord. No. 5701 §3, 4-19-2011]
Section
260.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
260.030
100:342
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the City
of O'Fallon including, but not limited to, the following places:
1. Aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums.
2. Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in
businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public
including, but not limited to, banks, laundromats, professional
offices and retail service establishments.
3. Bars.
4. Bingo facilities.
5. Licensed child care and licensed adult day care facilities.
6. Convention facilities.
7. Educational facilities, both public and private.
8. Elevators.
9. Gaming facilities.
10. Health care facilities.
11. Hotels and motels except in designated private rooms allowed for
smoking and rented to guests.
12. Lobbies, hallways and other common areas in apartment buildings,
condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes
and other multiple-unit residential facilities.
13. Polling places.
14. Public transportation vehicles, including buses and taxicabs, under
the authority of the City of O'Fallon and ticket, boarding and
waiting areas of public transportation facilities, including bus, train
and airport facilities.
15. Restaurants.
16. Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways and other commonuse
areas.
17. Retail stores.
18. Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including
school buildings, under the control of an agency, board,
commission, committee or Council of the City of O'Fallon or a
political subdivision of the State, to the extent the place is subject
to the jurisdiction of the City of O'Fallon.
19. Service lines.
20. Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas.
Section
260.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
260.030
100:343
Section 260.040. Prohibition of Smoking in Places of Employment.
[Ord. No. 5701 §4, 4-19-2011]
Section 260.050. Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed Residential
Facilities. [Ord. No. 5701 §5, 4-19-2011]
Section 260.060. Prohibition of Smoking in Outdoor Areas. [Ord.
No. 5701 §6, 4-19-2011]
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following outdoor places:
Within a reasonable distance of three (3) feet outside entrances, operable
windows and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is
prohibited, so as to insure that tobacco smoke does not enter those areas.
Section 260.070. Where Smoking Not Regulated. [Ord. No. 5701 §7,
4-19-2011]
21. Theaters and other facilities primarily used for exhibiting motion
pictures, stage dramas, lectures, musical recitals or other similar
performances.
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within places of
employment in the following areas. This includes common work areas,
auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private
offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee
lounges, stairs, restrooms and all other enclosed facilities.
B. This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing
employees by the effective date of this Chapter and to all prospective
employees upon their application for employment.
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in the following enclosed residential
facilities:
1. All private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes.
2. At least eighty percent (80%) of hotel and motel rooms that are
rented to guests. Designated non-smoking hotel rooms shall have
signage outside the hotel room saying the room is a non-smoking
room.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter to the contrary, the
following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 260.030
and 260.040:
1. Private residences, except when used as a licensed child care,
licensed adult day care or licensed health care facility and except
as provided in Section 260.050.
2. Not more than twenty percent (20%) of hotel and motel rooms
rented to guests and designated as smoking rooms. All smoking
Section
260.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
260.070
100:344
Section 260.080. Declaration of Establishment As Non-Smoking.
[Ord. No. 5701 §8, 4-19-2011]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, an owner, operator,
manager or other person in control of an establishment, facility or outdoor
area may declare that entire establishment, facility or outdoor area as a
non-smoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign
conforming to the requirements of Section 260.090(A) is posted.
Section 260.090. Posting of Signs. [Ord. No. 5701 §9, 4-19-2011]
rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these
rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited
under the provisions of this Chapter. The status of rooms as
smoking or non-smoking may not be changed, except to add
additional non-smoking rooms.
3. Private clubs that have no employees, except when being used for a
function to which the general public is invited; provided that smoke
from such clubs does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is
prohibited under the provisions of this Chapter. This exemption
shall not apply to any organization that is established for the
purpose of avoiding compliance with this Chapter.
4. Outdoor areas of places of employment except those covered by the
provisions of Section 260.060.
5. A cigar bar provided that smoke does not infiltrate into areas where
smoking is otherwise prohibited under this Chapter. To qualify for
this exemption, a cigar bar must satisfactorily report on a quarterly
basis to the City of O'Fallon on a form prescribed by the City of
O'Fallon, the revenue generated from the sale of alcoholic
beverages and cigars as a percentage of quarterly gross revenue.
This exemption shall not apply to any business that is established
for the purpose of avoiding compliance with this Chapter.
6. Retail tobacco stores as defined by this Chapter and provided that
smoke does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is otherwise
prohibited. This exemption shall not apply to any business that is
established for the purpose of avoiding compliance with this
Chapter.
A. "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed
in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and
conspicuously posted at every entrance in every public place and place
of employment where smoking is prohibited by this Chapter by the
owner, operator, manager or other person in control of that place.
Section
260.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
260.090
100:345
Section 260.100. Non-Retaliation — Non-Waiver of Rights. [Ord.
No. 5701 §10, 4-19-2011]
Section 260.110. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 5701 §11, 4-19-2011]
Section 260.120. Violations, Convictions and Penalties. [Ord. No.
5701 §12, 4-19-2011]
B. All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is
prohibited by this Chapter by the owner, operator, manager or other
person having control of the area.
A. No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner
retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment or customer
because that employee, applicant or customer exercises any rights
afforded by this Chapter or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation
of this Chapter.
B. An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking
does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee
may have against the employer or any other party.
A. This Chapter shall be enforced by the City Administrator or an
authorized designee.
B. Notice of the provisions of this Chapter shall be given to all applicants
for a business license in the City of O'Fallon.
C. Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this Chapter may
initiate enforcement with the City Administrator or an authorized
designee.
D. The Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee shall, while an
establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect
for compliance with this Chapter.
E. An owner, manager, operator or employee of an establishment
regulated by this Chapter shall inform persons violating this Chapter of
the appropriate provisions thereof.
F. In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this Section,
the City Administrator with the Mayor/City Council authorization or any
person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager or
other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to
comply with the provisions of this Chapter may apply for injunctive
relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the
provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by
a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00).
Section
260.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
260.120
100:346
Chapter 300
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 300.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §300.020; Ord. No. 4416
§1, 10-17-2002; Ord. No. 4575 §1, 10-15-2003]
The following words and phrases, when used in this Title, mean:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Any vehicle without current vehicle license, not
driveable without repair, or left on property without the consent of the
owner or person in possession of the property.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle manufactured and used
exclusively for off-highway use which is fifty (50) inches or less in width,
with an unladen dry weight of six hundred (600) pounds or less, traveling
on three (3) or more low pressure tires, with a seat designed to be straddled
by the operator, and handlebars for steering control.
ALLEY OR ALLEYWAY — Any street with a roadway of less than twenty (20)
feet in width.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A vehicle of any of the following
types as defined in Section 304.022, RSMo.:
Except as otherwise provided in Section 260.100, a person who owns,
manages, operates or otherwise controls a public place or place of
employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this Chapter
shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
B. In addition to the fines established by this Section, violation of this
Chapter by a person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise
controls a public place or place of employment may result in the
suspension or revocation of any permit or license by the Mayor/City
Council issued to the person for the premises on which the violation
occurred.
C. Each day on which a violation of this Chapter occurs shall be
considered a separate and distinct violation.
Any vehicle operated by the State Highway Patrol, Police, Sheriff, or
Deputy Sheriff Departments, Constable, Federal Law Enforcement
Officer authorized to carry firearms and to make arrests for violations
of the Laws of the United States, Coroner or Medical Examiner,
enforcement personnel of the Division of Transportation of the
Department of Economic Development;
1.
Any vehicle operated as an ambulance or operated commercially for the
purposes of transporting emergency medical supplies or organs;
2.
Section
260.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
300.010
100:347
AUXILIARY LAMP — An additional lighting device on a motor vehicle used
primarily to supplement the headlamps in providing general illumination
ahead of a vehicle.
BICYCLE — Every vehicle propelled solely by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, or two (2) parallel wheels
and one (1) or two (2) forward or rear wheels, all of which are more than
fourteen (14) inches in diameter, except scooters and similar devices.
BUSINESS DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway when within any six hundred (600) feet along the highway there
are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not
limited to hotels, banks, or office buildings, railroad stations and public
buildings which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on
one (1) side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
CENTRAL BUSINESS (OR TRAFFIC) DISTRICT — All streets and portions
of streets within the area described by City ordinance as such. If not
otherwise defined by City ordinance, the district shall include that area
bounded by Highway 70 on the south, Sonderen on the east, Civic Park
Drive on the north and Woodlawn on the west.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Ever vehicle designed, maintained or used
primarily for the transportation of property.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY — Every highway, street or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons
have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway.
CROSSWALK —
Any vehicle operated under the provisions of Section 307.175, RSMo.,
by any member of an organized Fire Department, ambulance
association, or rescue squad, whether paid or volunteer;
3.
Any wrecker, tow truck, or vehicle owned by a public utility or public
service corporation, or by an authorized privately owned emergency
vehicle company;
4.
Any vehicle transporting equipment designed to extricate human
beings from wreckage;
5.
Any vehicle designed to perform emergency functions for a Civil
Defense or Emergency Management Agency established under the
provisions of the Chapter 44, RSMo.;
while responding to emergency calls, performing emergency service,
or in reference to Subsection (1) hereof, while in pursuit of an actual
or suspected law violator.
6.
That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
1.
Section
300.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
300.010
100:348
CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight (or
passengers).
HEADLAMP — A major lighting device capable of providing general
illumination ahead of a vehicle.
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
INTERSECTION —
LANED ROADWAY — A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively
upon tracks, except farm tractors and motorized bicycles.
MOTORCYCLE — Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use
of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in
contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Any two-wheeled or three-wheeled device, except
motorized scooters, having an automatic transmission and a motor with
a cylinder capacity of not more than fifty (50) cubic centimeters which
produces less than three (3) gross brake horsepower and is capable of
propelling the device at a maximum speed of not more than thirty (30) miles
per hour on level ground.
highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the
edges of the traversable roadway;
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
2.
The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict;
1.
Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by
an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways
thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways
of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
2.
Section
300.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
300.010
100:349
MOTORIZED SCOOTER — Any two-, three- or four-wheeled device having
handlebars that are attached to a footboard, which is designed to be ridden
in a standing or seated position and is powered by a motor that is capable of
propelling the device with or without human propulsion. This Section shall
not apply to legitimate devices for use by physically disabled persons, such
as electric wheelchairs or scooters, when operated by a physically disabled
person.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named herein
they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current
use in the City.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES — All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this Title placed or erected by authority of
a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.
PARK OR PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
PASSENGER CAR — Every motor vehicle designed for carrying ten (10)
persons or less and used for the transportation of persons; except that,
the term "passenger car" shall not include motorcycles, motorized bicycles,
motor tricycles, and trucks with a licensed gross weight of twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds or more.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE — A place adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.
PHYSICALLY DISABLED — Any natural person with disabilities which limit
or impair the ability to walk, as determined by a licensed physician as
follows:
1. The person cannot walk fifty (50) feet without stopping to rest; or
The person cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a brace,
cane, crutch, another person, prosthetic device, wheelchair, or other
assistive device; or
2.
Is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that the person's forced
respiratory expiratory volume for one (1) second, when measured by
spirometry, is less than one (1) liter, or the arterial oxygen tension is
less than sixty (60) mm/hg on room air at rest; or
3.
4. Uses portable oxygen; or
Section
300.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
300.010
100:350
POLICE OFFICER — Every Officer of the Municipal Police Department or
any Officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
RAILROAD — A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon
stationary rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN — A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
REFLECTOR — An approved device designed and used to give an indication
by reflected light.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business district when the property on such
highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is in the main
improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right of one (1) driver or pedestrian to proceed in
a lawful manner in preference to another driver or pedestrian approaching
under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise
to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
highway includes two or more separate roadways the term ROADWAY as
used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such
roadways collectively.
SAFETY ZONE — The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SECONDARY STREET — Any street which is not designated as a "snow
emergency route".
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES — Those streets designated as such in
accordance with the provisions of this Title.
Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's functional
limitations are classified in severity as Class III or Class IV according to
standards set by the American Heart Association; or
5.
Is severely limited in his/her ability to walk due to an arthritic,
neurological, or orthopedic condition.
6.
Section
300.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
300.010
100:351
STAND OR STANDING — The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving
or discharging passengers.
STATE HIGHWAY — A highway maintained by the State of Missouri as a
part of the State Highway system.
STOP (REQUIRED) — Complete cessation from movement.
STOP OR STOPPING — When prohibited, any halting even momentarily of
a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between the lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the uses of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
THROUGH HIGHWAY — Every highway or portion thereof on which
vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to
which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to
yield right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to
either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided
in this Title.
THROUGH STREETS — Those streets and parts of streets described by
ordinances of the City are declared to be through streets for the purposes
of Sections 335.010 through 335.090.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed.
TRAFFIC DIVISION — The Traffic Division of the Police Department of the
City, or in the event a Traffic Division is not established, then said term
whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the Police Department of
the City.
VEHICLE — Any mechanical device on wheels designed primarily for use or
used on highways, except motorized bicycles, motorized scooters, vehicles
propelled or drawn by horses or human power, or vehicles used exclusively
on fixed rails or tracks, cotton trailers, or motorized wheelchairs operated
by handicapped persons.
Section 300.020. Traffic Management Policy. [Ord. No. 5324 §1,
5-8-2008]
A. A Traffic Management Policy shall be adopted for the City of O'Fallon as
set out in Exhibit A of Ord. No. 5324 and adopted by reference herein.
Said policy shall be on file in the City offices.
Section
300.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
300.020
100:352
Section 300.030. Traffic Calming Policy. [Ord. No. 5304 §1,
3-27-2008]
A Traffic Calming Policy shall be adopted for the City of O'Fallon as set out
in Exhibit A of Ord. No. 5304 and adopted by reference herein. Said policy
shall be on file in the City offices.
Chapter 305
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Section 305.010. Duty of The Police Department. [R.O. 2007
§305.010]
The O'Fallon Police Department shall enforce the street traffic regulations
of the City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in
the City, make arrests for traffic violations, investigate accidents, cooperate
with the City Traffic Engineer and other Officers of the City in the
administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to
improve traffic conditions and carry out those duties specially imposed upon
the Department by this Title and the traffic ordinances of the City.
Section 305.020. Records of Traffic Violations. [R.O. 2007 §305.020]
B. The Traffic Management Policy adopted in Subsection (A) of this
Section, was amended to include a new Subsection (20) establishing
guidelines for implementing a Pedestrian Crossings Policy. Said policy
shall be on file in the City offices. [Ord. No. 6472, 6-14-2018]
C. The Traffic Management Policy adopted in Subsection (A) of this
Section was amended to include revisions to Subsection (19) regarding
the City's Traffic Calming Policy. Said policy shall be on file in the City
offices. [Ord. No. 6479, 7-12-201864]
D. The Traffic Management Policy adopted in Subsection (A) of this
Section was amended to include a new Subsection (21), establishing
guidelines for implementing no-parking signs on residential streets.
Said policy shall be on file in the City offices. [Ord. No. 6565,
3-28-2019]
A. The Police Department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic
ordinances of the City or of the State vehicle laws of which any person
has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all
such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all
types of violations and the total of each.
64.Editor's Note: Additionally note the adoption of a Traffic Calming Policy as set out in
Section 300.030 below.
Section
300.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
305.020
100:353
Section 305.030. Police Department To Investigate Accidents. [R.O.
2007 §305.030]
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to investigate traffic accidents,
to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with
violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.
Section 305.040. City Traffic Engineer. [R.O. 2007 §305.050]
Section 305.050. Emergency and Experimental Regulations. [R.O.
2007 §305.060]
Chapter 310
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS
Section 310.010. Authority of Police and Fire Department Officials.
[R.O. 2007 §310.010]
B. All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be
serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be
kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.
A. The office of City Traffic Engineer is established. The City Engineer or
other designated City Official shall serve as City Traffic Engineer in
addition to his/her other functions, and shall exercise the powers and
duties with respect to traffic as provided in this Title unless the City
Administrator designates some other City Official as such.
B. The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the installation and proper
timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, conduct engineering
analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures, conduct
engineering investigation of traffic conditions, plan the operation of
traffic on the streets and highways of the City, and cooperate with other
City Officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by
ordinances of the City.
A. The Chief of Police by and with the approval of the City Traffic Engineer
is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective
the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the City and to make and
enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or
special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall
remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days.
B. The City Traffic Engineer may test traffic control devices under actual
conditions of traffic.
A. It shall be the duty of the Officers of the Police Department or such
Officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all street
Section
305.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
310.010
100:354
Section 310.020. Obedience To Police and Fire Department
Officials. [R.O. 2007 §310.020]
No person shall knowingly fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a Police or Fire Department Official.
Section 310.030. Persons Propelling Push Carts or Riding Animals
To Obey Traffic Regulations. [R.O. 2007 §310.030]
Every person propelling any push cart or riding an animal upon a roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this Title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this Title which by their very nature can have no application.
Section 310.040. Use of Coasters, Roller Skates and Similar Devices
Restricted. [R.O. 2007 §310.040; Ord. No. 1509 §2, 9-3-1987; Ord.
No. 4416 §2, 10-17-2002]
traffic laws of the City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to
street traffic in the City.
B. Officers of the Police Department or such Officers as are assigned by
the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice,
hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the
event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, Officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic
laws.
C. Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of an incident, may
direct or assist the Police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
A. No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster,
toy vehicle, skateboard, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway
except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing
such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all
of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
B. No person shall ride a bicycle, coaster, roller skates, skateboard, or
similar device upon a sidewalk within a business district.
C. The Chief of Police or City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs
on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles, coasters,
roller skates, skateboards, and similar devices thereon by any person
and when such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same.
D. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
skateboard or similar device upon a sidewalk in other than a business
district, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and
shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing any pedestrian.
Section
310.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
310.040
100:355
Section 310.050. Public Employees To Obey Traffic Regulations.
[R.O. 2007 §310.050]
The provisions of this Title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by
or used in the service of the United States Government, this State, County,
or City and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the
provisions of this Title, except as otherwise permitted in this Title.
Section 310.060. Emergency Vehicles — Use of Lights and Sirens —
Right-Of-Way — Stationary Vehicles, Procedure — Penalty.
E. No person shall ride or operate a motorized scooter on any street,
highway, roadway, sidewalk or anywhere within the boundaries of a City
park.
A. Upon the immediate approach of an emergency vehicle giving audible
signal by siren or while having at least one (1) lighted lamp exhibiting
red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance
of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle or a flashing blue
light authorized by Section 307.175, RSMo., the driver of every other
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a
position parallel to, and as far as possible to the right of, the traveled
portion of the highway and thereupon stop and remain in such position
until such emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a police or traffic officer.
B. Upon approaching a stationary emergency vehicle displaying lighted
red or red and blue lights, the driver of every motor vehicle shall:
1. Proceed with caution and yield the right-of-way, if possible with due
regard to safety and traffic conditions, by making a lane change
into a lane not adjacent to that of the stationary vehicle, if on a
roadway having at least four (4) lanes with not less than two (2)
lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching vehicle;
or
2. Proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the vehicle,
maintaining a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes
would be unsafe or impossible.
C. Responsibilities Of Driver Of Emergency Vehicle.
1. The driver of any "emergency vehicle" defined in Section 300.010
of this Code shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red
lights or blue lights on except when such vehicle is responding to
an emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected law
violator, or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire.
2. The driver of an emergency vehicle may:
a. Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of Sections 304.014
to 304.025, RSMo., and the provisions of this Code;
Section
310.040
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
310.060
100:356
Section 310.070. Immediate Notice of Accident Within City.
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the City resulting in
injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent
extent of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more to one (1) person shall give
or cause to be given notice of such accident to the Police Department as
soon as reasonably possible.
Section 310.080. Written Report of Accident. [R.O. 2007 §310.090]
The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total property damage
to an apparent extent of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more to one (1)
person shall, within five (5) days after such accident, forward a written
report of such accident to the Police Department. The provisions of this
Section shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at
the scene by a Police Officer while such driver was present thereat.
Section 310.090. When Driver Unable To Report. [R.O. 2007
§310.100]
b. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
c. Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the driver does
not endanger life or property;
d. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
3. The exemptions granted to an emergency vehicle pursuant to
Subsection (C)(2) of this Section shall apply only when the driver of
any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell,
siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when
the vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying
a red light or blue light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of
such vehicle.
D. No person shall purchase an emergency light as described in this
Section without furnishing the seller of such light an affidavit stating
that the light will be used exclusively for emergency vehicle purposes.
E. Violation of this Section shall be deemed an ordinance violation.
A. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving
immediate notice of an accident as required in Section 310.070 and
there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident
capable of doing so, such occupant shall give, or cause to be given, the
notice not given by the driver.
Section
310.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
310.090
100:357
Section 310.100. Leaving The Scene of A Motor Vehicle Accident.
Section 310.110. Speeding in Construction Zone. [R.O. 2007
§310.120; Ord. No. 4654 §§1—6, 5-14-2004]
B. Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report
of an accident as required in Section 310.080 and such driver is not the
owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such
accident shall within five (5) days after the accident make such report
not made by the driver.
A. A person commits the offense of leaving the scene of a motor vehicle
accident when, being the operator or driver of a vehicle on the
highways, streets or roads of the City or on any publicly or privately
owned parking lot or parking facility within the City generally open for
use by the public and knowing that an injury has been caused to a
person or damage has been caused to property due to his/her
culpability or to accident, he/she leaves the place of the injury, damage
or accident without stopping and giving his/her name, residence,
including City and street number, motor vehicle number and driver's
license number, if any, to the injured party or to a Police Officer, or if no
Police Officer is in the vicinity, then to the nearest Police station or
judicial officer.
B. For the purposes of this Section, all Peace Officers shall have
jurisdiction, when invited by an injured person, to enter the premises of
any such privately owned parking lot or parking facility for the purpose
of investigating an accident and performing all necessary duties
regarding such accident.
A. As used in this Section, the term "construction zone" or "work zone"
means any area upon or around any highway as defined in Section
302.010, RSMo., which is visibly marked by the Missouri Department of
Transportation, a contractor performing work for the Missouri
Department of Transportation, the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, or a
contractor performing work for the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, as an
area where construction, maintenance or other work is temporarily
occurring. The term "work zone" or "construction zone" also includes
the lanes of highway leading up to the area upon which an activity
described in this Section is being performed, beginning at the point
where appropriate signs directing motor vehicles to merge from one
lane into another lane are posted.
B. Upon a conviction or a plea of guilty by any person for a moving
violation as defined in Section 302.010, RSMo., or any offense listed in
Section 302.302, RSMo., the court shall assess a fine of thirty-five
dollars ($35.00) in addition to any other fine authorized to be imposed
by law, if the offense occurred within a construction zone or a work
zone.
Section
310.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
310.110
100:358
Chapter 315
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
C. Upon a conviction or plea of guilty by any person for a speeding
violation or a passing violation pursuant to Subsection (F), the court
shall assess a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in addition to
any other fine authorized by law, if the offense occurred within a
construction zone or a work zone and at the time the speeding or
passing violation occurred there was any person in such zone who was
there to perform duties related to the reason for which the area was
designated a construction zone or work zone. However, no person shall
be assessed an additional fine pursuant to this Section if no signs have
been posted pursuant to Subsection (D).
D. The penalty authorized by Subsection (C) shall only be assessed by the
court if the Missouri Department of Transportation, a contractor
performing work for the Missouri Department of Transportation, the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri, or a contractor performing work for the City
of O'Fallon, Missouri, has erected signs upon or around a construction
or work zone which are clearly visible from the highway and which state
substantially the following message: "Warning: $250 fine for speeding
or passing in this work zone".
E. During any day in which no person is present in a construction zone or
work zone established pursuant to Subsection (A) to perform duties
related to the purpose of the zone, the sign warning of additional
penalties shall not be visible to motorists. During any period of two (2)
hours or more in which no person is present in such zone on a day in
which persons have been or will be present to perform duties related to
the reason for which the area was designated as a construction zone or
work zone, the sign warning of additional penalties shall not be visible
to motorists. The Missouri Department of Transportation, any
contractor performing work for the Missouri Department of
Transportation, the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, or any contractor
performing work for the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, shall be responsible
for compliance with provisions of this Section. Nothing in this Section
shall prohibit warning or traffic control signs necessary for public
safety in the construction or work zone being visible to motorists at all
times.
F. The driver of a motor vehicle may not overtake or pass another motor
vehicle within a work zone or construction zone. This Section applies to
a construction zone or work zone located upon a highway divided into
two (2) or more marked lanes for traffic moving in the same direction
and for which motor vehicles are instructed to merge from one lane into
another lane by an appropriate sign erected by the any contractor
performing work for the Missouri Department of Transportation, the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri or any contractor performing work for the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
Section
310.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
315.010
100:359
Section 315.010. Authority To Install Traffic Control Devices. [R.O.
2007 §315.010]
The City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain traffic control signs,
signals, and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of
the City to make effective the provisions of said ordinances, and may place
and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he/she may deem
necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the City or
under State law or to guide or warn traffic.
Section 315.020. Manual and Specifications For Traffic Control
Devices. [R.O. 2007 §315.020]
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual
and specifications approved by the State Highways and Transportation
Commission or resolution adopted by the City Council of the City. All signs
or signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as
practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the City. All traffic
control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Title shall be official traffic control devices.
Section 315.030. Obedience To Traffic Control Devices. [R.O. 2007
§315.030]
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions
of this Title, unless otherwise directed by a Law Enforcement or Fire
Department Officer as detailed in Section 310.010 of this Title, subject to
the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
Title.
Section 315.040. When Official Traffic Control Devices Required For
Enforcement Purposes. [R.O. 2007 §315.040]
No provision of this Title for which official traffic control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and
place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever
a particular Section does not state that official traffic control devices are
required, such Section shall be effective even though no devices are erected
or in place.
Section 315.050. Official Traffic Control Devices — Presumption of
Legality. [R.O. 2007 §315.050]
A. Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position
approximately conforming to the requirements of this Title, such
devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
Section
315.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
315.050
100:360
Section 315.060. Traffic Control Signal Legend — Right Turn On
Red Light, When. [R.O. 2007 §315.060]
B. Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of
this Title and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements
pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the
requirements of this Title, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
A. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting
different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a
time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be
used except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and
said lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows:
1. Green indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
b. Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other
indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an
adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection;
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as
provided in Section 315.070, pedestrians facing any green
signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may
proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
2. Steady yellow indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby
warned that the related green movement is being terminated
or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately
thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection.
b. Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise
directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in Section
315.070 are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to
Section
315.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
315.060
100:361
Section 315.070. Pedestrian Control Signals.
cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no
pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
3. Steady red indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection
and shall remain standing until a green indication is shown
except as provided in Paragraph (b) of this Subsection;
b. The driver of a vehicle which is stopped as close as practicable
at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, than at the entrance to the intersection
in obedience to a red signal, may cautiously enter the
intersection to make a right turn but shall yield the right-ofway
to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by
the signal at the intersection, except that the State Highways
and Transportation Commission with reference to an
intersection involving a State highway, and local authorities
with reference to an intersection involving other highways
under their jurisdiction, may prohibit any such right turn
against a red signal at any intersection where safety conditions
so require, said prohibition shall be effective when a sign is
erected at such intersection giving notice thereof;
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as
provided in Section 315.070, pedestrians facing a steady red
signal alone shall not enter the roadway.
4. In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of
this Section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which
by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be
made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the
stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking
the stop shall be made at the signal.
A. Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words
"Walk" or "Don't Walk" or appropriate symbols are in place, such signals
shall indicate as follows:
1. "WALK": Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the rightof-
way by the drivers of all vehicles.
2. "WAIT" or "DON'T WALK": No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has
partially completed his/her crossing on the walk signal shall
Section
315.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
315.070
100:362
Section 315.080. Flashing Signals.
Section 315.090. Lane Direction Control Signals. [R.O. 2007
§315.090]
When lane direction control signals are placed over the individual lanes of
a street or highway, vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a
green signal is shown, but shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a
red signal is shown.
Section 315.100. Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or
Markings. [R.O. 2007 §315.100]
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or
signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides
from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control
device or any railroad sign or signal.
Section 315.110. Interference With Official Traffic Control Devices
or Railroad Signs or Signals. [R.O. 2007 §315.110]
No person shall without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any
other part thereof.
Section 315.120. City Traffic Engineer To Designate Crosswalks and
Establish Safety Zones. [R.O. 2007 §315.140]
proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is
showing.
A. Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic
sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
1. Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.
2. Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
B. This Section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be
governed by the rules as set forth in Section 335.100 of this Title.
Section
315.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
315.120
100:363
Section 315.130. Traffic Lanes. [R.O. 2007 §315.150]
Section 315.140. Markers or Warning Signs Indicating School
Zones. [R.O. 2007 §315.160; CC 1978 §315.160; Ord. No. 510 §4,
1-5-1976]
The City Traffic Engineer shall erect, place and maintain special markers or
warning signs indicating school zones and pedestrian crosswalks; said signs
shall be placed at the beginning and end of school zones; and pedestrian
crosswalk signs shall be placed on the traffic side of each marked crosswalk.
Section 315.150. Right-Of-Way At Uncontrolled Intersections. [R.O.
2007 §315.170]
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized;
1. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where
in his/her opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing
the roadway, and at such other places as he/she may deem
necessary;
2. To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he/she may deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes
upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment
of traffic is necessary.
B. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another
vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the rightof-
way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway, provided however, there is no form of traffic control at such
intersection.
B. When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall
yield the right-of-way to the driver of the vehicle on the right. This
Subsection shall not apply to vehicles approaching each other from
opposite directions when the driver of one (1) of the vehicles is
attempting to or is making a left turn.
C. The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the
left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as
to constitute an immediate hazard.
Section
315.120
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
315.150
100:364
Chapter 320
SPEED REGULATIONS
Section 320.010. State Speed Laws Applicable. [R.O. 2007
§320.010]
The State traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles, shall be applicable
upon all streets within the City, except that the City Traffic Engineer may
declare and determine upon the basis of engineering and traffic
investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon
specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared
when signs are in place giving notice thereof.
Section 320.020. Speed Limits Where Not Posted. [R.O. 2007
§320.020]
Section 320.030. Regulation of Speed By Traffic Signals. [R.O. 2007
§320.030]
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic
signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe
manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable
within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs
giving notice thereof.
Section 320.040. Special Enforcement Area. [R.O. 2007 §320.050;
Ord. No. 4030 §§2—4, 3-27-2000]
A. No person shall operate a vehicle upon any street or highway within the
City limits of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, at a speed in excess of
twenty-five (25) miles per hour, unless official signs are posted
designating another speed limit.
B. Nothing in this Section shall make the speeds prescribed herein lawful
in a situation that requires a slower speed for safe operation and
compliance with Section 340.180.
A. Speed limits are set according to standards established by the City
Traffic Engineer, and these standards include consideration for
pedestrian use, traffic volume and congestion, traffic flow patterns and
other criteria necessary to make the roadways as safe as possible.
These speed limits may be lower in certain areas to provide for the safe
passage of vehicles, safer ingress and egress to the roadway, and to
assure safer areas for pedestrians and bicycles to travel on or near the
roadway.
B. For the purposes of this Section, a special enforcement area shall be
defined as follows:
Section
315.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
320.040
100:365
Chapter 325
TURNING MOVEMENTS
Section 325.010. Required Position and Method of Turning At
Intersection.
Any public or private street or roadway where the speed limit has been
established at twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less, and/or any street
or roadway posted as a school speed zone.
C. Conviction of a violation of this Section is punishable by a fine of up to
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the St. Charles
County Jail for a period up to three (3) months, or to both such fine and
imprisonment. In order to determine the fine, any person found guilty of
a moving motor vehicle violation in a special enforcement area in the
City of O'Fallon shall be fined at a rate double the standard fine for such
moving motor vehicle violation.
A. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
1. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge
of the roadway, except where multiple turn lanes have been
established.
2. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that
portion of the right-half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable,
the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the
left of the center of the intersection.
3. Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction on one (1) or more of
the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme
left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of
travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as
practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving
in such direction upon the roadway being entered, except where
multiple turn lanes have been established.
Section
320.040
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
325.010
100:366
Section 325.020. Authority To Place and Obedience To Turning
Markers. [R.O. 2007 §325.020]
Section 325.030. Authority To Place Restricted Turn Signs. [R.O.
2007 §325.030]
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those
intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or Uturn,
and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such
turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at
other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs
or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.
Section 325.040. Obedience To No-Turn Signs. [R.O. 2007 §325.040]
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or Uturn
is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any
such sign.
Chapter 330
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
4. Designated two-way left turn lanes. Where a special lane for
making left turns by drivers proceeding in opposite directions have
been indicated by official traffic control devices:
a. A left turn shall not be made from any other lane;
b. A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when preparing
for or making a left turn from or into the roadway or when
preparing for or making a U-turn when otherwise permitted by
law; and
c. A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane for a distance more
than five hundred (500) feet.
A. The City Traffic Engineer, or a Police Officer for special temporary
situations where it is necessary to redirect traffic from its normal
course, is authorized to place markers, buttons, traffic control devices,
or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to
be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as
prescribed by law or ordinance.
B. When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
such indications.
Section
325.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
330.010
100:367
Section 330.010. Authority To Sign One-Way Streets and Alleys.
[R.O. 2007 §330.010]
Whenever any ordinance of the City designates any one (1) way street or
alley the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice
thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are
in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall
be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
Section 330.020. One-Way Streets and Alleys. [R.O. 2007 §330.020]
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described and
designated by ordinance, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated
direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and
maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction
is prohibited.
Section 330.030. Authority To Restrict Direction of Movement On
Streets During Certain Periods. [R.O. 2007 §330.030]
Chapter 335
STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS, RAILROAD CROSSINGS
Section 335.010. Through Streets Designated. [R.O. 2007 §335.010]
Those streets and parts of streets described by ordinances of the City are
declared to be through streets for the purposes of Sections 335.010 to
335.090.
A. The City Traffic Engineer, or a Police Officer for special temporary
situations where it is necessary to redirect traffic from its normal
course, is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, is
hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets
or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in
one (1) direction during one (1) period and the opposite direction
during another period of the day and shall place and maintain
appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice
thereof. The City Traffic Engineer may erect signs temporarily
designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction,
regardless of the center line of the roadway.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of
such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance
with this Section.
Section
330.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
335.020
100:368
Section 335.020. Signs Required At Through Streets. [R.O. 2007
§335.020]
Whenever any ordinance of the City designates and describes a through
street it shall be the duty of the City Traffic Engineer to place and maintain
a stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at
any intersection a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such
through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all
times by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection
of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through street
and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at
the approaches of either of said streets as may be determined by the City
Traffic Engineer upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study.
Section 335.030. Other Intersections Where Stop or Yield Required.
[R.O. 2007 §335.030; Ord. No. 3138, 8-4-1994]
Section 335.040. Installation of Stop and Yield Signs. [R.O. 2007
§335.040; Ord. No. 3138 §§4—5, 8-4-1994]
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and
designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than
through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1)
or more entrances to any such intersection in which event he/she shall
cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is
required, or whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on
a different street at such intersection as prescribed in Subsection (B) of
Section 335.040, in which event he/she shall cause to be erected a yield
sign at every place where obedience thereto is required.
B. Any need identified and proposed for the installation of stop signs and/
or yield signs, including those presented by O'Fallon residents, will be
evaluated by the City Traffic Engineer to determine if it meets specific
criteria as provided in this Section of this Title.
A. Upon evaluation by the City Traffic Engineer, one (1) of the following
processes shall be followed for the installation of proposed stop signs:
1. If the need meets the specific criteria contained in the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices as published by the United States
Department of Transportation the City Traffic Engineer shall
authorize the installation of stop signs as funding is available. The
manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices suggests that, if one (1)
or more of the following criteria exist, a stop sign may be
warranted:
a. Intersection of a less important road with a main road where
application of the normal right-of-way rule is unduly
hazardous.
b. Street entering a through highway or street.
Section
335.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
335.040
100:369
c. Unsignalized intersection in a signalized area.
d. Other intersections where a combination of high speed,
restricted view, and serious accident record indicates a need
for control by the stop sign.
e. Stop signs should never be used on the through roadways of
expressways.
2. If the need meets the following specific criteria, the City Traffic
Engineer shall authorize the installation of multi-way stop signs as
funding is available. Any of the following criteria may warrant the
installation of a multi-way stop sign:
a. Where electric traffic signals are warranted and urgently
needed, the multi-way stop sign is an interim measure that can
be installed quickly to control traffic while arrangements are
being made for the electric signal installation.
b. An accident problem, as indicated by three (3) or more
reported accidents in a twelve (12) month period, of a type
susceptible of correction by the installation of a multi-way stop
sign.
c. Where the volume of traffic on the intersecting roads is
approximately equal and the following minimum traffic
volumes are recorded:
(1) The total vehicular volume entering the intersection from
all approaches must average at least five hundred (500)
vehicles per hour for any eight (8) hours of an average day,
and
(2) The combined vehicular and pedestrian volume from the
minor street or highway must average at least two
hundred (200) units per hour for the same eight (8) hours,
with an average delay to minor street vehicular traffic of at
least thirty (30) seconds per vehicle during the maximum
hour, but
(3) When the eighty-five (85) percentile approach speed of the
major traffic exceeds forty (40) miles per hour, the
minimum vehicular volume criteria is seventy percent
(70%) of the above requirements.
B. The City Traffic Engineer will use the following criteria to evaluate the
need for installation of yield signs. If one (1) or more of the following
conditions exist, the City Traffic Engineer may authorize the installation
of yield signs:
1. At the entrance to an intersection where it is necessary to assign
right-of-way and where the safe approach speed on the entrance
exceed ten (10) miles per hour.
Section
335.040
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
335.040
100:370
Section 335.050. Stop and Yield Signs.
Section 335.060. Vehicle Entering Stop Intersection. [R.O. 2007
§335.060]
Except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer or traffic control signal,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop
sign shall stop as required by Subsection (B) of Section 335.050, and after
having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered
the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely
on said highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when
such driver is moving across or within the intersection.
Section 335.070. Vehicle Entering Yield Intersection. [R.O. 2007
§335.070]
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such
sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall
yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on
another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during
2. On the entrance ramp to an expressway where an acceleration lane
is not provided.
3. At intersections on a divided highway where the median between
the roadways is more than thirty (30) feet wide. At such
intersections, a stop sign may be used as the entrance to the first
roadway of the divided highway and a yield sign may be placed at
the entrance to the second roadway.
4. Where there is a separate channelized right-turn lane, without an
adequate acceleration lane.
5. At any intersection where a special problem exists and where an
engineering study indicates the problem to be susceptible to
correction by use of the yield sign.
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to
stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked
stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway.
B. Except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer or traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection
indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest
the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
Section
335.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
335.070
100:371
the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection; provided,
however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the
intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision
shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his/her failure to yield right-of-way.
Section 335.080. Emerging From Alley, Driveway or Building. [R.O.
2007 §335.080]
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as
may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
Section 335.090. Stop When Traffic Obstructed. [R.O. 2007
§335.090]
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he/she is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed.
Section 335.100. Stop Required At Railroad Grade Crossing, When
— Commercial Motor Vehicles, Speed At Crossings.
A. When any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing, the driver of the vehicle shall operate the vehicle in a manner
so he/she will be able to stop, and he/she shall stop the vehicle not less
than fifteen (15) feet and not more than fifty (50) feet from the nearest
rail of the railroad track and shall not proceed until he/she can safely do
so if:
1. A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device warns of the
approach of a railroad train;
2. A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or
continues to give a signal or warning of the approach or passage of
a railroad train;
3. An approaching railroad train is visible and is in hazardous
proximity to such crossing; or
4. Any other traffic sign, device or any other act, rule, regulation or
Statute requires a vehicle to stop at a railroad grade crossing.
B. No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing when a train is
approaching while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or
closed.
Section
335.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
335.100
100:372
Chapter 340
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Section 340.010. Following Emergency Vehicle Prohibited.
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any emergency vehicle traveling in response to an emergency call closer
than five hundred (500) feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the
block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
Section 340.020. Crossing Fire Hose. [R.O. 2007 §340.020]
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department
when laid down on any street, or private driveway to be used at any fire
or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in
command.
Section 340.030. Funeral Processions. [R.O. 2007 §340.030; Ord.
No. 4004 §§3—13, 2-10-2000]
C. No person shall drive a vehicle through a railroad crossing when there
is not sufficient space to drive completely through the crossing.
D. No person shall drive a vehicle through a railroad crossing unless such
vehicle has sufficient undercarriage clearance necessary to prevent the
undercarriage of the vehicle from contacting the railroad crossing.
E. Every commercial motor vehicle as defined in Section 302.700, RSMo.,
shall, upon approaching a railroad grade crossing, be driven at a rate of
speed which will permit said commercial motor vehicle to be stopped
before reaching the nearest rail of such crossing and shall not be driven
upon or over such crossing until due caution has been taken to
ascertain that the course is clear. This Section does not apply to
vehicles which are required to stop at railroad crossings pursuant to
Section 304.030, RSMo.
A. As used in this Section, the following definitions apply:
FUNERAL DIRECTOR — A person licensed as a funeral director
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 333, RSMo.
FUNERAL LEAD VEHICLE OR LEAD VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle
equipped with at least one (1) lighted circulating lamp exhibiting an
amber or purple light or lens or alternating flashing headlamps visible
under normal atmospheric conditions for a distance of five hundred
(500) feet from the front of the vehicle. A hearse or coach properly
equipped may be a lead vehicle.
ORGANIZED FUNERAL PROCESSION — Two (2) or more vehicles
accompanying the remains of a deceased person from a funeral
establishment, church, synagogue or other place when a funeral service
Section
335.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.030
100:373
has taken place to a cemetery, crematory or other place of final
disposition, or a funeral establishment, church, synagogue or other
place where additional funeral services will be performed, if directed
by a licensed funeral director from a licensed establishment.
B. Except as otherwise provided for in this Section, pedestrians and
operators of all other vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
which is a part of an organized funeral procession.
C. Notwithstanding any traffic control device or right-of-way provision
prescribed by State or local law, when the funeral lead vehicle in an
organized funeral procession lawfully enters an intersection, all
vehicles in the procession shall follow the lead vehicle through the
intersection. The operator of each vehicle in the procession shall
exercise the highest degree of care toward any other vehicle or
pedestrian on the roadway.
D. An organized funeral procession shall have the right-of-way at all
intersections regardless of any traffic control device at such
intersections, except that operators of vehicles in an organized funeral
procession shall yield the right-of-way to any approaching emergency
vehicle pursuant to the provisions of Section 304.022, RSMo., or when
directed to do so by a Law Enforcement Officer.
E. All vehicles in an organized funeral procession shall follow the
preceding vehicle in the procession as closely as is practical and safe
under the conditions.
F. No person shall operate any vehicle as part of an organized funeral
procession without the flashing emergency lights of such vehicle being
lighted.
G. Toll-free passage shall be given on all toll bridges, tunnels and other toll
highways to all vehicles in an organized funeral procession.
H. Any person who is not an operator of a vehicle in an organized funeral
procession shall not:
1. Drive between the vehicles comprising an organized funeral
procession while such vehicles are in motion and have the flashing
emergency lights lighted except when required to do so by a Law
Enforcement Officer or when such person is operating an
emergency vehicle giving an audible or visual signal.
2. Join a funeral procession for the purpose of securing the right-ofway
as granted in Subsection (G) of this Section.
3. Attempt to pass any vehicle in an organized funeral procession,
except where a passing lane has been specifically provided.
I. When an organized funeral procession is proceeding through a red
signal light as permitted in Subsections (C) and (D) of this Section, a
vehicle not in the organized funeral procession shall not enter the
Section
340.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
340.030
100:374
Section 340.040. Driving in Procession. [R.O. 2007 §340.040]
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand
edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practicable and safe.
Section 340.050. Parade Permit Procedures. [R.O. 2007 §340.060;
CC 1978 §340.060; Ord. No. 750 §k, 2, 4, 1-3-1980]
Section 340.060. Vehicle Shall Not Be Driven On A Sidewalk —
Prohibition On Obstruction of Bicycle Lanes — Drivers To Yield To
Bicycles in Designated Bicycle Lanes.
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except
on a permanent or temporary driveway. A designated bicycle lane shall not
be obstructed by a parked or standing motor vehicle or other stationary
object. A motor vehicle may be driven in a designated bicycle lane only for
the purpose of a lawful maneuver to cross the lane or to provide for safe
travel. In making an otherwise lawful maneuver that requires traveling in
or crossing a designated bicycle lane, the driver of a motor vehicle shall
yield to any bicycle in the lane. As used in this Section, the term "designated
bicycle lane" shall mean a portion of the roadway or highway that has been
designated by the Governing Body having jurisdiction over such roadway or
highway by striping with signing or striping with pavement markings for the
preferential or exclusive use of bicycles.
Section 340.070. Limitations On Backing. [R.O. 2007 §340.080; CC
1978 §340.200; Ord. No. 112 §4, 6-2-1954]
intersection unless such vehicle may do so without crossing the path of
the funeral procession.
J. No ordinance, regulation or any other provision of law shall prohibit the
use of a motorcycle utilizing flashing amber lights to escort an
organized funeral procession on the highway.
A. No procession or parade excepting the forces of the United States
Armed Forces, the military forces of this State, and the forces of the
Police and Fire Department or funeral processions, shall occupy, march,
or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued
by the City Administrator and such other regulations as are set forth
herein which may apply.
B. The permit issued by the City Administrator shall require certain data
to be provided including but not limited to the date and time of the
scheduled parade, the route and the number of vehicles and individuals
involved, assembly location, names and addresses of responsible
parties.
Section
340.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.070
100:375
Section 340.080. Opening and Closing Vehicle Doors. [R.O. 2007
§340.090]
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall
any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
Section 340.090. Riding On Motorcycles, Additional Passenger,
Requirements. [R.O. 2007 §340.100]
Section 340.100. Riding Motorized Bicycle On Sidewalks —
Prohibited. [R.O. 2007 340.120]
No person shall ride a motorized bicycle upon a sidewalk.
Section 340.110. Riding Bicycles, Sleds, Roller Skates By Attaching
To Another Vehicle, Prohibited — Pulling A Rider Behind Vehicle
Prohibited.
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorized bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself/herself to any vehicle
upon a roadway. Neither shall the driver of a vehicle knowingly pull a rider
behind a vehicle.
A. The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement
can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other
traffic.
B. Backing Into Intersections. No persons operating motor vehicles or
trailers shall back the same into an intersection, and shall not in any
event or at any place back a vehicle unless such movement can be made
in safety.
A. A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent
and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any
other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless
such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which
event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if
designed for two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to
the rear or side of the operator.
B. The operator of a motorized bicycle shall ride only astride the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and shall not permit
more than one (1) person to ride thereon at the same time, unless the
motorized bicycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person. Any
motorized bicycle designed to carry more than one (1) person must be
equipped with a passenger seat and footrests for the use of a passenger.
Section
340.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
340.120
100:376
Section 340.120. Driving Through Safety Zone Prohibited. [R.O.
2007 §340.140]
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone.
Section 340.130. Operation of Motorcycles. [R.O. 2007 §340.150]
Section 340.140. Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles (A.T.V.). [R.O.
2007 §340.160]
A. Every person operating or riding on a motorcycle shall wear protective
headgear, which meets the standards and specifications as established
by the Director of Revenue of Missouri, at all times while the vehicle is
in motion.
B. A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent
and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any
other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless
such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which
event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if
designed for two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to
the rear or side of the operator.
A. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle, as defined in Section
300.010, upon the streets and highways of this City, except as follows:
1. All-terrain vehicles owned and operated by a Governmental entity
for official use;
2. All-terrain vehicles operated for agricultural purposes or industrial
on-premise purposes between the official sunrise and sunset on the
day of operation;
3. All-terrain vehicles whose operators carry a special permit issued
by this City pursuant to Section 304.013, RSMo.
B. No person shall operate an off-road vehicle, as defined in Section
304.001, RSMo., within any stream or river in this City, except that offroad
vehicles may be operated within waterways which flow within the
boundaries of land which an off-road vehicle operator owns, or for
agricultural purposes within the boundaries of land which an off-road
vehicle operator owns or has permission to be upon, or for the purpose
of fording such stream or river of this City at such road crossings as are
customary or part of the highway system. All Law Enforcement Officials
or Peace Officers of this City shall enforce the provisions of this
Subsection within the geographic area of their jurisdiction.
C. A person operating an all-terrain vehicle on a street or highway
pursuant to an exception covered in this Section shall have a valid
operator's or chauffeur's license, but shall not be required to have
passed an examination for the operation of a motorcycle, and the
vehicle shall be operated at speeds of less than thirty (30) miles per
Section
340.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.140
100:377
Section 340.150. Controlled Access. [R.O. 2007 §340.170]
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
Section 340.160. Commercial Vehicles Prohibited From Using
Certain Streets. [R.O. 2007 §340.190]
In cases where an equally direct and convenient alternate route is provided,
an ordinance may describe and signs may be erected giving notice thereof,
that no persons shall operate any commercial vehicle upon streets or parts
of streets so described except those commercial vehicles making deliveries
thereon.
Section 340.170. Distance At Which Vehicle Must Follow.
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than
is reasonably safe and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the roadway. Vehicles being
driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a
caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so
operated, except in a funeral procession or in a duly authorized parade, so
as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of
vehicles as to enable any other vehicle to overtake or pass such vehicles
in safety. This Section shall in no manner affect Section 304.044, RSMo.,
relating to distance between trucks traveling on the highway.
hour. When operated on a street or highway, an all-terrain vehicle shall
have a bicycle safety flag, which extends not less than seven (7) feet
above the ground, attached to the rear of the vehicle. The bicycle safety
flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of not less than thirty (30)
square inches and shall be dayglow in color.
D. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle:
1. In any careless way so as to endanger the person or property of
another;
2. While under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance;
or
3. Without a securely fastened safety helmet on the head of an
individual who operates an all-terrain vehicle or who is being towed
or otherwise propelled by an all-terrain vehicles, unless the
individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
E. No operator of an all-terrain vehicle shall carry a passenger, except for
agricultural purposes.
F. A violation of this Section shall be a misdemeanor.
Section
340.140
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
340.180
100:378
Section 340.180. Careless and Imprudent Driving. [R.O. 2007
§340.210; CC 1978 §340.210; Ord. No. 609 §§1—3, 5-4-1978; Ord.
No. 3668 §§2—5, 3-10-1998; Ord. No. 6042 §1, 10-23-2014]
Section 340.190. Stopping For School Bus.
A. Every person operating a motor vehicle on the streets or highways
within the corporate limits of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, shall drive
the vehicle in a careful and prudent manner and at a rate of speed so as
not to endanger the property of another, or the life or limb of any
person, and shall exercise the highest degree of care.
B. Every person operating a motor vehicle on publicly owned or privately
owned parking lots, roads or driveways within the corporate limits of
the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, shall drive the vehicle in a careful and
prudent manner and at a rate of speed so as not to endanger the
property of another, or the life or limb of any person, and shall exercise
the highest degree of care.
C. It shall be prima facie evidence that a vehicle operator is not exercising
the highest degree of care if the operator of a moving vehicle engages
in any conduct that causes his or her vision or attention to be obscured,
diminished or directed away from the path of travel or operation of the
vehicle, including, but not limited to, by using a mirror to engage in
grooming; reading anything located in the vehicle other than
operational information displayed on vehicle gauges and equipment;
writing; drawing; manually inputting information into a GPS or
mapping device, or turning one's head substantially away from the path
of travel to observe things in the vehicle or outside the vehicle but
contrary to the path of travel.
A. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway upon meeting or overtaking
from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway
for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children and
whose driver has in the manner prescribed by law given the signal to
stop shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and shall not
proceed until such school bus resumes motion or until signaled by its
driver to proceed.
B. Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon
the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words
"School Bus" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height. Each bus
shall have lettered on the rear in plain and distinct type the following:
"State Law: Stop While Bus is Loading and Unloading". Each school bus
subject to the provisions of Sections 304.050 to 304.070, RSMo., shall
be equipped with a mechanical and electrical signaling device approved
by the State Board of Education which will display a signal plainly
visible from the front and rear and indicating intention to stop.
C. Every school bus operated to transport students in the public school
system which has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten
Section
340.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.190
100:379
thousand (10,000) pounds, which has the engine mounted entirely in
front of the windshield and the entrance door behind the front wheels,
and which is used for the transportation of school children shall be
equipped with a crossing control arm. The crossing control arm, when
activated, shall extend a minimum of five (5) feet six (6) inches from the
face of the front bumper. The crossing control arm shall be attached on
the right side of the front bumper and shall be activated by the same
controls which activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices
described in Subsection (B) of this Section. This Subsection may be
cited as "Jessica's Law" in commemoration of Jessica Leicht and all
other Missouri school children who have been injured or killed during
the operation of a school bus.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the driver of a school bus
in the process of loading or unloading students upon a street or
highway shall activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices,
in the manner prescribed by the State Board of Education, to
communicate to drivers of other vehicles that students are loading or
unloading. A public school district has the authority pursuant to Section
304.050, RSMo., to adopt a policy which provides that the driver of a
school bus in the process of loading or unloading students upon a
divided highway of four (4) or more lanes may pull off of the main
roadway and load or unload students without activating the mechanical
and electrical signaling devices in a manner which gives the signal for
other drivers to stop and may use the amber signaling devices to alert
motorists that the school bus is slowing to a stop; provided that the
passengers are not required to cross any traffic lanes and also provided
that the emergency flashing signal lights are activated in a manner
which indicates that drivers should proceed with caution and, in such
case, the driver of a vehicle may proceed past the school bus with due
caution. No driver of a school bus shall take on or discharge passengers
at any location upon a highway consisting of four (4) or more lanes of
traffic, whether or not divided by a median or barrier, in such manner as
to require the passengers to cross more than two (2) lanes of traffic; nor
shall any passengers be taken on or discharged while the vehicle is
upon the road or highway proper unless the vehicle so stopped is
plainly visible for at least five hundred (500) feet in each direction to
drivers of other vehicles in the case of a highway with no shoulder and a
speed limit greater than sixty (60) miles per hour and at least three
hundred (300) feet in each direction to drivers of other vehicles upon
other highways, and on all highways, only for such time as is actually
necessary to take on and discharge passengers.
E. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need
not stop upon meeting or overtaking a school bus which is on a different
roadway, which is proceeding in the opposite direction on a highway
containing four (4) or more lanes of traffic, or which is stopped in a
loading zone constituting a part of, or adjacent to, a limited or
controlled access highway at a point where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross the roadway.
Section
340.190
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
340.195
100:380
Section 340.195. Hand and Mechanical Signals.
A. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of or turn a vehicle
from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after the giving of an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein.
1. An operator or driver when stopping, or when checking the speed
of the operator's vehicle if the movement of other vehicles may
reasonably be affected by such checking of speed, shall extend
such operator's arm at an angle below horizontal so that the same
may be seen in the rear of the vehicle.
2. An operator or driver intending to turn the vehicle to the right shall
extend such operator's arm at an angle above horizontal so that the
same may be seen in front of and in the rear of the vehicle and shall
slow down and approach the intersecting highway as near as
practicable to the right side of the highway along which such
operator is proceeding before turning.
3. An operator or driver intending to turn the vehicle to the left shall
extend such operator's arm in a horizontal position so that the
same may be seen in the rear of the vehicle and shall slow down
and approach the intersecting highway so that the left side of the
vehicle shall be as near as practicable to the centerline of the
highway along which the operator is proceeding before turning.
4. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the
hand and arm or by a signal light or signal device in good
mechanical condition of a type approved by the State Highway
Patrol; however, when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a
hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear
of such vehicle, then such signals shall be given by such light or
device. A vehicle shall be considered as so constructed or loaded
that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front
and rear when the distance from the center of the top of the
steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load
exceeds twenty-four (24) inches, or when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or
load thereon exceeds fourteen (14) feet, which limit of fourteen
(14) feet shall apply to single vehicles or combinations of vehicles.
The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to any trailer
which does not interfere with a clear view of the hand signals of the
operator or of the signaling device upon the vehicle pulling such
trailer; provided further, that the provisions of this Section as far as
mechanical devices on vehicles so constructed that a hand and arm
signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle
as above provided shall only be applicable to new vehicles
registered within this State after the first (1st) day of January,
1954.
Section
340.195
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.200
100:381
Section 340.200. Drive On Right of Highway — Traffic Lanes. [R.O.
2007 §340.240]
A. All vehicles not in motion shall be placed with their right side as near
the right-hand side of the highway as practicable, except on streets of
municipalities where vehicles are obliged to move in one direction only
or parking of motor vehicles is regulated by ordinance.
B. Upon all public roads or highways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction under the rules governing such movements;
2. When placing a vehicle in position for and when such vehicle is
lawfully making a left turn in compliance with the provisions of
Section 325.010 of this Title;
3. When the right half of the roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
4. Upon a roadway designated by the City of O'Fallon as a one-way
street and marked or signed for one-way traffic.
5. When obeying orders of a Police or Fire Official.
C. It is unlawful to drive any vehicle upon any highway or road which has
been divided into two (2) or more roadways by means of a physical
barrier or by means of a dividing section or delineated by curbs, lines or
other markings on the roadway, except to the right of such barrier or
dividing section, or to make any left turn or semicircular or U-turn on
any such divided highway, except at an intersection or interchange or at
any signed location designated by the State Highways and
Transportation Commission or the Department of Transportation. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to emergency vehicles, law
enforcement vehicles or to vehicles owned by the Commission or the
Department.
D. The authorities in charge of any highway or the State Highway Patrol
may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic
moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the
highway, and all members of the Missouri Highway Patrol and other
Peace Officers may direct traffic in conformance with such signs. When
authorized signs have been erected designating off-center traffic lanes,
no person shall disobey the instructions given by such signs.
E. Whenever any roadway has been divided into three (3) or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic, the following rules shall apply:
1. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver
has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
Section
340.200
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
340.200
100:382
Section 340.210. Traffic Lanes Established — Improper Lane Usage.
[R.O. 2007 §340.245; Ord. No. 3671 §§1—4, 3-10-1998]
2. Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes a vehicle shall
not be driven in the center lane, except when overtaking and
passing another vehicle where the roadway ahead is clearly visible
and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in
preparation for a left turn or where such center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding and is sign-posted to give notice of such allocation;
3. Upon all highways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal
speed of traffic thereon shall be driven in the right-hand lane for
traffic or as close as practicable to the right-hand edge or curb,
except as otherwise provided in this Chapter;
4. Official signs may be caused to be erected by the City Traffic
Engineer, the State Highway and Transportation Department, the
State Highway Patrol, or the O'Fallon Police Department; and they
may place temporary signs directing slow moving traffic to use a
designated lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the
same direction; and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of
every such sign;
5. Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and except when a roadway has been
divided into traffic lanes, each driver shall give to the other at least
one-half (½) of the main traveled portion of the roadway whenever
possible.
F. All vehicles in motion upon a highway having two (2) or more lanes of
traffic proceeding in the same direction shall be driven in the righthand
lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or when
preparing to make a proper left turn or when otherwise directed by
traffic markings, signs, or signals.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes
upon the roadway of any street or highway within the municipal City
limits of O'Fallon where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
B. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing another
vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
C. Where a special lane for making left turns by drivers proceeding across
traffic in the opposite direction which has been indicated by official
traffic control devices:
1. A left turn shall not be made from any other lane.
Section
340.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.210
100:383
Section 340.220. Passing Regulations. [R.O. 2007 §340.250]
2. A motor vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when
preparing for or making an immediate left turn from or into the
roadway or parking lot.
D. Any person found to be in violation of this Section shall be subject upon
conviction to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or to
imprisonment in the St. Charles County Jail for up to three (3) months,
or to both such fine and imprisonment.
A. The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to the limitations and
exceptions hereinafter stated:
1. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and
shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely
clear of the overtaken vehicle; and
2. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of
the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of his/her
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
B. The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
1. When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
2. Upon a City street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width
for two (2) or more lines of vehicles in each direction;
3. Upon a one-way street;
4. Upon any highway outside of a City with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width and clearly marked for four (4) or more lines of
traffic.
The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass another
vehicle upon the right only under the foregoing conditions
when such movement may be made in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the paved or
main traveled portion of the roadway. The provisions of this
Subsection shall not relieve the driver of a slow-moving
vehicle from the duty to drive as closely as practicable to the
right-hand edge of the roadway.
C. Except when a roadway has been divided into three (3) traffic lanes, no
vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center line of a highway or
public road in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of
oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such
Section
340.210
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
340.220
100:384
Section 340.230. Stopping or Suddenly Decreasing Speed —
Turning Vehicle or Moving Right or Left — Signals To Be Given.
[R.O. 2007 §340.255; Ord. No. 4661 §1, 6-1-2004]
overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with
the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction or any vehicle overtaken.
D. No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
1. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve of the
highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance
as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach
from the opposite direction;
2. When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred
(100) feet of any bridge, viaduct, tunnel or when approaching
within one hundred (100) feet of or at any intersection or railroad
grade crossing.
A. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of or turn a vehicle
from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after the giving of an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein.
1. An operator or driver when stopping or when checking the speed of
the operator's vehicle, if the movement of other vehicles may
reasonably be affected by such checking of speed, shall extend
such operator's arm at an angle below horizontal so that the same
may be seen in the rear of the vehicle;
2. An operator or driver intending to turn the operator's vehicle to the
right shall extend such operator's arm at an angle above horizontal
so that the same may be seen in front of and in the rear of the
vehicle and shall slow down and approach the intersecting highway
as near as practicable to the right side of the highway along which
such operator is proceeding before turning;
3. An operator or driver intending to turn the operator's vehicle to the
left shall extend such operator's arm in a horizontal position so that
the same may be seen in the rear of the vehicle and shall slow down
and approach the intersecting highway so that the left side of the
vehicle shall be as near as practicable to the centerline of the
highway along which the operator is proceeding before turning;
4. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the
hand and arm or by a signal light or signal device in good
mechanical condition of a type approved by the Missouri State
Highway Patrol; however, when a vehicle is so constructed or
loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the
front and rear of such vehicle, then such signals shall be given by
Section
340.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.230
100:385
Section 340.240. Tampering With Motor Vehicles. [R.O. 2007
§340.220; CC 1978 §300.040; Ord. No. 289 §1, 10-18-1966]
No person shall drive, operate, use or tamper with a motor vehicle or
trailer without the permission of the owner thereof and no person shall,
without the permission of the owner or person in charge thereof, climb upon
or into or swing upon any motor vehicle or trailer, whether the same is
in motion or at rest, or sound the horn or other sound-producing device
thereon, or attempt to manipulate any of the levers, starting device, brakes
or machinery thereof or set the machinery in motion.
Section 340.250. Cutting Corners Prohibited. [Ord. No. 6052 §1,
12-11-2014]
No driver shall operate a motor vehicle on any private road or driveway,
parking lot or any area which is not a highway, road or street as defined
herein, for the purpose of avoiding travel upon the right-of-way between one
highway, road or street and the same or another highway, road or street.
This violation may be referred to as "cutting a corner."
Section 340.260. Regulation Of Golf Carts On City Streets And
Sidewalks. [Ord. No. 6016, 10-24-2019]
such light or device. A vehicle shall be considered as so constructed
or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to
the front and rear when the distance from the center of the top of
the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load
exceeds twenty-four (24) inches, or when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body
or load thereon exceeds fourteen (14) feet, which limit of fourteen
(14) feet shall apply to single vehicles or combinations of vehicles.
The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to any trailer
which does not interfere with a clear view of the hand signals of the
operator or of the signalling device upon the vehicle pulling such
trailer; provided further, that the provisions of this Section as far
as mechanical devices on vehicles so constructed that a hand and
arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such
vehicle as above provided shall only be applicable to new vehicles
registered within the State of Missouri after the first (1st) day of
January, 1954.
A. Purpose And Intent. It is the purpose and intent of this Section to
provide for the regulation of the operation of golf carts upon certain
designated public City streets and sidewalks in order to protect the
safety of all those who enter upon and use such rights-of-way.
B. Definitions. In this Section, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
GOLF CART — Any motor vehicle that is or was originally designed and
manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting or recreation
Section
340.230
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
340.260
100:386
purposes and that is designed and manufactured so as to not be capable
of exceeding speeds of twenty (20) miles per hour. All-terrain vehicles,
as defined in Section 300.010 of this Code of Ordinances, and off-road
vehicles, as defined in Section 304.001, RSMo., are not "golf carts"
within the meaning of this Section and are not authorized for use
pursuant to these regulations.
C. Operations.
1. No golf cart may be operated upon any private property without
permission of the owner, the person entitled to immediate
possession of the property, or the authorized agent of such.
2. Golf carts may be operated upon any public street, other than a
State or Federal highway, having a speed limit of thirty (30) miles
per hour or less.
3. Golf carts may be operated on: (a) public sidewalks, and (b) public
pedestrian or bicycle paths, which have a travel surface at least six
(6) feet wide unless prohibited by signs posted thereon.
4. No person shall operate a golf cart:
a. Without a valid driver's license in accord with Chapter 302,
RSMo.;
b. In a negligent or careless manner so as to endanger any person
or property of another;
c. While under the influence of alcohol or any controlled
substance;
d. Who is less than sixteen (16) years of age;
e. At any time between one-half (1/2) hour before sunset and onehalf
(1/2) hour before sunrise the following day unless the golf
cart is equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a
white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500)
feet to the front, and either:
(1) A lamp emitting a solid red taillight visible from a distance
of five hundred (500) feet to the rear when directly in front
of lawful low beams or head lamps on a motor vehicle; or
(2) A flashing light emitting diode taillight together with a red
reflector visible a distance of six hundred (600) feet to the
rear and when directly in front of lawful low beams of head
lamps on a motor vehicle.
f. Without a bicycle safety flag that is triangular in shape with an
area of not less than thirty (30) square inches in a dayglow
color and which extends not less than seven (7) feet above the
ground attached to the rear of the vehicle;
Section
340.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.260
100:387
Chapter 342
ALCOHOL OR DRUG-RELATED TRAFFIC OFFENSES
Section 342.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §342.010; CC 1978
§340.180; Ord. No. 937 §2, 8-7-1982; Ord. No. 4253 §1, 9-19-2001]
As used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings set out
herein:
DRIVE, DRIVING, OPERATES OR OPERATING — Means physically driving
or operating a motor vehicle.
g. Without a horn or other device capable of emitting an audible
warning signal;
h. With more passengers than the golf cart is specifically
designed to carry while seated;
i. With any passengers standing in the rear bag storage area or
hanging onto the vehicle;
j. On any State or Federal highway, other than to cross a portion
of the highway which intersects a street upon which use of the
golf cart is lawful; except that no golf cart shall cross any street
or highway which has a posted speed limit of more than fortyfive
(45) miles per hour;
k. On any public street, sidewalk, pedestrian or bicycle path or
other public way of any kind other than the streets, sidewalks
and paths designated in Subsections (C)(2) and (3), of this
Subsection, above.
5. Any person operating a golf cart shall:
a. Yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian or bicyclist; and
b. Give an audible signal before overtaking or passing a
pedestrian or bicyclist; and
c. Move the golf cart to the far-right side and yield to faster
moving vehicles, pedestrians and bicyclists; and
d. Maintain proof of financial responsibility in accordance with
Section 380.140 of this Code of Ordinances or maintain any
other insurance policy providing equivalent liability coverage
for operation of a golf cart; and
e. Adhere to all applicable State and local laws, regulations and
ordinances, including, but not necessarily limited the
provisions of this Code.
Section
340.260
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
342.010
100:388
INTOXICATED CONDITION — A person is in an intoxicated condition when
he/she is under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance, or drug, or
any combination thereof.
PERCENT BY WEIGHT OF ALCOHOL IN THE BLOOD — "Percent by weight
of alcohol in the blood" shall be based upon grams of alcohol per one
hundred (100) milliliters of blood or two hundred ten (210) liters of breath
and may be shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath, saliva
or urine. For the purposes of determining the alcoholic content of a person's
blood under this Section, the test shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 577.020 to 577.041, RSMo.
Section 342.020. Driving While Intoxicated. [R.O. 2007 §342.020;
CC 1978 §340.180; Ord. No. 937 §3, 8-7-1982]
A person commits the violation of driving while intoxicated if he/she
operates a motor vehicle while in an intoxicated or drugged condition.
Section 342.030. Driving With Excessive Blood Alcohol Content.
[R.O. 2007 §342.030; CC 1978 §340.180; Ord. No. 937 §4, 8-7-1982;
Ord. No. 4253 §2, 9-19-2001]
A person commits the offense of "driving with excessive blood alcohol
content" if such person operates a motor vehicle in this City with eighthundredths
of one percent (.08%) or more by weight of alcohol in such
person's blood.
Section 342.040. Arrest With or Without Warrant. [R.O. 2007
§342.040; CC 1978 §340.180; Ord. No. 937 §6, 8-7-1982; Ord. No.
4253 §3, 9-19-2001]
An arrest without a warrant by a Police Officer for a violation of Sections
342.020 or 342.030 is lawful whenever the arresting officer has reasonable
grounds to believe that the person to be arrested has violated the Section,
whether or not the violation occurred in the presence of the arresting
officer and when such arrest without warrant is made within one and onehalf
(1½) hours after such claimed violation occurred, unless the person to
be arrested has left the scene of an accident or has been removed from
the scene to receive medical treatment, in which case such arrest without
warrant may be made more than one and one-half (1½) hours after such
violation occurred.
Section 342.050. Chemical Test For Alcohol Content — Consent
Implied — Administered — When — How — Videotaping of Chemical
or Field Sobriety Test Admissible Evidence.
A. This Section and Section 577.021, RSMo., shall be known as the Alan
Woods Law.
B. Any person who operates a motor vehicle upon the public highways of
this City shall be deemed to have given consent to, subject to the
Section
342.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
342.050
100:389
provisions of Sections 577.020 to 577.041, RSMo., a chemical test or
tests of the person's breath, blood, saliva or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol or drug content of the person's blood pursuant
to the following circumstances:
1. If the person is arrested for any offense arising out of acts which
the arresting officer had reasonable grounds to believe were
committed while the person was driving a motor vehicle while in an
intoxicated or drugged condition;
2. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been stopped
by a Law Enforcement Officer, and the Law Enforcement Officer
has reasonable grounds to believe that such person was driving a
motor vehicle with a blood alcohol content of two-hundredths of
one percent (.02%) or more by weight;
3. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been stopped
by a Law Enforcement Officer, and the Law Enforcement Officer
has reasonable grounds to believe that such person has committed
a violation of the traffic laws of the State or any political subdivision
of the State, and such officer has reasonable grounds to believe,
after making such stop, that such person has a blood alcohol
content of two-hundredths of one percent (.02%) or greater;
4. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been stopped
at a sobriety checkpoint or roadblock, and the Law Enforcement
Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that such person has a
blood alcohol content of two-hundredths of one percent (.02%) or
greater;
5. If the person, while operating a motor vehicle, has been involved in
a motor vehicle collision which resulted in a fatality or a readily
apparent serious physical injury as defined in Section 565.002,
RSMo., and has been arrested as evidenced by the issuance of a
uniform traffic ticket for the violation of any State law or County or
municipal ordinance with the exception of equipment violations
contained in Chapter 307, RSMo., or similar provisions contained
in County or municipal ordinances; or
6. If the person, while operating a motor vehicle, has been involved in
a motor vehicle collision which resulted in a fatality or serious
physical injury as defined in Section 565.002, RSMo.
The test shall be administered at the direction of the Law
Enforcement Officer whenever the person has been arrested or
stopped for any reason.
C. The implied consent to submit to the chemical tests listed in Subsection
(B) of this Section shall be limited to not more than two (2) such tests
arising from the same arrest, incident or charge.
Section
342.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
342.050
100:390
D. Chemical analysis of the person's breath, blood, saliva or urine to be
considered valid pursuant to the provisions of Sections 577.020 to
577.041, RSMo., shall be performed according to methods approved by
the State Department of Health by licensed medical personnel or by a
person possessing a valid permit issued by the State Department of
Health for this purpose.
E. The person tested may have a physician, or a qualified technician,
chemist, registered nurse or other qualified person at the choosing and
expense of the person to be tested, administer a test in addition to any
administered at the direction of a Law Enforcement Officer. The failure
or inability to obtain an additional test by a person shall not preclude
the admission of evidence relating to the test taken at the direction of a
Law Enforcement Officer.
F. Upon the request of the person who is tested, full information
concerning the test shall be made available to such person. Full
information is limited to the following:
1. The type of test administered and the procedures followed;
2. The time of the collection of the blood or breath sample or urine
analyzed;
3. The numerical results of the test indicating the alcohol content of
the blood and breath and urine;
4. The type and status of any permit which was held by the person
who performed the test;
5. If the test was administered by means of a breath testing
instrument, the date of performance of the most recent required
maintenance of such instrument.
Full information does not include manuals, schematics or
software of the instrument used to test the person or any
other material that is not in the actual possession of the State.
Additionally, full information does not include information in
the possession of the manufacturer of the test instrument.
G. Any person given a chemical test of the person's breath pursuant to
Subsection (B) of this Section or a field sobriety test may be videotaped
during any such test at the direction of the Law Enforcement Officer.
Any such video recording made during the chemical test pursuant to
this Subsection or a field sobriety test shall be admissible as evidence
for a violation of any municipal ordinance or any license revocation or
suspension proceeding pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 302,
RSMo.
Section
342.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
342.060
100:391
Section 342.060. Drinking While Driving. [R.O. 2007 §342.060; Ord.
No. 4253 §5, 9-19-2001]
A person commits the violation of "drinking while driving" if he/she
consumes any alcoholic beverage while operating a moving motor vehicle
upon the public roadways.
Section 342.065. Operating A Motor Vehicle With An Open
Container of An Alcoholic Beverage. [Ord. No. 5137 §1, 2-8-2007]
A. Subject to the exceptions in Subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this Section,
a person commits the violation of "operating a motor vehicle with an
open container of an alcoholic beverage" if such person is operating a
motor vehicle in which an open container of beer or intoxicating liquor
is located while such vehicle is on any street, highway, or other public
or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking.
B. Notwithstanding Subsection (A), this Section does not apply to a person
who is conveying passengers in and operating a limousine or taxicab
licensed for commercial use if no other person is occupying a seat in the
front compartment of the vehicle where the operator of the vehicle is
located and no open container is in such compartment.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection (A), this Section does not apply to the
possession of an opened container that is securely resealed and stored
in the trunk of a motor vehicle or, if the motor vehicle does not have a
trunk, behind the last upright seat or in an area not normally occupied
by the driver or passengers and not easily accessible by the driver or
passengers.
D. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 311.101, RSMo., Supp. 2005, no
person who transports in a vehicle one (1) or more bottles of unfinished
wine which
1. Came from a licensed restaurant bar or winery,
2. After having ordered a meal (if from a restaurant bar), and
3. If the wine was partially consumed from such bottle(s) at the
restaurant bar or winery,
shall be considered to have violated this Section so long as:
1. Such person has in his or her possession a receipt dated
that date from the restaurant bar or winery, and
2. The bottle or bottles of wine remain in the restaurant baror
winery-furnished, one-time-use, tamperproof,
transparent bag(s) with the seal(s) intact.
In any prosecution under this Section the burden of injecting
the issue of this exception and the burden or persuasion with
respect thereto shall rest with the defendant.
Section
342.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
342.065
100:392
Chapter 345
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Section 345.010. Pedestrians Subject To Traffic Control Devices.
[R.O. 2007 §345.010]
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared
in Sections 315.060 and 315.070 of this Title, but at all other places
pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions
stated in this Chapter.
Section 345.020. Pedestrians' Right-Of-Way in Crosswalks. [R.O.
2007 §345.020]
Section 345.030. Pedestrians To Use Right Half of Crosswalks. [R.O.
2007 §345.030]
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half (½) of
crosswalks.
Section 345.040. Crossing At Right Angles. [R.O. 2007 §345.040]
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a crosswalk.
Section 345.050. When Pedestrian Shall Yield. [R.O. 2007 §345.050]
E. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable in accordance with Municipal Code Section
100.010.
A. When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a
crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
B. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
C. Subsection (A) shall not apply under the conditions stated in Subsection
(B) of Section 345.050.
D. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear
shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
Section
342.065
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
345.050
100:393
Section 345.060. Prohibited Crossing. [R.O. 2007 §345.060]
Section 345.070. Obedience of Pedestrians To Bridge and Railroad
Signals. [R.O. 2007 §345.070]
Section 345.080. Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways. [R.O. 2007
§345.080]
A. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
B. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the rightof-
way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
C. The foregoing rules in this Section have no application under the
conditions stated in Section 345.060 when pedestrians are prohibited
from crossing at certain designated places.
A. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a
crosswalk.
B. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any
business district.
C. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any
street designated by ordinance.
D. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic control devices; and, when authorized to
cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
A. No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge
operation signal indication has been given.
B. No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge when such gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
A. Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to
walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
B. Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the
opposite direction.
Section
345.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
345.090
100:394
Section 345.090. Drivers To Exercise Highest Degree of Care. [R.O.
2007 §345.090]
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Title, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise the highest degree of care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn
when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any
child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
Section 345.100. Pedestrians Soliciting Rides or Business. [R.O.
2007 §345.100; CC 1978 §345.100; Ord. No. 247 Art. X §9,
8-13-1962]
Chapter 350
METHOD OF PARKING
Section 350.010. Standing or Parking Close To Curb. [R.O. 2007
§350.010]
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped
or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within
eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb.
Section 350.020. Signs or Markings Indicating Angle Parking. [R.O.
2007 §350.020]
A. No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting rides,
employment, or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
B. No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the
purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while
parked or about to be parked on a street or highway.
A. The City Traffic Engineer shall determine upon what streets angle
parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets but such
angle parking shall not be indicated upon any Federal-aid or State
highway within the City unless the State Highways and Transportation
Commission has determined by resolution or order entered in its
minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking
without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
B. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where
passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the
left side of the street or upon any streetcar tracks.
Section
345.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.030
100:395
Section 350.030. Obedience To Angle Parking Signs or Markers.
[R.O. 2007 §350.030]
On those streets which have been signed or marked by the City Traffic
Engineer for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other
than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs
or markings.
Section 350.040. Permits For Loading or Unloading At An Angle To
The Curb. [R.O. 2007 §350.040]
Section 350.050. Lamps On Parked Vehicles. [R.O. 2007 §350.050]
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to issue special permits to
permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or
unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions
of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or
lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to
such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein.
B. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of
the special terms or conditions of any such permit.
A. Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during
the hours between a half (½) hour after sunset and half (½) hour before
sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
object within a distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such street or
highway no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
B. Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours
between a half (½) hour after sunset and a half (½) hour before sunrise
and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a
distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such highway, such vehicle so
parked or stopped shall be equipped with one (1) or more lamps
meeting the following requirements: At least one (1) lamp shall display
a white or amber light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet
to the front of the vehicle, and the same lamp or at least one other lamp
shall display a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500)
feet to the rear of the vehicle, and the location of said lamp or lamps
shall always be such that at least one (1) lamp or combination of lamps
meeting the requirements of this Section is installed as near as
practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closest to passing traffic.
The foregoing provisions shall not apply to a motor-driven cycle.
C. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed.
Section
350.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
350.060
100:396
Section 350.060. Parking A Vehicle in The Opposite Direction of
Traffic. [R.O. 2007 §350.060; CC 1978 §350.060; Ord. No. 226 §1,
7-11-1961]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to park a vehicle on an open and public street
or alley of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri facing the opposite direction and on
the opposite side of the street as the direction of the traffic over said street.
Chapter 355
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN
SPECIFIED PLACES
Section 355.010. Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited. [R.O.
2007 §355.010; Ord. No. 4394 §2, 7-17-2002]
A. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a Police Officer or official
traffic control device, no person shall:
1. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
a. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;
b. On a sidewalk;
c. Within an intersection;
d. On a crosswalk;
e. Between a safety zone and adjacent curb or within thirty (30)
feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a
safety zone, unless the City Traffic Engineer indicates a
different length by signs or markings;
f. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
g. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
h. On any railroad tracks;
i. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
2. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
a. In front of a public or private driveway;
b. Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
c. Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
Section
350.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
355.010
100:397
Section 355.020. Parking Not To Obstruct Traffic. [R.O. 2007
§355.020]
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such
a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10)
feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
Section 355.030. Parking in Alleys. [R.O. 2007 §355.030]
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
Section 355.040. Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited. [R.O.
2007 §355.040]
d. Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway;
e. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any
fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance (when
properly signposted);
f. At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
3. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers:
a. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
b. At any place where official signs prohibit parking;
c. Within ten (10) feet in each direction from any mailbox except
on Sunday, any Federal holiday or between the hours of 5:00
P.M. and 8:00 A.M.
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his/her control into
any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is
unlawful.
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway for the principal purpose
of:
1. Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
2. Repair such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
Section
355.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
355.050
100:398
Section 355.050. Parking Adjacent To Schools. [R.O. 2007
§355.050]
Section 355.060. Parking Prohibited On Narrow Streets. [R.O. 2007
§355.060]
Section 355.070. Standing or Parking On One-Way Streets. [R.O.
2007 §355.070]
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side
of any one (1) way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and
when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon
such left-hand side in violation of any such sign.
Section 355.080. Standing or Parking On One-Way Roadways. [R.O.
2007 §355.080]
In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one (1) direction upon any such roadway, no person
shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one (1) way
roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The
City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking
may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one (1) way roadway
and to erect signs giving notice thereof.
Section 355.090. No Stopping, Standing or Parking Near Hazardous
or Congested Places. [R.O. 2007 §355.090]
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating
no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school
property when such parking would, in his/her opinion, interfere with
traffic or create a hazardous situation.
B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of
a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person
shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed
twenty (20) feet, or upon one (1) side of a street as indicated by such
signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet.
B. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets
as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such
street in violation of any such sign.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and
designate by proper signs places not exceeding one hundred (100) feet
in length in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would
create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay
to traffic.
Section
355.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
355.090
100:399
Section 355.100. Parking Longer Than Forty-Eight Hours
Prohibited. [R.O. 2007 §355.100; CC 1978 §365.100; Ord. No. 247
Art. XIII §4, 8-13-1962]
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for a period of time longer
than forty-eight (48) hours.
Section 355.110. Parking of Commercial Vehicles in Residential
Areas. [R.O. 2007 §355.110; CC 1978 §365.110; Ord. No. 598 §2,
12-20-1977; Ord. No. 4510 §1, 4-17-2003; Ord. No. 5248 §1,
11-8-2007; Ord. No. 5709 §2, 6-23-2011]
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any
such designated place.
A. No vehicle meeting any of the following specifications shall be parked
on any street, highway or roadway in a residential area:
1. Any vehicle having a DOT classification of Class 3 or above as
described in Appendix A to Ord. No. 5709 (set out in Subsection
(F)), with the exception of pick-up trucks and sport utility vehicles.
2. Motor homes or campers, subject to a forty-eight (48) hour grace
period in any thirty (30) day period for set up or cleaning. The
motor home or camper must be unoccupied.
3. Step van (any class).
4. Any vehicle with a shell extending beyond the length or width of the
truck bed.
5. Any commercial or industrial trailer, tractor or equipment.
B. The parking of vehicles described in Subsection (A) upon any private or
public parking lot in any residential area is expressly prohibited without
the written permission of the property owner or agent for said property.
C. No commercial or industrial tractor or semi-tractor with or without an
attached trailer shall be parked in a residential driveway.
D. The parking prohibitions specified in this Section shall not apply to the
following vehicles under the specified conditions:
1. Moving vans or service vehicles providing direct service to the
premises. In such case, parking shall not exceed twenty-four (24)
hours in any seven (7) day period and must be in accordance with
any posted restrictions.
2. Emergency response vehicles, such as fire trucks, ambulances and
utility vehicles, while actively responding to an emergency
situation.
Section
355.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
355.110
100:400
3. Any vehicle owned or operated by the City with a necessary
business purpose for remaining on site.
E. Any person who violates any provision of this Section as established
shall be subjected upon conviction to the penalty provisions in Section
100.010 of this Code.
F. Appendix A to Ord. No. 5709.
APPENDIX A—DOT TRUCK TYPES AND CLASSIFICATIONS
Class Load Range (lbs) Description
One 0—6,000 Mini pickup
Full size pickup
Mini van
SUV
Utility van
Two 6,001—10,000 Crew size pickup
Full size pickup
Mini van
Mini bus
Step van
Utility van
Three 10,001—14,000 City delivery
Mini bus
Walk in
Four 14,001—16,000 City delivery
Conventional
Landscape utility
Large walk in
Five 16,001—19,500 Bucket
City delivery
Large walk in
Section
355.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
355.110
100:401
APPENDIX A—DOT TRUCK TYPES AND CLASSIFICATIONS
Class Load Range (lbs) Description
Six 19,501—26,000 Beverage
Rack
School bus
Single axle van
Stake body
Seven 26,001—33,000 Furniture
Hi-profile semi
Home fuel
Medium semi trailer
Refuse
Tow
Eight 33,001 lbs. and
over
Cement mixer
Dump
Fire truck
Fuel
Heavy semi tractor
Refrigerated van
Semi sleeper
Tour bus
Section
355.110
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
355.110
100:402
APPENDIX A—DOT TRUCK TYPES AND CLASSIFICATIONS
Class Load Range (lbs) Description
Trailers Auto transport
Double van
Drop frame
Dry bulk
Dump trailer
Flatbed (any size)
Logger
Reefer
Tanker
Van trailer
TRUCK TYPE AND WEIGHT CLASS
The vehicle icons on the following pages depict examples of
vehicles in each DOT classification one through eight with
corresponding load ranges. These classifications are guidelines in
understanding the type of vehicle used for different applications
by vehicle class.
Section
355.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
355.110
100:403
Section 355.115. Parking and Storage of Commercial Vehicles in
Parking Lots Prohibited. [Ord. No. 5712 §1, 6-23-2011]
A. No vehicle having a DOT classification of Class 3 or above, and no step
van (any class), and no vehicle with a shell extending beyond the length
or width of the truck bed, and no commercial or industrial trailer,
tractor or equipment, and no semi-tractor, with or without an attached
trailer, shall be parked or stored in a commercially or industrially zoned
area within the City limits unless the vehicle is at that time actively
engaged in business at that location or is owned by or leased to a
business situated on the same lot. It shall be a rebuttable presumption
[assumed until proven otherwise] that the vehicle or equipment is
parked in violation of this restriction if no business on the same lot is
open for business at that time.
Section
355.110
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
355.115
100:404
Section 355.120. Standing or Parking in Fire Lanes — Prohibited.
[R.O. 2007 §355.120; Ord. No. 3669 §§2—5, 3-10-1998]
Section 355.130. Presumption in Reference To Illegal Parking.
[R.O. 2007 §375.070; CC 1978 §395.110; Ord. No. 247 Art. XVII §9,
8-13-1962]
Section 355.140. Physically Disabled Parking.
B. No owner or operator of any commercially or industrially zoned
property shall suffer or permit parking on such property in violation of
this Section. Owners and operators may erect appropriate signs
warning against parking prohibited under this Section.
A. The establishment of fire lanes is under authority of the City Fire
Official.
B. Where signs have been erected or the pavement otherwise marked
indicating a public or private area to be designated as a fire lane, no
person shall stand or park a vehicle within the area of thirty (30) feet
adjacent to each sign, or anywhere within the marked area. At no time
shall a vehicle impede in any way the free movement of vehicular traffic
within such area.
C. Any person found to be in violation of this Section shall be subjected,
upon conviction, to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or to
imprisonment in the St. Charles County Jail for up to three (3) months,
or to both such fine and imprisonment.
D. The Chief of Police may cause the removal of any vehicle left standing
or parked in a fire lane in violation of this Section. Any vehicle which
has been removed and which is not properly claimed within thirty (30)
days thereafter shall be considered to be an abandoned vehicle.
A. In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such
law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of
such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption
that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or
placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which,
such violation occurred.
B. The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedures
as prescribed in this Chapter have been followed.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle in any
stall or space designated or reserved for physically disabled persons, as
defined in Section 301.142, RSMo., as amended, whether upon public
or private property open to public use, unless the vehicle bears the
Section
355.115
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
355.140
100:405
Chapter 360
STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY
Section 360.010. City Traffic Engineer To Designate Curb Loading
Zones. [R.O. 2007 §360.010]
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location
of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain
appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which
the provisions of this Section are applicable.
Section 360.020. Permits For Curb Loading Zones. [R.O. 2007
§360.020]
The City Traffic Engineer shall not designate or sign any curb loading zone
upon special request of any person unless such person makes application
for a permit for such zone and for two (2) signs to indicate the ends of each
such zone. The City Traffic Engineer upon granting a permit and issuing
such signs shall collect from the applicant and deposit in the City Treasury
a service fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per year or fraction thereof and may by
general regulations impose conditions upon the use of such signs and for
reimbursement of the City for the value thereof in the event of their loss or
damage and their return in the event of misuse or upon expiration of permit.
Every such permit shall expire at the end of one (1) year.
State of Missouri license plate or placard for the disabled as provided
for in Sections 301.071 or 301.142, RSMo., as amended. The space
shall be indicated by an upright sign whether on a pole or attached to
a building upon which shall be inscribed the international symbol of
accessibility and may also include any appropriate wording to indicate
that the space is reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles which
display a distinguishing license plate or card. The sign described in this
Subsection shall also state, or an additional sign shall be posted below
or adjacent to the sign stating, the following: "$50 to $300 fine".
B. Any vehicle operator who is not physically disabled shall not use the
accessible65 parking space unless there is a physically disabled person
in the vehicle or while the vehicle is being used to transport a physically
disabled person.
C. Any person convicted of violating this Section is guilty of an offense and
shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than three hundred dollars ($300.00). Every day upon which such
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
65.Editor's Note—After discussion and direction by the City, "handicapped" was changed to
"accessible" in this Subsection (B) by implication of Ord. No. 5883, passed 5-24-2013.
Section
355.140
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
360.030
100:406
Section 360.030. Standing in Passenger Curb Loading Zone. [R.O.
2007 §360.030]
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in
any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the
regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only
for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
Section 360.040. Standing in Freight Curb Loading Zones. [R.O.
2007 §360.040]
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and
loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provision applicable to such zones are in effect.
Section 360.050. City Traffic Engineer To Designate Public Carrier
Stops and Stands. [R.O. 2007 §360.050]
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized and required to establish bus
stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common
carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such
number as he/she shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab
stand, or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs.
Section 360.060. Stopping, Standing and Parking of Buses and
Taxicabs Regulated. [R.O. 2007 §360.060]
A. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided
herein.
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any
place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their
baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone
so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
C. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position
with the right front wheel of such vehicle, not further than eighteen
(18) inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb
so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
D. The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as
provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a
taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
Section
360.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
360.060
100:407
Section 360.070. Restricted Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands. [R.O.
2007 §360.070]
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop,
or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has
been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver
of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone.
Chapter 365
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR
PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Section 365.010. Application of Chapter. [R.O. 2007 §365.010]
The provisions of this Chapter prohibiting the standing or parking of a
vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as
indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
Police Officer or official traffic control device.
Section 365.020. Regulations Not Exclusive. [R.O. 2007 §365.020]
The provisions of this Title imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve
any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in
specified places or at specified times.
Section 365.030. Parking Prohibited At All Times On Certain
Streets. [R.O. 2007 §365.030]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the streets described by ordinance.
Section 365.040. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours On
Certain Streets. [R.O. 2007 §365.040]
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours specified by ordinance of any day except
Sunday and public holidays within the districts or upon any of the streets
described by ordinance.
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
Section
360.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
365.050
100:408
Section 365.050. Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited During
Certain Hours On Certain Streets. [R.O. 2007 §365.050]
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle between the hours specified by ordinance on
any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district or upon any
of the streets described by ordinance.
Section 365.060. Parking Signs Required. [R.O. 2007 §365.060]
Whenever by this Title or any ordinance of the City or by determination
of the City Traffic Engineer any parking time limit is imposed or parking
is prohibited on designated streets it shall be the duty of the City Traffic
Engineer to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such
regulations shall be effective unless said signs are erected and in place at
the time of any alleged offense.
Section 365.070. Vehicular Parking On Cul-De-Sacs. [R.O. 2007
§365.070; Ord. No. 2092 §§2—6, 11-17-1992; Ord. No. 5579 §1,
3-25-2010]
Section 365.080. (Reserved)66
Chapter 370
A. Vehicular parking within any cul-de-sac of any roadway owned and/or
maintained by City of O'Fallon shall be limited to the outside perimeter
of the cul-de-sac, unless designated otherwise and appropriately signed
by the City Traffic Engineer.
B. Any vehicle parked within a cul-de-sac shall be parked with the flow of
traffic and not obstructing the free passage of other vehicles around the
cul-de-sac.
C. Vehicular parking shall be strictly prohibited in or near the center of
any cul-de-sac, paved or unpaved, or against any center "island", with
or without a curb, unless designed otherwise and appropriately signed
by the City Traffic Engineer.
D. Any person who parks a motor vehicle in violation of this Section, or the
registered owner of any motor vehicle found violating this Section shall
be subjected upon conviction to the penalty provisions in Section
100.010 of this Code.
E. Any vehicle found in violation of this Section may be towed and
impounded at the owner's expense after being properly ticketed.
66.Editor's Note—Ord. no. 5709 §1, adopted June 23, 2011, repealed section 365.080 "semitractor/
trailer—parking and driving in residential areas or on parking
lots—restrictions—permit" in its entirety. Former section 365.080 derived from R.O. 2007
§365.080; ord. no. 1838 §§2—4, 6, 9-6-90.
Section
365.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
365.080
100:409
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
Section
365.080
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
365.080
100:410
ARTICLE I
Light Regulations
Section 370.010. When Lights Required.
Section 370.020. Headlamp On Motor Vehicles.
Except as in this Article provided, every motor vehicle other than a motordrawn
vehicle and other than a motorcycle shall be equipped with at least
two (2) approved headlamps mounted at the same level with at least one (1)
on each side of the front of the vehicle. Every motorcycle shall be equipped
with at least one (1) and not more than two (2) approved headlamps. Every
motorcycle equipped with a sidecar or other attachment shall be equipped
with a lamp on the outside limit of such attachment capable of displaying a
white light to the front.
Section 370.030. Multiple-Beam Headlamps — Arrangement.
A. "When lighted lamps are required" means at any time from a half (½)
hour after sunset to a half (½) hour before sunrise and at any other time
when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons
and vehicles on the highway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet
ahead. Lighted lamps shall also be required any time the weather
conditions require usage of the motor vehicle's windshield wipers to
operate the vehicle in a careful and prudent manner as defined in
Section 304.012, RSMo. The provisions of this Section shall be
interpreted to require lighted lamps during periods of fog even if usage
of the windshield wipers is not necessary to operate the vehicle in a
careful and prudent manner.
B. When Lights Required—Violation—Penalty.
1. No person shall drive, move, park or be in custody of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any street or highway during the times
when lighted lamps are required unless such vehicle or
combination of vehicles displays lighted lamps and illuminating
devices as hereinafter in this Article required. No person shall use
on any vehicle any approved electric lamp or similar device unless
the light source of such lamp or device complies with the conditions
of approval as to focus and rated candlepower.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 307.120, RSMo., or any
other provision of law, violation of this Section shall be deemed an
infraction and any person who violates this Section as it relates to
violations of the usage of lighted lamps required due to weather
conditions or fog shall only be fined ten dollars ($10.00) and no
court costs shall be assessed.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the headlamps or the auxiliary driving
lamp or the auxiliary passing lamp or combination thereof on motor
vehicles other than motorcycles or motor-driven cycles shall be so
Section
370.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.030
100:411
Section 370.040. Dimming of Lights — When.
Every person driving a motor vehicle equipped with multiple-beam road
lighting equipment, during the times when lighted lamps are required, shall
use a distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and
of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a safe distance
in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements and
limitations: Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming
vehicle within five hundred (500) feet or is within three hundred (300) feet
to the rear of another vehicle traveling in the same direction, the driver
shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that the
glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the other driver, and in no
case shall the high-intensity portion which is projected to the left of the
prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle be aimed higher than the
center of the lamp from which it comes at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet
ahead, and in no case higher than a level of forty-two (42) inches above the
level upon which the vehicle stands at a distance of seventy-five (75) feet
ahead.
Section 370.050. Taillamps — Reflectors.
arranged that the driver may select at will between distributions of
light projected to different elevations and such lamps may, in addition,
be so arranged that such selection can be made automatically, subject
to the following limitations:
1. There shall be an uppermost distribution of light, or composite
beam, so aimed and of such intensity as to reveal persons and
vehicles at a distance of at least three hundred fifty (350) feet
ahead for all conditions of loading.
2. There shall be a lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam,
so aimed and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles
at a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet ahead; and on a
straight level road under any condition of loading none of the highintensity
portion of the beam shall be directed to strike the eyes of
an approaching driver.
A. Every motor vehicle and every motor-drawn vehicle shall be equipped
with at least two (2) rear lamps, not less than fifteen (15) inches or more
than seventy-two (72) inches above the ground upon which the vehicle
stands, which when lighted will exhibit a red light plainly visible from a
distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear. Either such rear lamp or
a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with
a white light the rear registration marker and render it clearly legible
from a distance of fifty (50) feet to the rear. When the rear registration
marker is illuminated by an electric lamp other than the required rear
lamps, all such lamps shall be turned on or off only by the same control
switch at all times.
Section
370.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
370.050
100:412
Section 370.060. Auxiliary Lamps — Number — Location.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed three (3) auxiliary
lamps mounted on the front at a height not less than twelve (12) inches
nor more than forty-two (42) inches above the level surface upon which the
vehicle stands.
Section 370.070. Cowl, Fender, Running Board and Backup Lamps.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two (2) side cowl
or fender lamps which shall emit a white or yellow light without glare.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one (1) running
board courtesy lamp on each side thereof which shall emit a white or yellow
light without glare. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with a backup lamp
either separately or in combination with another lamp, except that no such
backup lamp shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in
forward motion.
Section 370.080. Spotlamps.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed one (1) spotlamp but
every lighted spotlamp shall be so aimed and used so as not to be dazzling
or glaring to any person.
B. Every motorcycle registered in this State, when operated on a highway,
shall also carry at the rear, either as part of the rear lamp or separately,
at least one (1) approved red reflector which shall be of such size and
characteristics and so maintained as to be visible during the times
when lighted lamps are required from all distances within three
hundred (300) feet to fifty (50) feet from such vehicle when directly in
front of a motor vehicle displaying lawful undimmed headlamps.
C. Every new passenger car, new commercial motor vehicle, motor-drawn
vehicle and omnibus with a capacity of more than six (6) passengers
registered in this State after January 1, 1966, when operated on a
highway shall also carry at the rear at least two (2) approved red
reflectors, at least one (1) at each side, so designed, mounted on the
vehicle and maintained as to be visible during the times when lighted
lamps are required from all distances within five hundred (500) to fifty
(50) feet from such vehicle when directly in front of a motor vehicle
displaying lawful undimmed headlamps. Every such reflector shall meet
the requirements of this Article and shall be mounted upon the vehicle
at a height not to exceed sixty (60) inches nor less than fifteen (15)
inches above the surface upon which the vehicle stands.
D. Any person who knowingly operates a motor vehicle without the lamps
required in this Section in operable condition is guilty of an infraction.
Section
370.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.090
100:413
Section 370.090. Colors of Various Lamps — Restriction of Red
Lights.
Headlamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights substantially white in color;
auxiliary lamps, cowllamps and spotlamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights
substantially white, yellow or amber in color. No person shall drive or
move any vehicle or equipment, except a school bus when used for school
purposes or an emergency vehicle, upon any street or highway with any
lamp or device thereon displaying a red light visible from directly in front
thereof.
Section 370.100. Limitations On Lamps Other Than Headlamps —
Flashing Signals Prohibited Except On Specified Vehicles.
Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle other than
headlamps, spotlamps, front direction signals or auxiliary lamps which
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than three hundred (300)
candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the
level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more
than seventy-five (75) feet from the vehicle. Alternately flashing warning
signals may be used on school buses when used for school purposes and on
motor vehicles when used to transport United States mail from post offices
to boxes of addressees thereof and on emergency vehicles as defined in
Section 300.010 of this Title and on buses owned or operated by churches,
mosques, synagogues, temples or other houses of worship and on
commercial passenger transport vehicles or railroad passenger cars that
are stopped to load or unload passengers, but are prohibited on other
motor vehicles, motorcycles and motor-drawn vehicles except as a means
for indicating a right or left turn.
Section 370.110. Limitation On Total of Lamps Lighted At One
Time.
At the times when lighted lamps are required, at least two (2) lighted
lamps shall be displayed, one (1) on each side of the front of every motor
vehicle except a motorcycle and except a motor-drawn vehicle except when
such vehicle is parked subject to the provisions governing lights on parked
vehicles. Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlamps as in this
Article required is also equipped with any auxiliary lamps or a spotlamp
or any other lamp on the front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity
greater than three hundred (300) candlepower, not more than a total of four
(4) of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one
time when upon a highway.
Section 370.120. Other Vehicles — How Lighted.
All vehicles, including agricultural machinery or implements, road
machinery, road rollers, traction engines and farm tractors not in this
Article specifically required to be equipped with lamps, shall be equipped
during the times when lighted lamps are required with at least one (1)
Section
370.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
370.120
100:414
lighted lamp or lantern exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of five
hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle and with a lamp or lantern
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to
the rear, and such lamps and lanterns shall exhibit lights to the sides of such
vehicle.
Section 370.130. Animal-Driven Vehicles — Lighting Requirements
— Penalty.
A. Any person who shall place or drive or cause to be placed or driven
upon or along any State highway of this City any animal-driven vehicle
whatsoever, whether in motion or at rest, shall after sunset to one-half
(½) hour before sunrise have attached to every such vehicle at the rear
thereof a red taillight or a red reflecting device of not less than three (3)
inches in diameter of effective area or its equivalent in area. When such
device shall consist of reflecting buttons, there shall be no less than
seven (7) of such buttons covering an area equal to a circle with a three
(3) inch diameter. The total subtended effective angle of reflection of
every such device shall be no less than sixty degrees (60°) and the
spread and efficiency of the reflected light shall be sufficient for the
reflected light to be visible to the driver of any motor vehicle
approaching such animal-drawn vehicle from the rear of a distance of
not less than five hundred (500) feet.
B. In addition, any person who operates any such animal-driven vehicle
during the hours between sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise
shall have at least one (1) light flashing at all times the vehicle is on any
highway of this City. Such light or lights shall be amber in the front and
red in the back and shall be placed on the left side of the vehicle at a
height of no more than six (6) feet from the ground and shall be visible
from the front and the back of the vehicle at a distance of at least five
hundred (500) feet.
C. Any person operating an animal-driven vehicle during the hours
between sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise may, in lieu of the
requirements of Subsection (B) of this Section, use lamps or lanterns
complying with the rules promulgated by the Director of the
Department of Public Safety.
D. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation.
Section
370.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.130
100:415

ARTICLE II
Other Vehicle Equipment
Section 370.140. Other Equipment of Motor Vehicles.
A. Signaling Devices. Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a horn,
directed forward, or whistle in good working order capable of emitting
a sound adequate in quantity and volume to give warning of the
approach of such vehicle to other users of the highway and to
pedestrians. Such signaling device shall be used for warning purposes
only and shall not be used for making any unnecessary noise, and no
other sound-producing signaling device shall be used at any time.
B. Muffler Cutouts. Muffler cutouts shall not be used and no vehicle shall
be driven in such manner or condition that excessive and unnecessary
noises shall be made by its machinery, motor, signaling device, or other
parts, or by any improperly loaded cargo. The motors of all motor
vehicles shall be fitted with properly attached mufflers of such capacity
or construction as to quiet the maximum possible exhaust noise as
completely as is done in modern gas engine passenger motor vehicles.
Any cutout or opening in the exhaust pipe between the motor and the
muffler on any motor vehicle shall be completely closed and
disconnected from its operating lever and shall be so arranged that it
cannot automatically open, or be opened or operated, while such
vehicle is in motion.
C. Brakes. All motor vehicles, except motorcycles, shall be provided at all
times with two (2) sets of adequate brakes kept in good working order,
and motorcycles shall be provided with one (1) set of adequate brakes
kept in good working order.
D. Mirrors. All motor vehicles which are so constructed or loaded that the
operator cannot see the road behind such vehicle by looking back or
around the side of such vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror so
adjusted as to reveal the road behind and be visible from the operator's
seat.
E. Projections On Vehicles. All vehicles carrying poles or other objects,
which project more than five (5) feet from the rear of such vehicle,
shall, during the period when lights are required by this Chapter, carry
a red light at or near the rear end of the pole or other object so
projecting. At other times a red flag or cloth, not less than sixteen (16)
inches square, shall be displayed at the end of such projection.
F. Towlines. When one vehicle is towing another, the connecting device
shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. During the time that lights are
required by Sections 307.020 to 307.120, RSMo., the required lights
shall be displayed by both vehicles. Every towed vehicle shall be
coupled to the towing vehicle by means of a safety chain, cable or
equivalent device in addition to the primary coupling device, except
that such secondary coupling device shall not be necessary if the
Section
370.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.140
100:417
Section 370.150. Loads Which Might Become Dislodged To Be
Secured — Failure — Penalty.
Section 370.160. Seat Belts.
connecting device is connected to the towing vehicle by a centerlocking
ball located over or nearly over the rear axle and not supported
by the rear bumper of the towing vehicle. Such secondary safety
connecting devices shall be of sufficient strength to control the towed
vehicle in the event of failure of the primary coupling device. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to wreckers towing
vehicles or to vehicles secured to the towing vehicle by a fifth-wheel
type connection. The provisions of this Subsection shall also not apply
to farm implements or to any vehicle which is not required to be
registered.
G. Commercial Motor Vehicles And Trailers. When being operated on any
highway, street or road of this City, commercial motor vehicles and
trailers shall be equipped with adequate and proper brakes, lighting
equipment, signaling devices, steering mechanisms, horns, mirrors,
windshield wipers, tires, wheels, exhaust system, glazing, air pollution
control devices, fuel tank and any other safety equipment required by
the State in such condition so as to obtain a certificate of inspection and
approval as required by the provisions of Section 307.360, RSMo.
H. Devices attached to or towed by motor vehicles for the purpose of
transporting hay shall have the protruding parts raised or retracted
when not in use to a position which will not cause injury or damage to
persons or property in the vicinity of such device when on the highways,
streets or roads of this City.
A. All motor vehicles and every trailer and semi-trailer operating upon the
public highways, streets or roads of this City and carrying goods or
material or farm products which may reasonably be expected to
become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer as a
result of wind pressure or air pressure and/or by the movement of the
vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer shall have a protective cover or be
sufficiently secured so that no portion of such goods or material can
become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer while
being transported or carried.
B. Operation of a motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer in violation of this
Section shall be an ordinance violation, and any person convicted
thereof shall be punished as provided by Section 100.010 of this Code.
A. As used in this Section, the term "truck" means a motor vehicle
designed, used or maintained for the transportation of property.
B. As used in this Section, the term "passenger car" means every motor
vehicle designed for carrying ten (10) persons or less and used for the
transportation of persons; except that the term "passenger car" shall
Section
370.140
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
370.160
100:418
Section 370.170. Transporting Children Under Sixteen Years of Age
— Restraint Systems.
not include motorcycles, motorized bicycles, motortricycles and trucks
with a licensed gross weight of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or
more.
C. Each driver, except persons employed by the United States Postal
Service while performing duties for that Federal agency which require
the operator to service postal boxes from their vehicles or which
require frequent entry into and exit from their vehicles, and front seat
passengers of a passenger car manufactured after January 1, 1968,
operated on a street or highway in the City, and persons less than
eighteen (18) years of age operating or riding in a truck, as defined in
Subsection (A) of this Section, on a street or highway of this City shall
wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt that meets Federal
National Highway, Transportation and Safety Act requirements. No
person shall be stopped, inspected or detained solely to determine
compliance with this Subsection. The provisions of this Section and
Section 370.170 of this Chapter, shall not be applicable to persons who
have a medical reason for failing to have a seat belt fastened about their
body, nor shall the provisions of this Section be applicable to persons
while operating or riding a motor vehicle being used in agricultural
work-related activities. Non-compliance with this Subsection shall not
constitute probable cause for violation of any other provision of law. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to the transporting of
children under sixteen (16) years of age, as provided in Section 370.170
of this Chapter.
D. Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child less than sixteen
(16) years of age shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and
fastened restraint under Section 370.170 of this Chapter.
E. Except as otherwise provided for in Section 370.170 of this Chapter,
each person found guilty of violating the provisions of Subsection (B) of
this Section is guilty of an infraction for which a fine not to exceed ten
dollars ($10.00) may be imposed. All other provisions of law and court
rules to the contrary notwithstanding, no court costs shall be imposed
on any person due to a violation of this Section.
F. If there are more persons than there are seat belts in the enclosed area
of a motor vehicle, then the passengers who are unable to wear seat
belts shall sit in the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle
unless the motor vehicle is designed only for a front-seated area. The
passenger or passengers occupying a seat location referred to in this
Subsection is not in violation of this Section. This Subsection shall not
apply to passengers who are accompanying a driver of a motor vehicle
who is licensed under Section 302.178, RSMo.
A. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
Section
370.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.170
100:419
CHILD BOOSTER SEAT — A seating system which meets the Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R 571.213, as
amended, that is designed to elevate a child to properly sit in a
Federally approved safety belt system.
CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM — A seating system which
meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R.
571.213, as amended, and which is either permanently affixed to a
motor vehicle or is affixed to such vehicle by a safety belt or a universal
attachment system.
DRIVER — A person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle.
B. Every driver transporting a child under the age of sixteen (16) years
shall be responsible, when transporting such child in a motor vehicle
operated by that driver on the streets or highways of this City, for
providing for the protection of such child as follows:
1. Children less than four (4) years of age, regardless of weight, shall
be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate for
that child.
2. Children weighing less than forty (40) pounds, regardless of age,
shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate
for that child.
3. Children at least four (4) years of age but less than eight (8) years
of age, who also weigh at least forty (40) pounds but less than
eighty (80) pounds, and who are also less than four (4) feet nine (9)
inches tall, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system or
booster seat appropriate for that child.
4. Children at least eighty (80) pounds or children more than four (4)
feet, nine (9) inches in height shall be secured by a vehicle safety
belt or booster seat appropriate for that child.
5. A child who otherwise would be required to be secured in a booster
seat may be transported in the back seat of a motor vehicle while
wearing only a lap belt if the back seat of the motor vehicle is not
equipped with a combination lap and shoulder belt for booster seat
installation.
6. When transporting children in the immediate family when there are
more children than there are seating positions in the enclosed area
of a motor vehicle, the children who are not able to be restrained by
a child safety restraint device appropriate for the child shall sit in
the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle unless the motor
vehicle is designed only for a front seat area. The driver
transporting children referred to in this Subsection is not in
violation of this Section.
Section
370.170
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
370.170
100:420
Section 370.180. Vision-Reducing Material Applied To Windshield
or Windows Without Permit Prohibited — Penalty — Rules —
Procedure.
This Subsection shall only apply to the use of a child passenger
restraint system or vehicle safety belt for children less than
sixteen (16) years of age being transported in a motor vehicle.
C. Any driver who violates Subdivision (1), (2) or (3) of Subsection (B)
herein, is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction may be punished
by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and court costs. Any
driver who violates Subdivision (4) of Subsection (B) herein, is guilty of
an infraction and, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine of not
more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and court costs. Any driver who violates
Subdivision (4) of Subsection (B) herein, shall be subject to the penalty
in Subsection (E) of Section 370.160 of this Chapter. If a driver receives
a citation for violating Subdivision (1), (2) or (3) of Subsection (B)
herein, the charges shall be dismissed or withdrawn if the driver prior
to or at his/her hearing provides evidence of acquisition of a child
passenger restraint system or child booster seat which is satisfactory to
the Court or the party responsible for prosecuting the driver's citation.
D. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any public carrier for
hire. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to students four (4)
years of age or older who are passengers on a school bus designed for
carrying eleven (11) passengers or more and which is manufactured or
equipped pursuant to Missouri Minimum Standards for School Buses as
school buses are defined in Section 301.010, RSMo.
A. Any person may operate a motor vehicle with front sidewing vents or
windows located immediately to the left and right of the driver that
have a sun-screening device, in conjunction with safety glazing
material, that has a light transmission of thirty-five percent (35%) or
more plus or minus three percent (3%) and a luminous reflectance of
thirty-five percent (35%) or less plus or minus three percent (3%).
Except as provided in Subsection (C) of this Section, any sun-screening
device applied to front sidewing vents or windows located immediately
to the left and right of the driver in excess of the requirements of this
Section shall be prohibited without a permit pursuant to a physician's
prescription as described below. A permit to operate a motor vehicle
with front sidewing vents or windows located immediately to the left
and right of the driver that have a sun-screening device, in conjunction
with safety glazing material, which permits less light transmission and
luminous reflectance than allowed under the requirements of this
Subsection may be issued by the Department of Public Safety to a
person having a serious medical condition which requires the use of a
sun-screening device if the permittee's physician prescribes its use. The
Director of the Department of Public Safety shall promulgate rules and
regulations for the issuance of the permit. The permit shall allow
operation of the vehicle by any titleholder or relative within the second
Section
370.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.180
100:421
Section 370.190. Headgear Required — Motorcycles or
Motortricycles.
Section 370.200. Studded Tires — Prohibited When.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any road or highway of this
City between the first (1st) day of April and the first (1st) day of November
while the motor vehicle is equipped with tires containing metal or carbide
studs.
Section 370.210. Restriction On Use of Metal-Tired Vehicles.
degree of consanguinity or affinity, which shall mean a spouse, each
grandparent, parent, brother, sister, niece, nephew, aunt, uncle, child
and grandchild of a person who resides in the household. Except as
provided in Subsection (B) of this Section, all sun-screening devices
applied to the windshield of a motor vehicle are prohibited.
B. This Section shall not prohibit labels, stickers, decalcomania or
informational signs on motor vehicles or the application of tinted or
solar-screening material to recreational vehicles as defined in Section
700.010, RSMo., provided that such material does not interfere with the
driver's normal view of the road. This Section shall not prohibit factoryinstalled
tinted glass, the equivalent replacement thereof or tinting
material applied to the upper portion of the motor vehicle's windshield
which is normally tinted by the manufacturer of motor vehicle safety
glass.
C. Any vehicle licensed with a historical license plate shall be exempt from
the requirements of this Section.
D. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section is guilty of an
ordinance violation.
A. Every person operating or riding as a passenger on any motorcycle or
motortricycle, as defined in this Title, upon any highway of this City
shall wear protective headgear at all times the vehicle is in motion. The
protective headgear shall meet reasonable standards and specifications
established by the Director of Revenue.
B. The penalty for failure to wear protective headgear as required by
Subsection (A) of this Section shall be deemed an infraction for which a
fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) may be imposed.
Notwithstanding all other provisions of law and court rules to the
contrary, no court costs shall be imposed upon any person due to such
violation. No points shall be assessed pursuant to Section 302.302,
RSMo., for a failure to wear such protective headgear.
A. No metal-tired vehicle shall be operated over any of the improved
highways of this City, except over highways constructed of gravel or
claybound gravel, if such vehicle has on the periphery of any of the road
Section
370.180
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
370.210
100:422
Section 370.220. Passengers in Trucks.
wheels any lug, flange, cleat, ridge, bolt or any projection of metal or
wood which projects radially beyond the tread or traffic surface of the
tire unless the highway is protected by putting down solid planks or
other suitable material or by attachments to the wheels so as to prevent
such vehicles from damaging the highway, except that this prohibition
shall not apply to tractors or traction engines equipped with what is
known as caterpillar treads when such caterpillar does not contain any
projection of any kind likely to injure the surface of the road. Tractors,
traction engines and similar vehicles may be operated which have upon
their road wheels "V" shaped, diagonal or other cleats arranged in such
manner as to be continuously in contact with the road surface if the
gross weight on the wheels per inch of width of such cleats or road
surface, when measured in the direction of the axle of the vehicle, does
not exceed eight hundred (800) pounds.
B. No tractor, tractor engine or other metal-tired vehicle weighing more
than four (4) tons, including the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
drive onto, upon or over the edge of any improved highway without
protecting such edge by putting down solid planks or other suitable
material to prevent such vehicle from breaking off the edges of the
pavement.
C. Any person violating this Section, whether operating pursuant to a
permit or not, or who shall willfully or negligently damage a highway,
shall be liable for the amount of such damage caused to any highway,
bridge, culvert or sewer, and any vehicle causing such damage shall be
subject to a lien for the full amount of such damage, which lien shall not
be superior to any duly recorded or filed chattel mortgage or other lien
previously attached to such vehicle; the amount of such damage may be
recovered in any action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. As used in this Section, the term "truck" means a motor vehicle
designed, used or maintained for the transportation of property.
B. No person shall operate any truck, as defined in Subsection (A) of this
Section, with a licensed gross weight of less than twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds on any highway which is part of the State or Federal
highway system or when such truck is operated within the corporate
limits of the City when any person under eighteen (18) years of age is
riding in the unenclosed bed of such truck. No person under eighteen
(18) years of age shall ride in the unenclosed bed of such truck when
the truck is in operation.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
1. Any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of the
employee's duties where it is necessary to ride in the unenclosed
bed of the truck;
Section
370.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.220
100:423
Section 370.230. Altering Passenger Motor Vehicle By Raising
Front or Rear of Vehicle Prohibited, When — Bumpers Front and
Rear Required, When Certain Vehicles Exempt.
2. Any person while engaged in agricultural activities where it is
necessary to ride in the unenclosed bed of the truck;
3. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck while such truck
is being operated in a parade, caravan or exhibition which is
authorized by law;
4. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck has
installed a means of preventing such person from being discharged
or such person is secured to the truck in a manner which will
prevent the person from being thrown, falling or jumping from the
truck;
5. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
being operated solely for the purpose of participating in a special
event and it is necessary that the person ride in such unenclosed
bed due to a lack of available seating. "Special event", for the
purposes of this Section, is a specific social activity of a definable
duration which is participated in by the person riding in the
unenclosed bed;
6. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
being operated solely for the purposes of providing assistance to,
or ensuring the safety of, other persons engaged in a recreational
activity; or
7. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
the only legally titled, licensed and insured vehicle owned by the
family of the person riding in the unenclosed bed and there is
insufficient room in the passenger cab of the truck to accommodate
all passengers in the truck. For the purposes of this Section, the
term "family" shall mean any persons related within the first
degree of consanguinity.
A. No person shall operate any passenger motor vehicle upon the public
streets or highways of this City, the body of which has been altered in
such a manner that the front or rear of the vehicle is raised at such an
angle as to obstruct the vision of the operator of the street or highway
in front or to the rear of the vehicle.
B. Every motor vehicle which is licensed in this State and operated upon
the public streets or highways of this City shall be equipped with front
and rear bumpers if such vehicle was equipped with bumpers as
standard equipment. This Subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles
designed or modified primarily for off-highway purposes, while such
vehicles are in tow, or to motorcycles or motor-driven cycles, or to
motor vehicles registered as historic motor vehicles when the original
Section
370.220
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
370.230
100:424
design of such vehicles did not include bumpers nor shall the provisions
of this Subsection prohibit the use of drop bumpers. Maximum bumper
heights of both the front and rear bumpers of motor vehicles shall be
determined by weight category of gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
measured from a level surface to the highest point of the bottom of the
bumper when the vehicle is unloaded and the tires are inflated to the
manufacturer's recommended pressure. Maximum bumper heights are
as follows:
Maximum
front bumper
height
Maximum
rear bumper
height
Motor vehicles except commercial
motor vehicles
22 inches 22 inches
Commercial motor vehicles (GVWR)
4,500 lbs. and under
24 inches 26 inches
4,501 lbs. through 7,500 lbs. 27 inches 29 inches
7,501 lbs. through 9,000 lbs. 28 inches 30 inches
9,001 lbs. through 11,500 lbs. 29 inches 31 inches
Section
370.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.230
100:425
Chapter 375
BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES
Section 375.010. Bicycle and Motorized Bicycle — Defined.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall mean:
BICYCLE — Every vehicle propelled solely by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, or two (2) parallel wheels
and one (1) or two (2) forward or rear wheels, all of which are more than
fourteen (14) inches in diameter, except scooters and similar devices.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Any two- or three-wheeled device having an
automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more
than fifty (50) cubic centimeters, which produces less than three (3) gross
brake horsepower, and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum
speed of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on level ground. A
motorized bicycle shall be considered a motor vehicle for purposes of any
homeowners' or renters' insurance policy.
Section 375.020. Brakes Required.
Every bicycle and motorized bicycle shall be equipped with a brake or
brakes which will enable its driver to stop the bicycle or motorized bicycle
within twenty-five (25) feet from a speed of ten (10) miles per hour on dry,
level, clean pavement.
Section 375.030. Lights and Reflectors — When Required —
Standards To Be Met.
A. Every bicycle and motorized bicycle when in use on a street or highway
during the period from one-half (½) hour after sunset to one-half (½)
hour before sunrise shall be equipped with the following:
1. A front-facing lamp on the front or carried by the rider which shall
emit a white light visible at night under normal atmospheric
conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway at five hundred
(500) feet;
2. A rear-facing red reflector, at least two (2) square inches in
reflective surface area, or a rear-facing red lamp on the rear which
shall be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a
straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver
under the lower beams of vehicle headlights at six hundred (600)
feet;
3. Reflective material and/or lights on any part of the bicyclist's
pedals, crank arms, shoes or lower leg visible from the front and
the rear at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a
straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver
Section
370.230
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
375.030
100:426
Section 375.040. Rights and Duties of Bicycle and Motorized
Bicycle Riders.
Every person riding a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon a street or highway
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle as provided by Chapter 304, RSMo.,
and this Title, except as to special regulations in this Chapter, and except
as to those provisions of Chapter 304, RSMo., and this Title, which by their
nature can have no application.
Section 375.050. Riding To Right — Required For Bicycles and
Motorized Bicycles — Mandatory Use of Bicycle Path By Bicycles.
Every person operating a bicycle or motorized bicycle at less than the
posted speed or slower than the flow of traffic upon a street or highway shall
ride as near to the right side of the roadway as safe, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction,
except when making a left turn, when avoiding hazardous conditions, when
the lane is too narrow to share with another vehicle, or when on a one-way
street. Bicyclists may ride abreast when not impeding other vehicles.
Section 375.060. Bicycle To Operate On The Shoulder Adjacent To
Roadway, When — Roadway Defined.
under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at two hundred
(200) feet; and
4. Reflective material and/or lights visible on each side of the bicycle
or bicyclist and visible at night under normal atmospheric
conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a
vehicle driver under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at
three hundred (300) feet. The provisions of this Subsection shall
not apply to motorized bicycles which comply with National
Highway Traffic and Safety Administration regulations relating to
reflectors on motorized bicycles.
A. A person operating a bicycle at less than the posted speed or slower
than the flow of traffic upon a street or highway may operate as
described in Section 375.050 of this Chapter, or may operate on the
shoulder adjacent to the roadway.
B. A bicycle operated on a roadway, or the shoulder adjacent to a roadway,
shall be operated in the same direction as vehicles are required to be
driven upon the roadway.
C. For purposes of this Section, and Section 375.050, "roadway" means
that portion of a street or highway ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
Section
375.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
375.070
100:427
Section 375.070. Bicycle Required To Give Hand or Mechanical
Signals.
The operator of a bicycle shall signal as required in Section 340.195 of
this Title, except that a signal by the hand and arm need not be given
continuously if the hand is needed to control or operate the bicycle. An
operator of a bicycle intending to turn the bicycle to the right shall signal as
indicated in Section 340.195 of this Title, or by extending such operator's
right arm in a horizontal position so that the same may be seen in front and
in rear of the vehicle.
Section 375.080. Penalty For Violation.
Any person seventeen (17) years of age or older who violates any provision
of this Chapter is guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor
more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). If any person under seventeen (17)
years of age violates any provision of this Chapter in the presence of a Police
Officer, said officer may impound the bicycle or motorized bicycle involved
for a period not to exceed five (5) days upon issuance of a receipt to the
child riding it or to its owner.
Section 375.090. Motorized Bicycles — License Required.
Section 375.100. Equipment Required.
No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any highways, streets or
roads in this City unless it is equipped in accordance with the minimum
requirements for construction and equipment of MOPEDS, Regulation
VESC-17, approved July, 1977, as promulgated by the Vehicle Equipment
Safety Commission.
Section 375.110. Distance To Be Maintained When Overtaking A
Bicycle.
The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle proceeding in the same
direction on the roadway, as defined in Section 300.010, shall leave a safe
distance when passing the bicycle, and shall maintain clearance until safely
past the overtaken bicycle.
Chapter 380
LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
A. No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any highways, streets or
roads in this City unless the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle.
B. No motorized bicycle may be operated on any public thoroughfare
located within this City which has been designated as part of the
Federal interstate highway system.
Section
375.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
375.110
100:428
ARTICLE I
Operator's Licenses
Section 380.010. Driving While License Suspended or Revoked.67
A person commits the offense of driving while revoked if such person
operates a motor vehicle on a highway when such person's license or
driving privilege has been canceled, suspended or revoked under the laws
of this State or any other State and acts with criminal negligence with
respect to knowledge of the fact that such person's driving privilege has
been canceled, suspended or revoked.
Section 380.020. Operation of Motor Vehicle Without Proper
License Prohibited — Motorcycles — Special License.68
A. Unless otherwise provided for by law, it shall be unlawful for any
person, except those expressly exempted by Section 380.040, to:
1. Operate any vehicle upon any highway in this City unless the
person has a valid license as required by Chapter 302, RSMo., or a
temporary instruction permit issued in compliance with Section
302.130, RSMo., or an intermediate driver's license issued in
compliance with Section 302.178, RSMo., in his/her possession;
2. Operate a motorcycle or motortricycle upon any highway of this
City unless such person has a valid license that shows the person
has successfully passed an examination for the operation of a
motorcycle or motortricycle as prescribed by the Director of
Revenue. The Director of Revenue may indicate such upon a valid
license issued to such person or shall issue a license restricting the
applicant to the operation of a motorcycle or motortricycle if the
actual demonstration, required by Section 302.173, RSMo., is
conducted on such vehicle;
3. Authorize or knowingly permit a motorcycle or motortricycle
owned by such person or under such person's control to be driven
upon any highway by any person whose license does not indicate
that the person has passed the examination for the operation of a
motorcycle or motortricycle or has been issued an instruction
permit therefor;
4. Operate a motor vehicle with an instruction permit, intermediate
driver's license or license issued to another person;
5. Operate a motor vehicle in violation of the provisions of Sections
302.130 and 302.178, RSMo., regarding accompaniment by a
qualified driver or stated hours of operation; or
67.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
68.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
380.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
380.020
100:429
Section 380.025. Effect of Revocation — Penalty.
Any resident or non-resident whose license, right or privilege to operate
a motor vehicle in this State has been suspended or revoked as provided
in Sections 302.010—302.540, RSMo., shall not operate a motor vehicle
in this State under a license, permit or registration certificate issued by
any other jurisdiction or otherwise during such suspension or after such
revocation until a new license is obtained when and as permitted under
Sections 302.010—302.540, RSMo. Violation of any provision of this Section
is a misdemeanor and on conviction therefor a person shall be punished as
prescribed by Section 302.321, RSMo.
Section 380.030. Prohibited Uses of License.
6. Drive a commercial motor vehicle, unless fully licensed in
compliance with Chapter 302, RSMo., except when operating
under an instruction permit as provided for in Section 302.720,
RSMo.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Display or to permit to be displayed, or to have in his/her
possession, any license knowing the same to be fictitious or to have
been canceled, suspended, revoked, disqualified or altered;
2. Lend to or knowingly permit the use of by another any license
issued to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof;
3. Display or to represent as one's own any license not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
4. Fail or refuse to surrender to the Clerk of any Division of the Circuit
Court or the Director any license which has been suspended,
canceled, disqualified or revoked as provided by law;
5. Use a false or fictitious name or give a false or fictitious address on
any application for a license, or any renewal or duplicate thereof, or
knowingly to make a false statement;
6. Knowingly conceal a material fact or otherwise commit a fraud in
any such application;
7. Authorize or consent to any motor vehicle owned by him/her or
under his/her control to be driven by any person, when he/she has
knowledge that such person has no legal right to do so, or for any
person to drive any motor vehicle in violation of any of the
provisions of Sections 302.010 to 302.780, RSMo.;
8. Employ a person to operate a motor vehicle in the transportation of
persons or property with knowledge that such person has not
complied with the provisions of Sections 302.010 to 302.780,
RSMo., or whose license has been revoked, suspended, canceled or
Section
380.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
380.030
100:430
Section 380.040. Exemptions From License Law.
disqualified or who fails to produce his/her license upon demand of
any person or persons authorized to make such demand;
9. Operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of the
restrictions imposed in a restricted license; or
10. Fail to carry his/her instruction permit, valid operator's license
while operating a vehicle and to display instruction permit or said
license upon demand of any Police Officer, court official or any
other duly authorized person for inspection when demand is made
therefor. Failure to exhibit his/her instruction permit or license as
aforesaid shall be presumptive evidence that said person is not a
duly licensed operator.
A. The following persons are exempt from license hereunder:
1. Any person while operating any farm tractor or implement of
husbandry temporarily operated or moved on a highway;
2. A non-resident who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and who has
in his/her immediate possession a valid license issued to him/her in
his/her home State or country;
3. A non-resident who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and who
has in his/her immediate possession a valid license issued to him/
her in his/her home State or country which allows such person to
operate a motor vehicle in the transportation of persons or
property as classified in Section 302.015, RSMo.; or
4. Convicted offenders of the Department of Corrections who have not
been convicted of a motor vehicle felony as follows—driving while
intoxicated, failing to stop after an accident and disclosing his/her
identity, or driving a motor vehicle without the owner's
consent—may operate State-owned trucks for the benefit of the
correctional facilities, provided that such offender shall be
accompanied by a Correctional Officer or other staff person in such
truck.
Section
380.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
380.040
100:431

ARTICLE II
Vehicle Licensing
Section 380.050. State Vehicle License Plates Required.
No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle or trailer upon any street
or highway of this City unless such motor vehicle or trailer has properly
displayed a valid license plate or plates or temporary permit issued to the
lawful owner of the vehicle by the Department of Revenue of the State
of Missouri, except that any person who is a non-resident of the State of
Missouri may operate or park any motor vehicle or trailer upon any street
or highway of this City, provided the motor vehicle or trailer has been duly
registered for the current year in the State, country or other place of which
the owner is a resident, provided that at all times such motor vehicle or
trailer is being operated or parked upon the streets or highways of this City,
the valid license plate or plates or temporary permit is properly displayed
on such vehicle or trailer.
Section 380.055. Registration of Motor Vehicles Operated For First
Time in State.
Application for registration of a motor vehicle not previously registered in
Missouri, operated for the first time on the public highways of this State,
and previously registered in another State shall be made within thirty (30)
days after the owner of such motor vehicle has become a resident of this
State.
Section 380.060. Method of Displaying License Plates.
No motor vehicle or trailer shall be operated on any highway of this City
unless it shall have displayed thereon the license plate or set of license
plates issued by the Director of Revenue or the State Highways and
Transportation Commission and authorized by Section 301.140, RSMo.
Each such plate shall be securely fastened to the motor vehicle or trailer
in a manner so that all parts thereof shall be plainly visible and reasonably
clean so that the reflective qualities thereof are not impaired. License
plates shall be fastened to all motor vehicles except trucks, tractors, truck
tractors or truck-tractors licensed in excess of twelve thousand (12,000)
pounds on the front and rear of such vehicles not less than eight (8) nor
more than forty-eight (48) inches above the ground, with the letters and
numbers thereon right side up. The license plates on trailers, motorcycles,
motortricycles and motor scooters shall be displayed on the rear of such
vehicles, with the letters and numbers thereon right side up. The license
plate on buses, other than school buses, and on trucks, tractors, truck
tractors or truck-tractors licensed in excess of twelve thousand (12,000)
pounds shall be displayed on the front of such vehicles not less than eight
(8) nor more than forty-eight (48) inches above the ground, with the letters
and numbers thereon right side up, or if two (2) plates are issued for the
vehicle pursuant to Subsection (3) of Section 301.130, RSMo., displayed in
the same manner on the front and rear of such vehicles. The license plate or
Section
380.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
380.060
100:433
plates authorized by Section 301.140, RSMo., when properly attached, shall
be prima facie evidence that the required fees have been paid.
Section 380.070. Unauthorized Plates, Tags, Stickers, Signs.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or trailer on which there is
displayed on the front or rear thereof any other plate, tag or placard bearing
any number except the plate furnished by the Director of Revenue or the
placard herein authorized and the official license tag of any municipality
of this State, nor shall there be displayed on any motor vehicle or trailer a
placard, sign or tag bearing the words "license lost", "license applied for"
or words of similar import as a substitute for such number plates or such
placard.
Section 380.080. License Plates On Vehicles Displayed For Sale.
No person shall show, exhibit, display or have in possession for the purpose
of sale any motor vehicle bearing or displaying thereon any number or
license plates except those of the dealer or owner so displaying said motor
vehicle; provided however, that where the motor vehicle is placed on
consignment with a dealer by the owner thereof, there may be displayed a
number or license plate issued to the owner thereof.
Section 380.090. Certificate of Ownership Required For Registered
Vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in this City a motor vehicle or
trailer required to be registered as provided by law unless a certificate of
ownership has been applied for as provided in Section 301.190, RSMo.
Section 380.100. Transfer of Certificate of Ownership Upon Sale of
Vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or sell in this City any motor
vehicle or trailer registered under the laws of this State unless at the
time of delivery thereof there shall pass between the parties a certificate
of ownership with an assignment thereof as provided in Section 301.210,
RSMo., as amended, and the sale of any motor vehicle or trailer registered
under the laws of this State, without the assignment of such certificate of
ownership, shall be fraudulent and void.
Section 380.110. Removal of Plates On Transfer of Vehicle — Use By
Purchaser.
Upon the transfer of ownership of any motor vehicle or trailer, the
certificate of registration and the right to use the number plates shall expire
and the number plates shall be removed by the owner at the time of the
transfer of possession, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than
the person to whom such number plates were originally issued to have the
same in his/her possession whether in use or not; except that the buyer of a
motor vehicle or trailer who trades in a motor vehicle or trailer may attach
Section
380.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
380.110
100:434
the license plates from the trade-in motor vehicle or trailer to the newly
purchased motor vehicle or trailer. The operation of a motor vehicle with
such transferred plates shall be lawful for no more than thirty (30) days.
As used in this Section, the term "trade-in motor vehicle or trailer" shall
include any single motor vehicle or trailer sold by the buyer of the newly
purchased vehicle or trailer, as long as the license plates for the trade-in
motor vehicle or trailer are still valid.
Section 380.120. Sale By Dealer.
Upon the sale of a motor vehicle or trailer by a dealer, a buyer who has
made application for registration, by mail or otherwise, may operate the
same for a period of thirty (30) days after taking possession thereof if during
such period the motor vehicle or trailer shall have attached thereto, in
the manner required by Section 301.130, RSMo., number plates issued to
the dealer. Upon application and presentation of satisfactory evidence that
the buyer has applied for registration, a dealer may furnish such number
plates to the buyer for such temporary use. In such event, the dealer shall
require the buyer to deposit the sum of ten dollars fifty cents ($10.50), to
be returned to the buyer upon return of the number plates, as a guarantee
that said buyer will return to the dealer such number plates within thirty
(30) days.
Section 380.130. False Information By Dealer.
No dealer shall advise any purchaser of a motor vehicle or trailer that such
purchaser may drive such a motor vehicle or trailer without compliance
with the foregoing license requirements.
Section
380.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
380.130
100:435

ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 380.140. Financial Responsibility Required.
A. No owner of a motor vehicle registered in this State or required to be
registered in this State shall operate the vehicle, or authorize any other
person to operate the vehicle registered, or maintain registration of a
motor vehicle, or permit another person to operate such vehicle upon
the streets or the alleys of this City unless the owner maintains the
financial responsibility as required in this Section which conforms to
the requirements of the laws of this State. Furthermore, no person shall
operate a motor vehicle owned by another with the knowledge that the
owner has not maintained financial responsibility unless such person
has financial responsibility which covers the person's operation of the
other's vehicle. However, no owner shall be in violation of this
Subsection if he/she fails to maintain financial responsibility on a motor
vehicle which is inoperable or being stored and not in operation.
B. For purposes of this Section, the term "financial responsibility" shall
mean the ability to respond in damages for liability on account of
accidents occurring after the effective date of proof of said financial
responsibility, arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a
motor vehicle, in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) because of bodily injury to or death of one (1) person in
any one (1) accident and, subject to said limit for one (1) person, in the
amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) because of bodily injury
to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one (1) accident and in the
amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) because of injury to or
destruction of property of others in any one (1) accident.
C. Proof of financial responsibility may be shown by any of the following:
1. A current insurance identification card issued by a motor vehicle
insurer or by the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri for
self-insurance. A motor vehicle liability insurance policy, a motor
vehicle liability insurance binder, or receipt which contains the
name and address of the insurer, the name and address of the
named insured, the policy number, the effective dates of the policy
and a description by year and make of the vehicle, or at least five
(5) digits of the vehicle identification number or the word "Fleet" if
the insurance policy covers five (5) or more motor vehicles shall be
satisfactory evidence of insurance in lieu of an insurance
identification card.
2. A certificate of the State Treasurer of a cash or security deposit
according to Section 303.240, RSMo.
3. A surety bond according to Section 303.230, RSMo.
Section
380.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
380.140
100:437
Section 380.150. Display of False Evidence of Insurance — Penalty
— Confiscation of False Evidence.
No person shall display evidence of insurance to a Law Enforcement Officer
knowing there is no valid liability insurance in effect on the motor vehicle
as required pursuant to this Article or knowing the evidence of insurance is
illegally altered, counterfeit or otherwise invalid as evidence of insurance.
If the Law Enforcement Officer issues a citation to a motor vehicle operator
for displaying invalid evidence of insurance, the officer shall confiscate the
evidence for presentation in court. Any person convicted of violating this
Section is guilty of an ordinance violation.
Section 380.160. Alteration, Production or Sale of Invalid
Insurance Card.
No person shall alter an invalid insurance card to make it appear valid. No
person knowingly shall make, sell or otherwise make available an invalid or
counterfeit insurance card. Any person who violates this Section is guilty of
an ordinance violation.
D. Proof of financial responsibility shall be carried at all times in the
insured motor vehicle or by the operator of the motor vehicle if the
proof of financial responsibility is effective as to the operator rather
than to the vehicle. The operator of an insured motor vehicle shall
exhibit the insurance identification card on the demand of any Peace
Officer, commercial vehicle enforcement officer or commercial vehicle
inspector who lawfully stops such operator or investigates an accident
while that officer or inspector is engaged in the performance of the
officer's or inspector's duties.
E. However, no person shall be found guilty of violating this Section if the
operator demonstrates to the court that he/she met the financial
responsibility requirements of Section 303.025, RSMo., at the time the
Peace Officer wrote the citation.
F. Any person who violates any provisions of this Section shall be guilty of
an ordinance violation and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) for each and every violation.
Section
380.140
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
380.160
100:438
Chapter 385
WEATHER EMERGENCIES
Editor's Note — Ord. no. 5689 §1, adopted March 24, 2011, repealed ch. 385
"snow emergency routes" and enacted the new provisions herein. Former
ch. 385 derived from R.O. 2007 §§390.010—390.100; ord. no. 4001 §§1—12,
1-11-00.
Section 385.010. Parking During Winter Weather Events. [Ord. No.
5689 §1, 3-24-2011]
Section 385.020. Stalled Vehicles During Winter Weather
Emergency. [Ord. No. 5689 §1, 3-24-2011]
Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled for any reason during a winter weather
emergency, the person operating the vehicle shall take immediate action
to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the roadway. No person shall
abandon or leave his/her vehicle in the roadway regardless of whether he/
she indicates by raising the hood or otherwise that the vehicle is stalled,
except for the purpose of securing assistance during the actual time
necessary to go to a nearby telephone or to a nearby garage, gasoline
station or other place of assistance and return without delay.
Section 385.030. Deposit of Snow or Ice in Street or Public Way.
[Ord. No. 5689 §1, 3-24-2011]
No person or persons, other than persons employed or under contract by
the City of O'Fallon, engaged in the removal of snow, ice or other frozen
precipitation from driveways, parking lots or sidewalks shall deposit such
snow, ice or other frozen precipitation in the streets or any public way for
A. With any winter weather event, parking on City streets becomes
problematic in maintaining efficient and effective snow/ice removal
operations. Parked vehicles slow snow/ice removal operations and
create situations that impede street clearing operations depriving
residents and the traveling public of safe and efficient travel. Similarly,
emergency response will be affected. As such, the following regulations
shall apply to parking on City streets during any winter weather event.
1. A parking prohibition on all City streets shall automatically go into
effect without any formal declaration when there has been any
accumulation of snow, ice, or other frozen precipitation.
2. Once in effect, a prohibition under this Chapter shall remain in
effect until terminated by announcement of the Mayor or City
Administrator, except that any street which has become
substantially clear of snow and ice for the length of the entire block
shall be automatically excluded therefrom. However, nothing in
this Chapter shall be construed to permit parking at any time or
place where it is forbidden by any other provision of law.
Section
380.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
385.030
100:439
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Nor shall any person or persons engaged in
the removal of snow or ice allow such snow, ice or other frozen precipitation
to be deposited on or against any fire hydrant. One (1) result of clearing
City streets is that the windrow from the plows pushes snow/ice out to the
edges of the roadway often blocking private driveway or mailbox access.
Property owners and residents clearing this windrow to provide driveway
and mailbox access shall only do so in a manner that does not place the
snow/ice back onto the public street pavement.
Section 385.040. Special Provisions During All Types of Weather
Emergencies. [Ord. No. 5689 §1, 3-24-2011]
For weather-related emergencies of any kind, the Mayor or City
Administrator may cause additional restrictions or prohibitions to traffic
and parking regulations be placed into effect by making a public declaration
thereof. Each declaration made by him/her pursuant to this Chapter to be
publicly announced by means of the City's Internet website and/or such
other media or Internet sites or systems as the Mayor or City Administrator
may find appropriate from time to time, and by issuing a press release
to local media with broadcasts or telecasts from a station with a normal
operating range covering the City. Each announcement shall describe the
action taken by the Mayor or City Administrator, including the time it
became or will become effective.
Section 385.050. Termination of Parking Prohibition or Traffic
Emergency. [Ord. No. 5689 §1, 3-24-2011]
Whenever the Mayor or City Administrator shall find that some or all of
the conditions which give rise to a parking prohibition emergency or other
traffic restrictions in effect pursuant to this Chapter no longer exist, he/
she may declare the prohibitions or emergencies terminated, in whole or
in part, in a manner prescribed by this Chapter effective immediately upon
announcement.
Section 385.060. Temporary Provisions To Take Precedence Over
Other Ordinances — Exceptions. [Ord. No. 5689 §1, 3-24-2011]
Any provisions of this Chapter which becomes effective by declaration of
the Mayor or City Administrator or upon the occurrence of certain weather
conditions shall, while temporarily in effect, take precedence over other
conflicting provisions of law normally in effect; except that it shall not take
precedence over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency
travel of authorized emergency vehicles or emergency traffic directions by
a public safety officer.
Section 385.070. Removal, Impounding and Return of Vehicles.
[Ord. No. 5689 §1, 3-24-2011]
Section
385.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
385.070
100:440
Section 385.080. Citation On Vehicle Parked in Violation of
Chapter. [Ord. No. 5689 §1, 3-24-2011]
Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or left in
violation of any provision of this Chapter, and is not removed and
impounded as provided for in this Chapter, the officer finding such vehicle
shall take its registration number and any other applicable information
affixed to such vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously
affix to such vehicle a traffic citation for the driver to answer to the charge
against him/her.
Section 385.090. Interference With Snow Plows. [Ord. No. 5689 §1,
3-24-2011]
No person shall impede or interfere in any way with snow plow or other
snow removal vehicle while such snow plow or other snow removal vehicle
is in operation on City streets as an agent of the City.
Section 385.100. Violation of Chapter Provisions. [Ord. No. 5689 §1,
3-24-2011]
That any person, firm or corporation found to be in violation of any provision
of this Chapter by parking or causing to be parked a motor vehicle on any
street shall be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or to
imprisonment for up to three (3) months in the St. Charles County Jail, or to
both such fine and imprisonment, as well as to the costs incurred in towing
and storing said vehicle.
Chapter 390
SIZE AND WEIGHT OF MOTOR VEHICLES - PERMITS
Section 390.010. Regulations — Generally. [R.O. 2007 §395.010;
Ord. No. 4488 §1, 3-3-2003]
A. The Police Department is hereby authorized to remove or have removed
a vehicle from a street to the nearest garage, to the City's storage
facility or other place of safety when:
1. The vehicle is parked on a City street while a weather emergency is
in effect.
2. The vehicle is stalled on a part of City street on which there is a
covering of snow, sleet or ice or on which there is a parking
prohibition in effect and the person who was operating such vehicle
does not appear to be removing it in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter.
B. The removal, impounding and release of obstructing vehicles on City
streets shall be by the O'Fallon Police Department in accordance with
all applicable ordinances pertaining thereto.
Section
385.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
390.010
100:441
Section 390.020. Weight and Size Limitations. [R.O. 2007 §395.020;
Ord. No. 4488 §2, 3-3-2003]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, park, operate or move on,
upon or across or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be
parked, driven, operated or moved on, upon or across any street or
highway under the jurisdiction of the City any vehicle or combination of
vehicles exceeding the size and weight limitations stated herein.
B. The size and weight limitations stated herein shall not apply to the
following:
1. Any vehicle or fire apparatus which is designed for use and used by
a Fire Department, Fire Protection District or Volunteer Fire
Protection Association or when being operated by a fire apparatus
manufacturer or sales organization for the purpose of sale,
demonstration, exhibit or delivery to a Fire Department, Fire
Protection District or Volunteer Fire Protection Association.
2. Any vehicle used for snow or ice removal operations and owned or
operated by or for any governmental body.
3. Any farm equipment or other implements of husbandry temporarily
operated or towed in a combination in the furtherance of a farm or
agricultural endeavor.
4. Any wrecker or tow truck performing a wrecker or towing service,
or if a disabled or wrecked vehicle cannot be moved by a wrecker
or tow truck, a roll back or car carrier, as defined in Section
301.001 RSMo., 2000, may be used, so long as it is operated by a
bona fide wrecker operator or owner.
5. Any vehicle or combination of vehicles operating under the terms of
a valid oversize and/or overweight permit issued by the City under
the authority of Section 390.030.
C. Nothing contained in this Section shall restrict the weight of road
machines, oilers, traction engines, tractors, rollers, power shovels,
dump trucks, trucks or other construction or maintenance equipment
when used by the City in the construction or the maintenance of any
street or highway, provided that such construction or maintenance is
performed by persons employed by or under contract with such City for
such purpose. However, any operation of the foregoing equipment or
vehicles used in construction work contracted by the City or by the City
using its own equipment or vehicles shall be unrestricted as to weight
only within a construction area.
D. Whenever any vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in
violation of this Section, the owner and/or the driver of such vehicle
shall be deemed guilty of such violation and either or both the owner
and driver of such vehicle or combination of vehicles may be prosecuted
for such violation.
Section
390.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
390.020
100:442
A. The following weight and size limitations shall be in place on all streets,
highways and bridges which are under the jurisdiction of the City,
unless otherwise stated herein:
1. The maximum width of any vehicle or combination of vehicles,
including load, shall be ninety-six (96) inches. Clearance lights,
rearview mirrors and other accessories that are required by law or
regulations shall not be included in calculating the width of any
vehicle.
2. The maximum height of any vehicle or combination of vehicles,
including load, shall be thirteen and one-half (13½) feet, except
that any vehicle or combination of vehicles transporting
automobiles or other motor vehicles may have a height, including
load, of not more than fourteen (14) feet.
3. The maximum length of a single motor vehicle, including load, is
forty-five (45) feet, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.
4. The maximum length for truck-tractor and semitrailer or trucktractor
equipped with dromedary and semitrailer, including load,
shall be sixty (60) feet.
5. The maximum weight of any vehicle or combination of vehicles
shall be twenty thousand (20,000) pounds for a each axle. The
maximum total weight for any vehicle or combination of vehicles
shall be eighty thousand (80,000) pounds. The maximum total gross
weight with load imposed by any group of two (2) or more
consecutive axles of any vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be
as set forth in the table below:
* FEET 2 AXLES 3 AXLES 4 AXLES 5 AXLES 6 AXLES
4 34,000
5 34,000
6 34,000
7 34,000
8 34,000 34,000
9 39,000 42,500
10 40,000 43,500
11 40,000 44,000
12 40,000 45,000 50,000
13 40,000 45,500 50,500
14 40,000 46,500 51,500
15 40,000 47,000 52,000
16 40,000 48,000 52,500 58,000
17 40,000 48,500 53,500 58,500
Section
390.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
390.020
100:443
* FEET 2 AXLES 3 AXLES 4 AXLES 5 AXLES 6 AXLES
18 40,000 49,500 54,000 59,000
19 40,000 50,000 54,500 60,000
20 40,000 51,000 55,500 60,500 66,000
21 40,000 51,500 56,000 61,000 66,500
22 40,000 52,500 56,500 61,500 67,000
23 40,000 53,000 57,500 62,500 68,000
24 40,000 54,000 58,000 63,000 68,500
25 40,000 54,500 58,500 63,500 69,000
26 40,000 55,500 59,500 64,000 69,500
27 40,000 56,000 60,000 65,000 70,000
28 40,000 57,000 60,500 65,500 71,000
29 40,000 57,500 61,500 66,000 71,500
30 40,000 58,500 62,000 66,500 72,000
31 40,000 59,000 62,500 67,500 72,500
32 40,000 60,000 63,500 68,000 73,000
33 40,000 60,000 64,000 68,500 74,000
34 40,000 60,000 64,500 69,000 74,500
35 40,000 60,000 65,500 70,000 75,000
36 60,000 66,000 70,500 75,500
37 60,000 66,500 71,000 76,000
38 60,000 67,500 72,000 77,000
39 60,000 68,000 72,500 77,500
40 60,000 68,500 73,000 78,000
41 60,000 69,500 73,500 78,500
42 60,000 70,000 74,000 79,000
43 60,000 70,500 75,000 80,000
44 60,000 71,500 75,500 80,000
45 60,000 72,000 76,000 80,000
46 60,000 72,500 76,500 80,000
47 60,000 73,500 77,500 80,000
48 60,000 74,000 78,000 80,000
49 60,000 74,500 78,500 80,000
50 60,000 75,500 79,000 80,000
51 60,000 76,000 80,000 80,000
52 60,000 76,500 80,000 80,000
53 60,000 77,500 80,000 80,000
Section
390.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
390.020
100:444
Section 390.030. Permit Required. [R.O. 2007 §395.030; Ord. No.
4488 §3, 3-3-2003]
* FEET 2 AXLES 3 AXLES 4 AXLES 5 AXLES 6 AXLES
54 60,000 78,000 80,000 80,000
55 60,000 78,500 80,000 80,000
56 60,000 79,500 80,000 80,000
57 60,000 80,000 80,000 80,000
* Distance in feet between the extremes of any group of two (2) or
more consecutive axles is measured to the nearest foot; maximum
load in pounds.
6. The Director of Community Development is hereby authorized to
designate different size and weight limitations for particular
streets, highways and bridges as he or she deems appropriate. A
list of the limitations shall be kept on file with the Director of
Community Development and with the City Clerk.
A. A permit shall be required for the movement of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles with a non-divisible load on streets, highways
and bridges within the City which exceeds the size and weight
permitted for the particular streets, highways and bridges.
B. The City, with respect to any street or highway under its jurisdiction,
may, upon application to the Director of Community Development on
forms provided by the Director of Community Development and for
good cause shown, issue a special permit authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size and/or
weight exceeding the maximum stated herein. The applicant shall
furnish the following information in the special permit application:
1. The name and address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle.
2. Applicant's name.
3. Description of the object or vehicle to be moved.
4. The number of axles of the vehicle or combination of vehicles.
5. The maximum axle weights of all single, tandem or series axles.
6. Maximum gross weight of the vehicle.
7. The maximum width, length and height of the vehicle and load.
8. A valid certificate of insurance from an insurance company
authorized to do business in Missouri in an amount equal to or
exceeding one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
9. Requested routing over City streets to and from a specific location.
Section
390.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
390.030
100:445
C. Permits are valid only for the day or dates specified on the permit and
for the specific vehicle, load and routing as established by the Director
of Community Development or his or her designee. No substitution
vehicle, load or routing is permitted without the expressed written
permission by the Director of Community Development or his or her
designee and the permit must be carried in the vehicle to which the
permit applies.
D. The permit fee shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
E. The Director of Community Development or his or her designee is
authorized to approve the application for approved routes. Upon
approval and payment of all required fees, the Director of Community
Development shall issue a permit allowing passage of the oversize and/
or overweight vehicle or combination of vehicles over City streets. The
permit shall be specific and shall contain the following information:
1. Permit number.
2. The date or dates when the permit is valid.
3. The description of the vehicle and/or object to be moved.
4. Authorized gross weight, axle weights, width, length and height.
5. The authorized routing over City streets including the origin and
termination point within the City.
6. That the fee was paid.
7. The date and signature of the Director of Community Development
or his or her designee.
8. In addition, the permit will specify general conditions that the
permitee must comply with that are consistent and reasonable for
the protection of the general public and the City streets.
F. A copy of all permits issued will be provided to the City Administrator
for informational purposes.
G. It is the duty of the permitee to read and familiarize himself or herself
with the permit provisions upon receipt. Undertaking of the permit
move is deemed prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit and
that:
1. The permitee is in compliance with all operation requirements;
2. All dimension and weight limitations specified in the permit will not
be exceeded;
3. All operation, registration and license requirements have been
complied with;
Section
390.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
390.030
100:446
Section 390.040. Temporary Weight Restrictions. [R.O. 2007
§395.040; Ord. No. 4488 §4, 3-3-2003]
Temporary weight restrictions can be applied to any bridge, street or
highway under the jurisdiction of the City by the Director of Community
Development based on weather-related circumstances which are of a
temporary and special nature. Such a restriction shall not exceed a three
(3) month period.
Section 390.050. Liability For Damage. [R.O. 2007 §395.050; Ord.
No. 4488 §5, 3-3-2003]
Either or both the owner or driver of any vehicle which collides with a
lawfully established bridge or viaduct shall be liable for all damage and
injury resulting from a collision caused by the height of the vehicle, whether
the clearance of the bridge or viaduct is posted or not.
Chapter 395
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section 395.010. Abandoned Vehicles or Trailers Prohibited.69
No person shall abandon any motor vehicle or trailer on the right-of-way of
any public road or State highway.
4. All financial responsibilities, obligations and other legal
requirements have been complied with; and
5. The permitee assumes all responsibilities for injury or damage to
persons or to public or private property, including his or her own,
or to the object being transported, caused directly or indirectly by
the transportation or movement of vehicles and objects authorized
under the permit. He or she agrees to hold the City harmless from
all suits, claims, damages or proceedings of any kind and indemnify
the City for any claim it may be required to pay arising from the
movement.
H. The permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which the permit applies at
all times while operating on streets or highways within the City and
shall be exhibited upon demand to any Law Enforcement Officer, Police
Officer or authorized official of the City.
I. Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a City
permit whether it be by size, weight or general provisions, and either or
both the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty and
either or both the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be
prosecuted for such violation.
69.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §577.080, RSMo.
Section
390.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
395.020
100:447
Section 395.020. Obstructing The Flow of Traffic Prohibited.70
Except in the case of an accident resulting in the injury or death of any
person, the driver of a vehicle which for any reason obstructs the regular
flow of traffic on the roadway of any public road or State highway shall
make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved so as not
to block the regular flow of traffic. Any person who fails to comply with the
requirements of this Section is guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00).
Section 395.030. Towing of Abandoned Property On Public Real
Property.71
A. Any Law Enforcement Officer, or an official of the City where the City's
real property is concerned, may authorize a towing company to remove
to a place of safety:
1. Any abandoned property on the right-of-way of:
a. Any interstate highway or freeway in an urbanized area of the
City left unattended for ten (10) hours, or immediately if a Law
Enforcement Officer determines that the abandoned property
is a serious hazard to other motorists;
b. Any interstate highway or freeway outside of an urbanized
area of the City left unattended for forty-eight (48) hours, or
after four (4) hours if a Law Enforcement Officer determines
that the abandoned property is a serious hazard to other
motorists;
c. Any State highway other than an interstate highway or freeway
outside of an urbanized area, left unattended for more than
forty-eight (48) hours;
provided that commercial motor vehicles referred to in
Subsections (a—c) not hauling waste designated as hazardous
under 49 U.S.C. 5103(a) may only be removed under this
Section to a place of safety until the owner or owner's
representative has had a reasonable opportunity to contact a
towing company of choice; or
d. Any State highway other than an interstate highway or freeway
in an urbanized area, left unattended for more than ten (10)
hours.
2. Any unattended abandoned property illegally left standing upon
any highway or bridge if the abandoned property is left in a position
or under such circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement
70.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §304.151, RSMo.
71.State Law References—For similar provisions, §§304.155.1, 304.155.3, RSMo.
Section
395.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
395.030
100:448
Section 395.040. General Provisions and Procedures.72
of traffic where there is no reasonable indication that the person
in control of the property is arranging for its immediate control or
removal.
3. Any abandoned property which has been abandoned under Section
395.010 herein or Section 577.080, RSMo.
4. Any abandoned property which has been reported as stolen or
taken without consent of the owner.
5. Any abandoned property for which the person operating such
property is arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is
required to take the person into custody and where such person is
unable to arrange for the property's timely removal.
6. Any abandoned property which due to any other State law or City
ordinance is subject to towing because of the owner's outstanding
traffic or parking violations.
7. Any abandoned property left unattended in violation of a State law
or City ordinance where signs have been posted giving notice of the
law or where the violation causes a safety hazard.
B. When the City Police Department authorizes a tow pursuant to this
Section in which the abandoned property is moved from the immediate
vicinity, it shall complete a crime inquiry and inspection report.
C. Any City agency other than the City Police Department authorizing a
tow under this Section where property is towed away from the
immediate vicinity shall report the tow to the City Police Department
within two (2) hours of the tow, along with a crime inquiry and
inspection report.
A. Payment Of Charges. The owner of abandoned property removed as
provided in this Chapter shall be responsible for payment of all
reasonable charges for towing and storage of such abandoned property
as provided in Section 395.050.
B. Crime Inquiry And Inspection Report. Upon the towing of any
abandoned property pursuant to Section 395.030 or under authority of
a Law Enforcement Officer or local governmental agency pursuant to
Section 217.040, the City Police Department, where it authorized such
towing or was properly notified by another governmental agency of
such towing, shall promptly make an inquiry with the National Crime
Information Center (NCIC) and any statewide Missouri law
enforcement computer system to determine if the abandoned property
has been reported as stolen and shall enter the information pertaining
72.State Law References—For similar provisions, §§304.155.5—6, 304.155.11—12, 304.158.1,
304.158.5, 304.158.7, RSMo.
Section
395.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
395.040
100:449
to the towed property into the statewide law enforcement computer
system.
If the abandoned property is not claimed within ten (10) working days
of the towing, the tower who has online access to the Department of
Revenue's records shall make an inquiry to determine the abandoned
property owner and lienholder, if any, of record. In the event that the
records of the Department of Revenue fail to disclose the name of
the owner or any lienholder of record, the tower shall comply with
the requirements of Subsection (3) of Section 304.156, RSMo. If the
tower does not have online access, the City Police Department shall
submit a crime inquiry and inspection report to the Missouri Director
of Revenue. The City Police Department shall also provide one (1) copy
of the report to the storage facility and one (1) copy to the towing
company. A towing company that does not have online access to the
department's records and that is in possession of abandoned property
after ten (10) working days shall report such fact to the City Police
Department. The crime inquiry and inspection report shall be designed
by the Director of Revenue and shall include the following:
1. The year, model, make and property identification number of the
property and the owner and any lienholders, if known;
2. A description of any damage to the property noted by the Law
Enforcement Officer authorizing the tow;
3. The license plate or registration number and the State of issuance,
if available;
4. The storage location of the towed property;
5. The name, telephone number and address of the towing company;
6. The date, place and reason for the towing of the abandoned
property;
7. The date of the inquiry of the National Crime Information Center,
any statewide Missouri law enforcement computer system, and any
other similar system which has titling and registration information
to determine if the abandoned property had been stolen. This
information shall be entered only by the City Police Department;
8. The signature and printed name of the Law Enforcement Officer
authorizing the tow and the towing operator; and
9. Any additional information the Missouri Director of Revenue deems
appropriate.
C. Reclaiming Property. The owner of such abandoned property, or the
holder of a valid security interest of record, may reclaim it from the
towing company upon proof of ownership or valid security interest of
record and payment of all reasonable charges for the towing and
storage of the abandoned property.
Section
395.040
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
395.040
100:450
D. Lienholder Repossession. If a lienholder repossesses any motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel without the
knowledge or cooperation of the owner, then the repossessor shall
notify the City Police Department within two (2) hours of the
repossession and shall further provide the Police Department with any
additional information the Police Department deems appropriate. The
City Police Department shall make an inquiry with the National Crime
Information Center and the Missouri statewide law enforcement
computer system and shall enter the repossessed vehicle into the
statewide law enforcement computer system.
E. Notice To Owner/Tow Lien Claim. Any towing company which comes
into possession of abandoned property pursuant to this Chapter and
who claims a lien for recovering, towing or storing abandoned property
shall give notice to the title owner and to all persons claiming a lien
thereon, as disclosed by the records of the Missouri Department of
Revenue or of a corresponding agency in any other State. The towing
company shall notify the owner and any lienholder within ten (10)
business days of the date of mailing indicated on the notice sent by the
Missouri Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 304.156, RSMo.,
by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain the
following:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the storage facility;
2. The date, reason and place from which the abandoned property
was removed;
3. A statement that the amount of the accrued towing, storage and
administrative costs are the responsibility of the owner, and that
storage and/or administrative costs will continue to accrue as a
legal liability of the owner until the abandoned property is
redeemed;
4. A statement that the storage firm claims a possessory lien for all
such charges;
5. A statement that the owner or holder of a valid security interest of
record may retake possession of the abandoned property at any
time during business hours by proving ownership or rights to a
secured interest and paying all towing and storage charges;
6. A statement that, should the owner consider that the towing or
removal was improper or not legally justified, the owner has a right
to request a hearing as provided in this Section to contest the
propriety of such towing or removal;
7. A statement that if the abandoned property remains unclaimed for
thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the notice, title to the
abandoned property will be transferred to the person or firm in
possession of the abandoned property, free of all prior liens; and
Section
395.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
395.040
100:451
8. A statement that any charges in excess of the value of the
abandoned property at the time of such transfer shall remain a
liability of the owner.
F. Physical Search Of Property. In the event that the Missouri Department
of Revenue notifies the towing company that the records of the
Department of Revenue fail to disclose the name of the owner or any
lienholder of record, the towing company shall attempt to locate
documents or other evidence of ownership on or within the abandoned
property itself. The towing company must certify that a physical search
of the abandoned property disclosed no ownership documents were
found and a good faith effort has been made. For purposes of this
Section, "good faith effort" means that the following checks have been
performed by the company to establish the prior State of registration
and title:
1. Check of the abandoned property for any type of license plates,
license plate record, temporary permit, inspection sticker, decal or
other evidence which may indicate a State of possible registration
and title;
2. Check the law enforcement report for a license plate number or
registration number if the abandoned property was towed at the
request of a law enforcement agency;
3. Check the tow ticket/report of the tow truck operator to see if a
license plate was on the abandoned property at the beginning of
the tow, if a private tow; and
4. If there is no address of the owner on the impound report, check
the law enforcement report to see if an out-of-state address is
indicated on the driver license information.
G. Petition In Circuit Court. The owner of the abandoned property
removed pursuant to this Chapter or any person claiming a lien, other
than the towing company, within ten (10) days after the receipt of
notification from the towing company pursuant to Subsection (E) of this
Section may file a petition in the Associate Circuit Court in the County
where the abandoned property is stored to determine if the abandoned
property was wrongfully taken or withheld from the owner. The petition
shall name the towing company among the defendants. The petition
may also name the agency ordering the tow or the owner, lessee or
agent of the real property from which the abandoned property was
removed. The Missouri Director of Revenue shall not be a party to such
petition but a copy of the petition shall be served on the Director of
Revenue.
H. Notice To Owner. Notice as to the removal of any abandoned property
pursuant to this Chapter shall be made in writing within five (5)
working days to the registered owner and any lienholder of the fact of
the removal, the grounds for the removal, and the place to which the
property has been removed by either:
Section
395.040
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
395.040
100:452
Section 395.050. Maximum Charges.73
1. The public agency authorizing the removal; or
2. The towing company, where authorization was made by an owner
or lessee of real property.
If the abandoned property is stored in any storage facility, a
copy of the notice shall be given to the operator of the facility.
The notice provided for in this Section shall include the amount
of mileage if available shown on the abandoned property at the
time of removal.
I. Tow Truck Requirements. Any towing company which tows abandoned
property for hire shall have the towing company's name, City and State
clearly printed in letters at least three (3) inches in height on the sides
of the truck, wrecker or other vehicle used in the towing.
J. Storage Facilities. Persons operating or in charge of any storage facility
where the abandoned property is stored pursuant to this Chapter shall
accept cash for payment of towing and storage by a registered owner or
the owner's agent claiming the abandoned property.
K. Disposition Of Towed Property. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 301.227, RSMo., any towing company who has complied with
the notification provisions in Section 304.156, RSMo., including notice
that any property remaining unredeemed after thirty (30) days may be
sold as scrap property, may then dispose of such property as provided in
this Subsection. Such sale shall only occur if at least thirty (30) days
have passed since the date of such notification, the abandoned property
remains unredeemed with no satisfactory arrangements made with the
towing company for continued storage, and the owner or holder of a
security agreement has not requested a hearing as provided in Section
304.156, RSMo. The towing company may dispose of such abandoned
property by selling the property on a bill of sale as prescribed by the
Director of Revenue to a scrap metal operator or licensed salvage
dealer for destruction purposes only. The towing company shall forward
a copy of the bill of sale provided by the scrap metal operator or
licensed salvage dealer to the Director of Revenue within two (2) weeks
of the date of such sale. The towing company shall keep a record of
each such vehicle sold for destruction for three (3) years that shall be
available for inspection by law enforcement and authorized Department
of Revenue officials. The record shall contain the year, make,
identification number of the property, date of sale, and name of the
purchasing scrap metal operator or licensed salvage dealer and copies
of all notifications issued by the towing company as required in this
Chapter. Scrap metal operators or licensed salvage dealers shall keep a
record of the purchase of such property as provided in Section 301.227,
RSMo. Scrap metal operators and licensed salvage dealers may obtain a
junk certificate as provided in Section 301.227, RSMo., on vehicles
purchased on a bill of sale pursuant to the Section.
Section
395.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
395.050
100:453
Section 395.060. Sale of Abandoned Property By City.74
When the City has physical possession of the abandoned property, it may
sell the abandoned property, in accordance with its established provisions
and regulations and may transfer ownership by means of a bill of sale signed
by the City Clerk and sealed with the official City Seal. Such bill of sale
shall contain the make and model of the abandoned property the complete
abandoned property identification number, and the odometer reading of the
abandoned property, if available and shall be lawful proof of ownership for
any dealer registered under the provisions of Section 301.218, RSMo., or
Section 301.560, RSMo., or for any other person.
Schedule I
SPEED LIMITS
Table I-A. State Speed Limits. [Ord. No. 6395, 10-12-2017; Ord. No.
6502, 9-27-2018]
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 320, and when signs are
erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
A. A towing company may only assess reasonable storage charges for
abandoned property towed without the consent of the owner.
Reasonable storage charges shall not exceed the charges for vehicles
which have been towed with the consent of the owner on a negotiated
basis. Storage charges may be assessed only for the time in which the
towing company complies with the procedural requirements of this
Chapter.
B. The City Council may from time to time establish maximum reasonable
towing, storage and other charges which can be imposed by towing and
storage companies operating within the City, and which are consistent
with this Chapter and with Sections 304.155 to 304.158, RSMo. Any
violation of said established maximum charges shall be deemed a
violation of this Section of the Code and shall be punishable pursuant to
Section 100.010.
C. A towing company may impose a charge of not more than one-half (½)
of the regular towing charge for the towing of abandoned property at
the request of the owner of private real property or that owner's agent
pursuant to this Chapter if the owner of the abandoned property or the
owner's agent returns to the abandoned property before it is removed
from the private real property. The regular towing charge may only be
imposed after the abandoned property has been removed from the
property and is in transit.
73.State Law References—For similar provisions, §§304.156.2, 304.158.6, 304.158.10, RSMo.
74.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §304.156, RSMo.
Section
395.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Table I-A
100:454
a vehicle at a speed in excess of the speeds listed below on the streets as
designated.
Street
Speed Limit
(miles per hour)
Drennen Parkway (I-70 SOR from TR Hughes to
Route K)
45
Entire length in City limits
East Terra (I-70 NOR east of Route K)
Entire length in City limits 45
Interstate 64 (also Missouri Highway 40/61)
Eastern City limits to Corporate Center Drive 60
Corporate Center Drive to the western City limits 65
Interstate 64 North Outer Road
East of K 45
Interstate 70
Entire length in City limits 60
Missouri Highway 364
Entire length in City limits 60
Missouri Highway 364 SOR
Route K to East of Twin Chimney Boulevard 45
East of Twin Chimney Boulevard (West) 35
Missouri Highway 79
North of Pearl Drive 60
South of Pearl Drive (southbound only) 50
Route DD
Entire length in City limits 45
Route K
Bramblett (North) to Interstate 70 30
Highway 40 to Route N 50
Route N to Bramblett (North) 45
Route M
Route P to Missouri 79 40
Route N
East of Bryan Road to City limits 45
Highway 364 to Hawk Ridge Trail 45
Table I-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table I-A
100:455
Street
Speed Limit
(miles per hour)
West of Red Barron Drive 50
Route P
Approximately 250 feet west of Deer Creek Drive
eastwardly to Route M
45
Western City limit eastwardly to approximately
250 feet west of Deer Creek Drive
50
Technology Boulevard
Entire length in City limits 45
Veterans Memorial Parkway (Portions of I-70 SOR)
City limits to Parkview 45
Entire length in City limits 30
Parkview to Route K 35
West Terra (I-70 NOR west of Route K)
Route K to Bryan Road 40
Bryan Road to western City limits 40
Schedule II
SCHOOL ZONES
Table II-A. School Zones. [Ord. No. 510, 1-5-1976; Ord. No. 941,
8-19-1982]
The City of O'Fallon has authorized School Zones at the following locations:
Location Speed Limit
Assumption Catholic School Posted 20 mph when children
present
North Main Street
Boonslick State School Posted 20 mph when children
present
Knaust
Crossroads Elementary School Posted 20 mph when children
present
Timber Meadows Parkway
North High and Christian High School Posted 20 mph when children
present
Tom Ginnever
Table I-A O'FALLON CITY CODE Table II-A
100:456
Location Speed Limit
North Middle School Posted 20 mph when children
present
Sonderen
Pheasant Point Elementary Posted 20 mph when children
present
Pheasant Meadow
Progress South Elementary Posted 20 mph when children
present
Knaust
South Middle School Posted 20 mph when children
present
Knaust
Twin Chimneys Elementary Posted 20 mph when children
present
Twin Chimneys Boulevard
West High School Posted 20 mph when children
present
Turtle Creek
Westhoff Elementary School Posted 20 mph when children
present
Homefield Boulevard
Schedule III
ONE-WAY STREETS
Table III-A. One-Way Streets. [Ord. No. 826, 5-7-1981; Ord. No. 949,
10-7-1982]
In accordance with Section 330.010 — 330.030, vehicular traffic shall move
only in the direction indicated on the following streets:
Location Direction
Lincoln Street from its northern entrance at Third
Street until it reaches Civic Park Drive where it ends
Southward
Mary Street from its southern entrance at Civic Park
Drive until it reaches Third Street where it ends
Northward
Sheppard Drive from its northern entrance until it
reaches the parking area/roadway which is nine
hundred fifty feet (950) more or less from the South
entrance of Eggering Drive
Southward
Table II-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table III-A
100:457
Schedule IV
TURNING REGULATIONS
Table IV-A. Turning Regulations.
In accordance with Section 325.030 of this Title, the following location shall
have turning restrictions as listed:
Location Restriction
No locations at this time.
Schedule V
STOP SIGNS
Table V-A. Stop Signs. [Ord. No. 3609 § 2, 11-6-1997; Ord. No. 4160
§ 2, 1-30-2001; Ord. No. 4888 § 2, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 4889 § 2,
8-16-2005; Ord. No. 4907 § 2, 9-8-2005; Ord. No. 4953 § 2,
1-30-2006; Ord. No. 4980 §§ 1--2, 3-23-2006; Ord. No. 4981 §§ 1--2,
3-23-2006; Ord. No. 4982 §§ 1--2, 3-23-2006; Ord. No. 4983 §§ 1--2,
3-23-2006; Ord. No. 5001 § 2, 5-3-2006; Ord. No. 5132 §§ 1--2,
1-25-2007; Ord. No. 5133 §§ 1--2, 1-25-2007; Ord. No. 5477 § 1,
6-25-2009; Ord. No. 5797 §§ 1--2, 7-12-2012]
As authorized in Section 315.010 of this Code, when signs are erected, the
following streets shall be known as stop locations:
Location
Brook Hollow Drive and Brook Hollow Court/Hickory Hollow Lane (fourway
stop).
Chelsea Way Drive and the easternmost intersection of Brookneal (all three
directions).
Cherrywood Parc Drive at Red Cedar Parc Drive (four-way stop).
Fallon Parkway and Avondale Drive (three-way stop).
Fallon Parkway and Jacobs Ladder (four-way stop).
Hawk Run Drive and Falcon Hill Parkway (four-way stop).
Jacobs Way and Fallon Parkway (four-way stop).
Legacy Pointe Drive and Ancestry Drive (four-way stop).
Legacy Pointe Drive and Pearview Drive (three-way stop).
Little Oaks Drive and Winding Stair Way (two three-way stops).
Morgan Trail Drive and Thoroughbred Trail (four-way stop).
Nalpac Drive and Fallon Parkway (four-way stop).
Paul Renaud Boulevard and Wyndgate Ridge Drive (four-way stop) [Ord.
No. 6549; 1-24-2019]
Table III-A O'FALLON CITY CODE Table V-A
100:458
Location
Thunder Hill Drive and Village Center Drive (four-way stop).
Timber Meadows Parkway and Cypress Knoll Drive (three-way stop).
Village Center Drive and Rolling Thunder Drive (four-way stop).
Chapter 400
ZONING CODE
Table V-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table V-A
100:459

ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose and Legal Clauses
Section 400.010. Title. [R.O. 2007 §400.010; Ord. No. 1161 §1.01,
10-16-1984]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited hereinafter as the "Zoning
Code of the City of O'Fallon".
Section 400.015. Purpose. [R.O. 2007 §400.015; Ord. No. 1161
§1.03, 10-16-1984]
A. The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate and control the zoning of land
and consequent use of said land within the City of O'Fallon in order to
promote public safety, health, and general welfare of the citizens. These
Regulations are specifically designed to:
1. Protect the character and stability of residential, recreation,
commercial, industrial, and open space areas within the City of
O'Fallon and promote their orderly and beneficial development;
2. Provide privacy and convenience of access to property; etc.
3. Regulate the intensity of land use and establish open areas
surrounding buildings and structures necessary to provide
adequate light and ventilation and to protect public safety and
health;
4. Regulate and limit the height of buildings and structures.
5. Lessen and avoid congestion on public streets by providing offstreet
parking and loading;
6. Regulate and limit the density of population based on the City's
ability to provide for water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other
essential public services;
7. Divide the City into zoning districts and establish, by reference to a
map, the boundaries of said districts;
8. Fix reasonable standards to which land, buildings, structures, and
their uses must conform;
9. Prohibit uses, buildings, or structures which are incompatible with
the character of development or uses, buildings, or structures
permitted within specified zoning districts;
10. Prevent illegal additions or alterations of existing buildings or
structures;
11. Protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and odor, heat, dust,
smoke, glare, noise, vibration, radioactivity, and other nuisances
Section
400.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.015
100:461
Section 400.020. Validity and Severability Clause. [R.O. 2007
§400.020; Ord. No. 1161 §1.04, 10-16-1984]
Section 400.025. Compliance With The Regulations. [R.O. 2007
§400.025; Ord. No. 1161 §1.05, 10-16-1984]
and hazards in the interest of public health, safety, and general
welfare;
12. Prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of buildings
and structures so far as is possible and appropriate in each zoning
district by regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the
land surrounding them;
13. Preserve and enhance the taxable value of land, buildings, and
structures throughout the City;
14. Provide for the completion, restoration, reconstruction, extension,
or substitution of non-conforming uses;
15. Designate and define the powers and duties of the official(s)
administering and enforcing this Chapter; and
16. Provide penalties for the violation of this Chapter.
A. If any Court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this
Chapter to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of
this Chapter not specifically included in said ruling.
B. If any Court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the
application of any provision of this Chapter to a particular land, parcel,
lot, district, use, building or structure, such ruling shall not affect the
application of said provision to any other land, parcel, lot, district, use,
building, or structure not specifically included in said ruling.
A. The regulations set by this Chapter within each district shall be
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land, except as hereinafter provided.
1. No building shall be erected, converted, placed, enlarged,
reconstructed, or structurally altered, nor shall any building or
land be used except for a purpose and in the manner permitted in
the district in which the building or land is located.
2. No land required for yards, open spaces, or off-street parking or
loading spaces about an existing building or any building hereafter
erected or structurally altered shall be considered as required yard
or lot area for more than one (1) building.
3. Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be
located on a lot and in no case shall there be more than one (1)
main building on one (1) lot except as otherwise provided in the
Chapter.
Section
400.015
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.025
100:462
4. The provisions of these Regulations shall be considered the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, morals, comfort and welfare. Where provisions of the
regulations of this Chapter impose greater restrictions than those
of any Statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the
regulations of this Chapter shall be controlling. Where the
provisions of any Statute, other ordinance or regulation impose
greater restrictions than this Chapter, the provisions of such
Statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
5. This Chapter is not intended to abrogate or annul any easement,
covenant or other private agreement provided that where any
provisions of this Chapter are more restrictive or imposes a higher
standard or requirement than such easement, covenant or other
private agreement, the provision of this Chapter shall govern.
Section
400.025
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.025
100:463

ARTICLE II
Rules and Definitions
Section 400.030. Rules of Construction. [R.O. 2007 §400.030; Ord.
No. 1161 §2.01, 10-16-1984]
Section 400.035. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §400.035; Ord. No. 1161
§2.02, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 2030 §§1—2, 6-5-1992; Ord. No. 3258
§2, 7-18-1995; Ord. No. 3441 §2, 11-8-1996; Ord. No. 3604 §4,
11-17-1997; Ord. No. 4083 §2, 7-14-2000; Ord. No. 4383 §7,
7-1-2002; Ord. No. 4645 §1, 3-16-2004; Ord. No. 4743 §1,
11-22-2004; Ord. No. 4786 §1, 3-30-2005; Ord. No. 4872 §1,
7-20-2005; Ord. No. 4885 §1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 5083 §§1—2,
10-12-2006; Ord. No. 5161 §1, 4-12-2007; Ord. No. 5356 §1(A),
8-14-2008; Ord. No. 5371 §1, 9-11-2008; Ord. No. 5401 §2,
12-26-2008; Ord. No. 5443 §1, 3-31-2009; Ord. No. 5608 §1,
7-22-2010; Ord. No. 5726 §1, 8-25-2011; Ord. No. 5727 §1,
8-25-2011; Ord. No. 5753 §1, 12-8-2011; Ord. No. 5831 §1,
12-13-2012]
The following definitions shall apply in interpretation and enforcement of
this Chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated:
ACCESS EASEMENT — An easement which grants the right to cross
property.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A subordinate building or
structure having a use customarily incident to and located on the lot
occupied by the main building. A building housing an accessory use is
considered an integral part of the main building when it has any part of a
wall in common with the main building, or is under an extension of the main
roof and designed as an integral part of the main building.
A. For the purposes of this Chapter, certain rules of construction apply to
the text, as follows:
1. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; and the
singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary.
2. The term "shall" and "must" are always mandatory and not
discretionary; the words "may" or "should" are permissive.
3. Words or terms not interpreted or defined by this Article shall be
used with a meaning of common or standard utilization.
4. The word "person" includes a firm, organization, association,
partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an
individual.
5. The words "use" or "occupy" shall include the words "intended",
"designed", or "arranged" to be "used" or "occupied".
Section
400.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.035
100:465
ACCESSORY USE — A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use
of the premises.
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE — Any business,
commercial establishment or premises in which ten percent (10%) or more
of its sales floor area is devoted to the sale, rental or lease of books,
magazines, periodicals, photographs, films, motion picture, video cassette,
slides, digital video disc, sexually-oriented toys or novelties designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities or other explicit sexual
material that depict or describe specified sexual activities. Said adult
bookstore or adult video store may not publicly display any of the books,
magazines, periodicals, photographs, films, motion picture, video cassette,
slides, digital video disc, sexually-oriented toys or novelties designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities or other obscene or explicit
sexual material that depict or describe specified sexual activities. With the
exception of individuals on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises, equipment on the premises or for the delivery of goods to the
premises, all employees, guests, customers, patrons or members must be
age twenty-one (21) or older.
ADULT CABARET — Any nightclub, tavern, bar, restaurant, café or similar
commercial establishment that regularly, commonly, habitually or
consistently features or otherwise offers to the public, customers, patrons
or members in a viewing area, any live exhibition, performance or dance
by persons whose exhibition, performance or dance includes any of the
following:
1. Persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity, and
Persons who engage in erotic dancing or performances that are
intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or
customers.
Any person who appears in a state of semi-nudity shall be at least ten
(10) feet from any customer, patron, member or other individual in a
state of semi-nudity at all times and shall be prohibited from touching
a customer, patron, member or other individual in a state of seminudity
or the clothing of a customer, patron or member. Any person
who appears in a state of semi-nudity shall be at all times on a stage
at least two (2) feet from the floor and behind a railing no less than
twenty-four (24) inches in height. Any person who appears in a state
of semi-nudity shall not knowingly or intentionally depict, simulate or
perform specified sexual activities. All employees, performers, guests,
customers, patrons and members shall be prohibited from knowingly
and intentionally appearing in a state of nudity or depicting, simulating
or performing specified sexual activities. With the exception of
individuals on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises,
equipment on the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises,
all employees, guests, customers, patrons or members must be age
twenty-one (21) or older.
2.
Section
400.035
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.035
100:466
ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL — A hotel, motel, inn, building or similar
commercial establishment offering public accommodations for any form
of consideration which provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, digital video discs or other photographic reproductions
fifty percent (50%) or more of the number of which are distinguished or
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities,
nudity or semi-nudity and/or which rents, leases or lets any single room for
less than a six (6) hour period or rents, leases or lets any single room more
than twice in an eighteen (18) hour period. With the exception of individuals
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises, equipment on
the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises, all employees,
guests, customers, patrons or members must be age twenty-one (21) or
older.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An establishment emphasizing
or showing sexually-oriented movies distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to nudity, semi-nudity
or specified sexual activities. With the exception of individuals on the
premises for repair or maintenance of the premises, equipment on the
premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises, all employees, guests,
customers, patrons or members must be age twenty-one (21) or older.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment that regularly, commonly, habitually or
consistently features live theatrical performances or persons who appear
in a state of semi-nudity. Any person who appears in a state of semi-nudity
shall be at least ten (10) feet from any customer, patron, member or other
individual in a state of semi-nudity at all times and shall be prohibited from
touching a customer, patron, member or other individual in a state of seminudity
or the clothing of a customer, patron or member. Any person who
appears in a state of semi-nudity shall be at all times on a stage at least
two (2) feet from the floor and behind a railing no less than twenty-four
(24) inches in height. Any person who appears in a state of semi-nudity
shall not knowingly or intentionally depict, simulate or perform specified
sexual activities. All employees, performers, guests, customers, patrons and
members shall be prohibited from knowingly and intentionally appearing
in a state of nudity or depicting, simulating or performing specified sexual
activities. With the exception of individuals on the premises for repair or
maintenance of the premises, equipment on the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises, all employees, guests, customers, patrons or
members must be age twenty-one (21) or older.
ADULT VIDEO ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically
or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or
other image producing devices are maintained in a viewing room to show
images distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
nudity or specified sexual activities. Said adult video arcade may not
publicly display any such poster, interior signage or similar attraction
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of nudity or
Section
400.035
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.035
100:467
specified sexual activities. Any such viewing room shall not be obscured
by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. No viewing room shall be
occupied by more than one (1) individual at a time and there shall be
no aperture between viewing rooms which is designed or constructed to
facilitate sexual activity between persons in different rooms. With the
exception of individuals on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises, equipment on the premises or for the delivery of goods to the
premises, all employees, guests, customers, patrons or members must be
age twenty-one (21) or older.
AGGRIEVED PARTY — For the purpose of standing to file permitted appeals
from decisions made in the course of administration of the City's land use
regulations, an aggrieved party is one who:
AGRICULTURAL — The use of land for agricultural purposes, including
farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory
uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that
the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of
the normal agricultural activities. The operation of commercial feed lots or
pens, sales yards and auction yards for cattle or hogs shall be deemed an
industrial and not an agricultural use.
ALLEY — A private right-of-way with a minimum pavement width of twenty
(20) feet that provides secondary vehicular access to the rear or side of a
lot, block, or parcel of land otherwise abutting a street. Alleys shall:
ALTERATION — Any addition, removal, extension, or change in the location
of any exterior wall of a main building or accessory building.
APARTMENT — A room or a suite of rooms within an apartment house
arranged, intended or designed for a place of residence of a single family or
group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
Suffers a demonstrable and material adverse effect from the decision at
issue, and
1.
Is an owner or occupant of property adjacent to the subject property.
For this purpose, property which would be adjacent to the subject
property but for an intervening street, alley or common ground shall be
deemed to be "adjacent".
2.
1. Be designated and signed for "one-way" traffic,
Have a minimum five (5) foot wide easement strip placed adjacent to
the right side of the alley easement designated for trash receptacle
placement,
2.
3. Be designated and signed to prohibit on-street parking, and
Be designated and signed as "private streets" in accordance with
Section 400.264 of the Subdivision and Land Development Code.
4.
Section
400.035
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.035
100:468
APARTMENT HOTEL — An apartment house which furnishes for the use
of its tenants services ordinarily furnished by hotels, but the privileges of
which are not primarily available to the public.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A multi-family apartment building of four (4) or
more stories in height served by one (1) or more elevators. Typical
apartment houses are designed with an internal single or double loaded
corridor which opens to a number of apartment flats. Apartment houses,
because of their height, are usually constructed with steel frame or
reinforced concrete. Typical apartment houses of four (4) stories in height
have a project density of twenty (20) to twenty-four (24) apartment units
per gross acre.
AREA PROJECT —
AS-BUILT PLANS — Construction plans revised to show a facility or
structure as actually constructed and as it appears on the tract of land
involved.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — Any group housing and services program,
other than a skilled nursing facility, for three (3) or more unrelated adults
that promotes resident self-direction and participation in decisions that
emphasize choice, dignity, privacy, individuality, independence and homelike
surroundings and makes available, at a minimum, one (1) meal per
day, housekeeping services and personal care services directly or through
a formal written agreement with one (1) or more licensed home care or
hospice agencies. Settings in which services are delivered may include selfcontained
apartment units or single or shared units with private or area
baths.
BANK — An office building or portion thereof which provides for the
custody, loan, exchange, or issue of money, the extension of credit, or
facilitating the transmission of funds, and which may include accessory
drive-up units on the same premises.
BASEMENT — A story below the first story as defined under "Story"
counted as a story for height regulations, in multi-family districts if
subdivided and used for dwelling purposes.
BLOCK — An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded
by streets, highways, or right-of-way, except alleys, or between streets,
highways, streams, parks, etc., or any other barrier, or combination thereof,
to the continuity of development.
1. GROSS PROJECT AREA — Total project area.
NET PROJECT AREA — Total project area less land allocated to public
street right-of-way, private streets, parking areas and any land
allocated to specified non-project uses such as schools and churches
when determining the "net residential project area" to be used as
a basis for calculating the number of permitted dwelling units for a
Planned Unit Development.
2.
Section
400.035
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.035
100:469
BOARDING HOUSE OR LODGING HOUSE — A building other than a hotel,
occupied as a single housekeeping unit, where lodging or meals are
provided for four (4) or more persons for compensation, pursuant to
previous arrangements, but not for the public or transients.
BUFFER STRIP —
See "Greenbelt".
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels,
or property of any kind, but not including any vehicle, trailer (with or
without wheels) nor any movable device, such as furniture, machinery, or
equipment.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The proportion of the lot area, expressed as
a percent that is covered by the maximum horizontal cross-section of a
building or buildings.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average ground level
abutting a building or structure to the highest point of the roof of a building
or highest point of any permanent part of a structure other than a building.
BUILDING LINE OR SETBACK LINE — A line parallel to a street right-ofway
line, edge of a stream, or other property line established on a parcel
of land or lot for the purpose of prohibiting construction of a building or
structure in the area between such building line and right-of-way, streambank,
or other property line.
BULK — The term used to indicate the size and setback of a building or
structure and the location of same with respect to another building or
structure or to a lot line and includes the following: size and height of a
building or structure; location of exterior walls of a building in relation to
lot lines, streets, or other buildings; the floor area of a building in relation
to the area of the lot on which it is located; the open space allocated to and
surrounding a building; and the amount of lot area per dwelling unit.
CHURCH — A building used principally for religious worship but the word
church shall not include or mean an undertakers chapel, or funeral building,
a religious educational institution or parochial school or day care center.
CEMETERY — A place for burial of the dead, including crematory facilities
as an accessory use.
CHECK-CASHING ESTABLISHMENT — A business engaged in checkcashing
operations for a fee as a primary or substantial element of its
business and which is not licensed by the appropriate State or Federal
agency as a banking or savings and loan facility.
CITY — The City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
CITY COUNCIL — The officially elected City Council of the City of O'Fallon;
the term may be abbreviated in this Chapter as the Council.
CITY ENGINEER — The officially appointed Engineer of the City of O'Fallon.
Section
400.035
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.035
100:470
CLUB, PRIVATE — A building or premises used for social, recreational,
dining or philanthropic purposes the normal use of which is limited to
specific members, patrons or otherwise listed and enumerated persons.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officially designated
representative of the City of O'Fallon responsible for the enforcement of the
Sign Code, Zoning Code and other ordinances.
COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning Commission for the City of
O'Fallon, Missouri.
COMMON ELEMENTS (CONDOMINIUMS) — All portions of a
condominium property, except the units.
COMMON GROUND — That land set aside for open space, recreational or
other common use by the owners of the lots in a subdivision, and which is
owned by trustees for the sole benefit, use and enjoyment of the lot owners
present and future. No lot owner shall have the right to convey his/her
interest in the common ground except as an incident of the ownership of a
platted lot.
COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT — A residential cluster subdivision, a
commercial or industrial park, or a Planned Unit Development as defined in
this Article.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A comprehensive land use plan made and
adopted by the City Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council
for the City of O'Fallon which through any combination of text, charts,
and maps sets forth proposals for general locations for various land uses,
streets, parks, schools, public buildings, utilities, and for the physical
development of O'Fallon.
CONDITIONAL USE — A conditional use is a use that would not be
appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the Zoning District
but which if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the
neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, morals, order,
comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such
uses may be permitted in such Zoning Districts as conditional uses, if
specific provisions for such conditional use is made in this Zoning Code.
CONDOMINIUM — A form of ownership pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 448, RSMo., in which individuals own the interior space of separate
units, but together through an owner's association share ownership of all
common elements and common ground appurtenant to the units.
CONSIGNMENT STORE — A building or part of a building where
secondhand goods, articles, or antiques are offered or kept for sale at retail
to the general public wherein the owner/operator of the business sells the
merchandise in exchange for a fee from the owner(s) of the goods, articles,
or antiques.
CONSTRUCTION PLANS — The engineering drawings showing types of
materials and construction details for physical structures and facilities,
excluding dwelling units to be installed in conjunction with development of
a subdivision.
Section
400.035
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.035
100:471
COSMETIC TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment which
performs only the following types of insertion of pigmentation under the
skin:[Ord. No. 6531, 12-13-2018]
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate turnaround at the end for the safe and convenient reversal of
traffic movement.
CURB LEVEL — The mean level of the curb in front of the lot or in case
of a corner lot, along that abutting street where the mean curb level is the
highest.
DAY CARE CENTER, ADULT — A facility designed to provide care and
supervision to meet the needs of five (5) or more functionally impaired
adults for periods of less than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours per day,
but more than two (2) hours per day in a place other than the adult's
home.[Ord. No. 6421, 1-11-2018]
DAY CARE CENTER, CHILD — A place which provides shelter and personal
care to children who are not related within the third degree computed
according to civil law to the operator, for four (4) or more hours of any part
of twenty-four (24) hour day, whether such place be organized or operated
for profit or not. The term "day care center" includes child care facility,
kindergarten, nurseries or any other facility that falls within the scope of
the definitions set forth above.[Ord. No. 6421, 1-11-2018]
DEDICATION — Intentional transfer by the developer to the public of
ownership of or an interest in land for a public purpose. Dedication may
be effected by compliance with Statutes relating to dedication of land,
by formal deed of conveyance, or by any other method recognized by
the laws of the State of Missouri. Acceptance by the City of maintenance
responsibilities will be an action by the City Council separate from the
dedication.[Ord. No. 6421, 1-11-2018]
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per acre of gross land area.
DETENTION FACILITIES — The use of a site for the provision by a public
agency of housing and care for legally confined individuals.
DEVELOPER — That person, firm or corporation by whom a tract will
be subdivided and/or improved pursuant to the requirements of these
regulations.[Ord. No. 6223 §1, 5-26-2016]
DEVELOPMENT — Any subdivision of land as herein defined or any
material change in the use or appearance of any parcel of land subject to
provisions of this Chapter, or the act of building structures and/or installing
site improvements.
The application of permanent eyeliner, eyebrows, cheek blush, eye
shadow, and lip liner or lip color for cosmetic purposes; and
1.
For repigmentation of the areola or scar camouflage which is the
disguising or concealing permanently blotchy or irregularly pigmented
skin, acne scarring or other permanent skin irregularities by the use of
blending pigments into the skin.
2.
Section
400.035
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.035
100:472
DIRECTOR OF BUILDING SAFETY — The Director of Building Safety for
the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
DIRECTOR OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT — Director of Planning
and Development for the City of O’Fallon, MO.[Ord. No. 6223 §1,
5-26-2016]
DISTRICT — A section or sections of the City for which the zoning
regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of
buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of use are uniform.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS — Animals kept exclusively for the personal
enjoyment of the occupants of a principal building and including those
animals normally kept as pets such as dogs, cats, birds, guinea pigs, etc.
DORMITORY — A building with many rooms providing sleeping and living
accommodations for a number of usually unrelated persons; usually
associated with an educational institution.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS — Any business so developed that its retail or
service character is primarily dependent upon serving patrons who remain
in their motor vehicles in a driveway or parking spaces.
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof, designed exclusively for
residential occupancy, including single-family, two-family and multiplefamily
dwellings, boarding and lodging houses, apartment houses and town
houses, but not hotels.
DWELLING AREA — The area of a dwelling unit is composed of those
rooms designed for and exclusively used for residential purposes, including
bedrooms, kitchen, dining room, den/library, bathrooms, family and living
rooms, and hallways connecting these rooms.
DWELLING, GROUP HOME — Any residence occupied as a group home.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building or portion thereof, arranged,
intended or designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families on a rental
or ownership basis and commonly referred to as a triplex, four-plex, or
apartment building.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building arranged, intended, or
designed for occupancy by one (1) family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed for occupation by two
(2) families living independently of each other and being designed in
accordance with one (1) of the following:
The two-family dwelling is located on a single platted lot of record
that does not provide for the sale of the individual dwelling units. The
individual dwelling units may be located side-by-side or with one (1)
dwelling unit located above the other dwelling unit.
1.
The two-family dwelling is located on two (2) separately platted lots of
record and the interior side lot line (party lot line) runs coincident with
the common firewall separating the side-by-side units.
2.
Section
400.035
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.035
100:473
EASEMENT — A right or privilege to use a portion of another's property for
a particular purpose.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer registered in the State of Missouri.
ESCORT — A person who for consideration agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform for another person in a state
of semi-nudity. Any escort or their guests, customers, patrons or members
shall be prohibited from knowingly and intentionally appearing in a state of
nudity or depicting, simulating or performing specified sexual activities.
ESCORT AGENCY — A business that furnishes, offers to furnish or
advertises to furnish escorts as one (1) of its primary business purposes
for a fee, tip or other consideration. With the exception of individuals on
the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises, equipment on the
premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises, all employees, guests,
customers, patrons or members must be age twenty-one (21) or older.
EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIAL — Any pictorial or three dimensional
material depicting human masturbation, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual
intercourse, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals,
sadomasochistic abuse or emphasizing the depiction of post-pubertal
human genitals; provided however, that works of art or of anthropological
significance shall not be deemed to be within the foregoing definition.
Explicit sexual material shall include undeveloped photographs, printing
plates, computer software and other latent representational objects or
material.
EXTENDED STAY FACILITY — A building which, in whole or in part, has a
main or accessory use and is kept, maintained, advertised or held out to the
public to be a place where living and sleeping accommodations are offered
for consideration to guests and having a common entrance or entrances.
The term "extended stay facility" shall include any building which, although
advertised as a "hotel" or "extended stay hotel", meets one (1) or more of
the following:
The two-family dwelling is located on a single platted lot of record and:
The individual dwelling units share a common firewall separating
the side-by-side units,
a.
The individual dwelling units are sold as condominium or town
house/villa units, and
b.
The remainder of the lot is set aside as common elements or
common ground.
c.
3.
Kitchen or cooking facilities are located in more than ten percent (10%)
of the rooms or units;
1.
Rates for housing are calculated or advertised on a weekly or monthly
basis; or
2.
Section
400.035
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.035
100:474
FACILITIES — A network or system, or any part thereof, used for providing
or delivering a service and consisting of one (1) or more lines, pipes,
irrigation systems, wires, cables, fibers, conduit facilities, cabinets, poles,
vaults, pedestals, boxes, appliances, antennas, transmitters, radios, towers,
gates, meters, appurtenances or other equipment; provided however, that
facilities shall not include individual service drops of fifty (50) feet or
less, temporary construction facilities, private sewer laterals, or similar
circumstances as may be determined by the Planning Director.
FACILITIES PERMIT — A permit granted by the City for placement of
facilities on private property.
FAMILY — One (1) or more persons who are related by blood, marriage,
or adoption, living together and occupying a single housekeeping unit with
single kitchen facilities, or a group of not more than five (5) living together
by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single
kitchen facilities, on a non-profit cost-sharing basis.
FLEA MARKET — A building or open area in which stalls or sales areas are
set aside and rented or otherwise provided, and which are intended for use
by various unrelated individuals to sell articles that are either homemade,
homegrown, old, obsolete, or antique and may include the selling of goods
at retail by businesses or individuals who are generally engaged in retail
trade.
FLOOD PLAIN — The area of land adjoining the channel of a river, stream,
watercourse, lake or similar body of water which has a one percent (1%)
chance to be inundated by a flood in any given year as defined by
FEMA.[Ord. No. 6421, 1-11-2018]
FLOOR AREA — For commercial business and industrial building or
buildings, containing mixed uses; the sum of the gross horizontal areas of
the several floors of the building measured from the exterior walls, but not
including:
FRONTAGE — The length of the property abutting on one side of a street
measured along the dividing line between the property and the street rightof-
way.
GARAGE, COMMUNITY — A building or portion thereof, other than a public
or repair garage, providing storage for motor vehicles but no other services,
Residents and/or guests are housed for more than thirty (30) days
within a one (1) year period of time.
3.
1. Attic space providing headroom of less than seven (7) feet;
2. Easement space not used for retailing;
Accessory water and cooling towers.
For residential buildings; the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a dwelling exclusive of garages, basements and open porches
measured from the external faces of the exterior walls.
3.
Section
400.035
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.035
100:475
such garage to be in lieu of private garages within a block or portion of
block.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or portion of a main building
used for storage of automobiles.
GARAGE, REPAIR — A building or portion thereof, designed or used for the
storage, sale, hiring, care or repair of motor vehicles and which is operated
for commercial purposes.
GARAGE SALES — All general sales, open to the public, conducted from or
on a residential premises in any residential zone district for the purpose of
disposing of personal property including, but not limited to, all sales entitled
"estate", "garage", "lawn", "yard", "attic", "porch", "room", "backyard",
"patio", "flea market" or "rummage sale".
GARAGE, STORAGE — A building or portion thereof, except those defined
as a private, a repair or a community garage providing storage for motor
vehicles with facilities for washing but no other services.
GARDEN APARTMENT BUILDING — A two (2) or three (3) story multifamily
apartment building usually of wood frame construction. The typical
garden apartment building is designed with apartment flats which extend
through the building without a central corridor. One-half (½) of the units
have ground level patios and the second-story units have balconies. In land
planning the trend is toward two-story walk up buildings at low density,
(typically fifteen (15) to eighteen (18) families per acre gross), with open
spaces for recreational purposes and to preserve the natural terrain and
trees. Frequently, a sloping site can be adapted to gain another story
without necessitating more than one (1) flight of stairs.
GREENBELT OR BUFFER STRIP — A strip of land located between
incompatible land uses which is subject to private use restrictions, or a
negative easement, or is dedicated to public use as open space, for the
purpose of protecting the built environment of a subdivision or to enhance
a street right-of-way, or both.
GROUP HOME — A form of residential occupancy, other than a family,
in which eight (8) or fewer unrelated mentally or physically handicapped
persons reside, and may include two (2) additional persons acting as
houseparents or guardians who need not be related to each other or to any
of the mentally or physically handicapped persons residing in the home.
HAZARDOUS PIPELINE — A pipeline:
HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES — The vertical distance from
the average ground level abutting a building or structure to the highest
point of the roof of a building or highest point of any permanent part of a
structure other than a building.
Designed for the transmission of a "hazardous liquid", as defined by
Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Section 195.2, with an
inside diameter of eight (8) inches or more, and
1.
2. Which is regulated by the United States Department of Transportation.
Section
400.035
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.035
100:476
HELIPAD OR HELISTOP — A facility, either at ground level or atop a
building, for the landing and takeoff of helicopters or other rotorcraft, which
does not include passenger or cargo facilities, hangars, storage, fueling,
service or similar facilities.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation carried on within a dwelling or
accessory building by members of the family occupying the dwelling and
no more than two (2) non-resident individuals, provided the residential
character of the building is maintained and the occupation is conducted
in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance nor manifest any
characteristic of a business in the ordinary meaning of the term nor infringe
upon the right of the neighboring residents to enjoy the peaceful occupancy
of their homes.
HOSPITAL — An institution whose primary function is providing in-patient
health services; medical or surgical care of the sick or injured; and
maintaining, as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities
as ambulance services, medical clinics, medical laboratories, out-patient
physician services, staff offices, training facilities, central service facilities,
as well as medical supplies sales and services. Such institutions may also
provide pharmaceutical sales, food and beverage sales for consumption onsite,
and gift shop and florist sales in support of their primary function.
HOTEL — A building which, in whole or in part, has a main or accessory use
and is kept, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place
where sleeping accommodations are offered for consideration to transient
guests and having a common entrance or entrances. The term "transient
guest" means persons who pay for and occupy a particular room or unit on a
nightly basis and who occupy the premises for no more than thirty (30) days
within a one (1) year period of time. A "hotel" shall not include any building
in which more than ten percent (10%) of the rooms or units contain kitchen
or cooking facilities; provided however, that hotels may include in rooms a
miniature refrigerator (commonly referred to as a "mini-bar"), microwave
ovens and automatic-drip coffee makers.
INDEPENDENT LIVING OR CONGREGATE LIVING RESIDENCE FACILITY
— A facility that provides residential accommodations for senior adults who
are in good health and do not require medical or skilled nursing. Residents
shall have individual dwelling units with living, sleeping, bathroom and
kitchen facilities. The facility may provide home health care or other
community based services on an individual basis and offer meals, linen and
housekeeping services.
INPATIENT CARE FACILITIES — The use of a site for the consultation,
diagnosis, therapeutic, preventative or corrective personal treatment by
doctors, dentists, medical or dental laboratories or similar practitioners of
medical and healing arts for humans, licensed for practice by the State on
an inpatient basis.
INSTITUTION — A building occupied by a non-profit corporation or a nonprofit
establishment.
Section
400.035
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.035
100:477
JUNK YARD — A parcel of land upon which the principal or accessory
use is the accumulation of used, discarded, or worn out materials, or
manufactured products, any of which may or may not be re-useable or
salable.
LAUNDROMAT — A business that provides washing, drying or ironing
machines and professional type cleaning and pressing equipment for hire to
be used by customers on the premises.
LIMITED IMPROVEMENT AREA — Includes an area that begins twenty-five
(25) feet of either side of any hazardous pipeline and extends to fifty (50)
feet from either side of any hazardous pipeline.
LIVE THEATRICAL PERFORMANCE — A play, skit, opera, ballet, concert,
comedy or musical drama.
LOADING SPACE — A space within the main building or on the same lot,
providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks, which space
shall have a minimum dimension of twelve by thirty-five (12 x 35) feet and a
vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet.
LONG TERM CARE OR SKILLED NURSING FACILITY — A building or
group of buildings which is licensed by the State of Missouri to provide
twenty-four (24) hour, intensive, skilled and supportive nursing care,
convalescent or chronic care under medical supervision to individuals who,
by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care
for themselves.
LOT — A measured portion of a parcel or a tract of land, set forth in a
Recorded Plat, recorded or proposed to be recorded, and intended as a unit
for transfer of ownership or for development.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their
intersection.
LOT COVERAGE — Lot coverage shall include the total area of all principal
and accessory buildings as measured along the outside wall at ground level
or above as viewed from above and included all projections other than open
porches, fire escapes, canopies or the first three (3) feet of a roof over-hang.
Roads, driveways, parking lots and swimming pools shall not be included in
the maximum lot coverage requirement. The percent of lot coverage shall
be computed as follows:
Percent of lot
coverage =
Square feet of ground coverage of all ground
coverage of all
principal and accessory buildings divided by
Total square feet of lot area.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance from the front lot line to the
rear line.[Ord. No. 6421, 1-11-2018]
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot whose side lines do not abut upon any street.
Section
400.035
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.035
100:478
LOT LINE, FRONT — The boundary between a lot and the street on which
it fronts.
LOT LINE, REAR — The boundary line or lines opposite and most distant
from the front street line; except that in the case of uncertainty the Building
Inspector shall determine the rear line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot boundary line not a front or rear line thereof; a
side line may be a party lot line, a line bordering on an alley or place or a
side street line.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
LOT, THROUGH — An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at
the front building line.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one (1) or more
sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in
width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is
six hundred (600) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained
therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets
all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and
with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification
required by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). For
mobile/manufactured homes built prior to June 15, 1976, a label certifying
compliance to the standard for mobile/manufactured homes, NFPA 501,
ANSI 119.1 in effect at the time of manufacture is required. For the purpose
of these provisions, a mobile/manufactured home shall be considered a
manufactured home.
MANUFACTURED HOME STAND — That part of an individual
manufactured home lot which has been reserved for the placement of a
manufactured home, appurtenant structures or additions.
MARIJUANA OR MARIHUANA — Cannabis indica, Cannabis sativa, and
Cannabis ruderalis, hybrids of such species, and any other strains
commonly understood within the scientific community to constitute
marijuana, as well as resin extracted from the plant and marijuana-infused
products. Marijuana or Marihuana does not include industrial hemp
containing a crop-wide average tetrahydrocannabinol concentration that
does not exceed three-tenths of one percent (3/10 of 1%) on a dry weight
basis, or commodities or products manufactured from industrial
hemp.[Ord. No. 6562, 3-28-2019]
MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCTS — Products that are infused with
marijuana or an extract thereof and are intended for use or consumption
other than by smoking, including, but not limited to, edible products,
ointments, tinctures and concentrates.[Ord. No. 6562, 3-28-2019]
Section
400.035
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.035
100:479
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY — A facility licensed by the
Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services to acquire, cultivate,
process, store, transport, and sell marijuana to a medical marijuana
dispensary facility, medical marijuana testing facility, or to a medical
marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility.[Ord. No. 6562,
3-28-2019]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY FACILITY — A facility licensed by
the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services to acquire, store,
sell, transport, and deliver marijuana, marijuana-infused products, and drug
paraphernalia used to administer marijuana to a qualifying patient, a
primary caregiver, another medical marijuana dispensary facility, a medical
marijuana testing facility, or a medical marijuana-infused products
manufacturing facility.[Ord. No. 6562, 3-28-2019]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — A facility certified by the
Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services to acquire, test, certify,
and transport marijuana.[Ord. No. 6562, 3-28-2019]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING
FACILITY — A facility licensed by the Missouri Department of Health and
Senior Services to acquire, store, manufacture, transport, and sell
marijuana-infused products to a medical marijuana dispensary facility, a
medical marijuana testing facility, or to another medical marijuana-infused
products manufacturing facility.[Ord. No. 6562, 3-28-2019]
MOBILE HOME — A detached single-family dwelling unit, in an approved
mobile home park, with all of the following characteristics:
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK/DEVELOPMENT — Any plot of
ground containing five (5) acres or more which is equipped as required
for support of mobile/manufactured homes and used or intended to be
used by one (1) or more occupied mobile/manufactured homes, but under
no circumstances shall the mobile/manufactured home spaces be sold or
offered for sale individually. The term "mobile/manufactured home park"
does not include sales lots on which unoccupied mobile/manufactured
homes, whether new or used, are parked for the purposes of storage,
inspection or sale.
Designed for long-term occupancy, containing sleeping
accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath, and kitchen
facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections provided for,
attachment to outside systems;
1.
2. Designed to be transported after fabrication on wheels or on a flatbed;
Delivered to a site where it is to be occupied as a complete dwelling,
including major appliances and furniture and ready for occupancy
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations,
location on foundation supports, connection to utilities, etc., and
3.
4. Designed to have a permanent foundation.
Section
400.035
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.035
100:480
MOBILE STRUCTURE — A self-contained unit designed to be transported
after fabrication on wheels or on a flatbed, delivered to a site with a
permanent foundation; ready for use except for minor unpacking and
assembly, location on foundation supports, connection to utilities, etc.
MODULAR HOME — A dwelling unit made of one (1) or (usually) more
modules built in a factory and erected on a foundation. The dwelling unit
adheres to the Building Code and is considered real property. These units
are not designed and/or constructed to be readily movable.
MOTEL — Shall be the same as "hotel".
NEGATIVE EASEMENT — A grant by the developer to the public, a
corporation, or person(s) for use of a recorded strip of land for open space
or other non-developed purposes.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — The construction after May 1, 2005, of a
structure intended for human occupancy. This Article shall not apply to any
building or structure to be located on any lot or within any development
which has received final approval of plats or site plans by either the City
Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission, as applicable, as of the
date of the adoption of this Article.
NON-ACCESS RESERVATION — A parcel or tract of subdivision land
withheld from development and subject to private use and access
restrictions for the purpose of protecting the environment of subdivision,
or to enhance a street right-of-way, or to improve traffic flow on a principal
street.
NON-CONFORMING USE, BUILDING OR YARD — A use, building or yard
existing legally at the time of the passage of this Chapter (October 16, 1984)
or any amendment thereto which does not, by reason of design, use, or
dimensions, conform, to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.
NUDE, NUDITY OR IN A STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human
male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or anal cleavage
with less than fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with
less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple or the showing of
the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
NURSING HOME — A residence or other place licensed by the State of
Missouri as a nursing home.
OBSCENE — Any material or performance if:
Applying contemporary community standards, its predominant appeal
is to prurient interest in sex;
1.
Taken as a whole with the average person applying contemporary
community standards, it depicts or describes sexual conduct in a
patently offensive way; and
2.
Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value.
3.
Section
400.035
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.035
100:481
OPEN SPACE — Land dedicated or reserved for use by the general public
or for use by residents of the subdivision, or land held out of development
and retained in its natural conditions, with or without public access. Open
space includes but is not limited to parks, parkways, playgrounds, school
sites, wildlife or plantlife preserves, and nature study areas.
PARCEL OR TRACT — A continuous area or acreage of land which can be
divided or subdivided as provided by this Chapter.
PARKING AREA — An open, unoccupied space used or required for use
for parking vehicles exclusively and in which no gasoline or vehicular
accessories are sold or no other business is conducted and no fees are
charged.
PARKING LOT — An open surfaced area used exclusively for the temporary
storage of motor vehicles and within which motor fuels and oils may be
sold and fees charged, but no vehicles may be equipped, repaired, rented or
sold.
PARKING SPACE — A surfaced area, enclosed in the main building or in
an accessory building or unenclosed, having an area of not less than one
hundred sixty-two (162) square feet, exclusive of driveways, permanently
reserved.
PAWNBROKER — Any person engaged in the business of lending money
on the security of pledged goods or engaged in the business of purchasing
tangible personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or
repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, limited liability corporation or
partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, organization,
corporation, or other entity, or any lawful successor thereto or transferee
thereof.
PERSONAL CARE SERVICES — Establishments engaged in providing
individual services related to personal needs. This includes barbershops,
beauty shops, massage therapy licensed by the State of Missouri, beauty
and health spas, and other similar establishments.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Property which is owned, utilized and maintained
by an individual or members of his/her residence and acquired in the
normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include
merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
PET GROOMING FACILITY — An establishment engaged in the business of
providing hygienic care to animals (i.e. shampooing, brushing, trimming,
etc.). A pet grooming facility may have supervised outside activities, which
are defined as having a single animal under the physical control of an
individual. Pet boarding/kennels are prohibited without the approval of a
conditional use permit.
PIPELINE COMPANY — A person engaged in or organized for the purpose
of owning, operating or controlling a hazardous pipeline.
Section
400.035
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.035
100:482
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — A specific parcel of land or several
contiguous parcels of land under common ownership or control which, when
designed in accordance with this Article and approved by the City Council,
allow for the development of residential, commercial, office, high-tech or
industrial land by means of an alternate, more flexible method than would
be permitted utilizing the City's conventional Zoning Code and Subdivision
and Land Development Code regulations. A proposed Planned Development
will only be reviewed if it is determined to meet the qualifying objectives
to the satisfaction of the City Council of one (1) of the three (3) types of
permitted Planned Developments outlined below. Under no circumstances
will a Planned Development be permitted when the same development
objectives can be accomplished utilizing the City's conventional Zoning
Code and Subdivision and Land Development Code regulations.
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION — The officially appointed
Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of O'Fallon; the term may be
abbreviated in this Chapter as the "Commission".
PLANNING DIRECTOR — The City's Planning Director or such other person
designated to administer and enforce this Chapter.
PLAT — A map or chart of a tract of land or a subdivision of land.
PRIVATE PRIMARY EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES — The use of a site for a
private or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary school
level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the
public schools of the State of Missouri.
PRIVATE SECONDARY EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES — The use of a site for a
private or parochial school offering instruction at the junior and senior high
school levels in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in
the public schools of the State of Missouri.
PUBLIC PRIMARY EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES — The use of a site for
a public school offering instruction at the elementary school level in the
branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools
of the State of Missouri.
PUBLIC SECONDARY EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES — The use of a site for a
public school offering instruction at the junior and senior high school levels
in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public
schools of the State of Missouri.
PUBLIC USE AREAS — Public parks, playgrounds, recreational areas,
designated scenic or historic sites; school sites or sites for other public
buildings; and other areas dedicated to public use or enjoyment.
PUBLICLY DISPLAY — Exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting or in any
fashion displaying in any location within the interior or exterior of sexuallyoriented
business an explicit sexual material, obscene item or item
portraying nudity, semi-nudity or specified sexual activities in such a
manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character
distinguished by normal unaided vision from adjacent businesses, the
Section
400.035
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.035
100:483
property of others or when viewing it from a public or private street,
highway, sidewalk or multi-purpose trail.
RESTRICTED PIPELINE AREA — Includes an area within twenty-five (25)
feet of either side of any hazardous pipeline.
REVERSE FRONTAGE — When a subdivision lot occurs between two (2)
non-intersecting streets, one (1) of which is a parkway, thoroughfare, or
collector and the other is a minor residential street, the lot will front on
the minor residential street and a non-access reservation will be provided
buffering the rear of the lot from the traffic artery.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land opened, reserved or dedicated for a street,
sewer, water, walk, drainage course or other public purpose.
SADOMASOCHISTIC PRACTICES — Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person clothed, nude or in a state of semi-nudity for the purpose of sexual
arousal or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one clothed or nude for the purpose of sexual
arousal.
SCREEN PLANTING — A hedge of closely spaced shrubs with dense foliage
in all seasons that effectively blocks view. Among the species that include
varieties that would provide the necessary conformation are: American
Holly, Chinese Juniper, Rocky Mountain Juniper, Easter.
SEMI-NUDE, SEMI-NUDITY or IN A STATE OF SEMI-NUDITY — A state of
dress in which opaque clothing fails to cover the genitals, anus, anal cleft
or cleavage, pubic area, vulva, the entire nipple and areola of the female
breast and the entire front of the female breast. Semi-nudity shall not
include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited
by wearing apparel provided the areola and the front of the breast are not
exposed in whole or part.[Ord. No. 6292 §1, 1-12-2017]
SENIOR COMMUNITY — A development of land as a unified, self contained,
residential community constructed expressly for use and residency by
persons who have achieved a minimum age of fifty-five (55) years or older.
A senior community shall be permitted only within a Senior Community
Overlay District and only upon the granting of a conditional use permit by
the City Council.
SENIOR COMMUNITY CENTER OR COMMUNITY BUILDING(S) — A
building or group of buildings, erected primarily for the use of the residents
of a senior community and their guests, that provides educational,
recreational or social services that may include, but are not limited to,
a library, place of worship, game room, entertainment room, kitchen,
cafeteria or dining room, pool, toilet facilities and similar facilities.
SENIOR COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of
land within a senior community that results in the creation of lots to serve
as home sites upon which individual single- family dwellings are to be
constructed for residency by seniors. The individual single-family dwellings
may be detached homes, attached townhouses or other building type(s)
Section
400.035
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.035
100:484
approved by the City Council that is/are designed for occupancy by an
individual family.
SERVICE — Providing or delivering an economic good or an article of
commerce including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable television,
Internet, open video systems, video services, alarm systems, steam,
electricity, water, telegraph, data transmission, petroleum pipelines,
sanitary or stormwater, sewerage or any similar or related service, to one
(1) or more persons located within or outside of the City using facilities
located within the City.
SEX SHOP — Any business, commercial establishment or premises in which
ten percent (10%) or more of its sales floor area is devoted to the sale, rental
or lease of sexually-oriented toys or novelties designed for use in connection
with specified sexual activities or sadomasochistic practices. Said sex shop
may not publicly display any sexually-oriented toys or novelties designed
for use in connection with specified sexual activities or other obscene or
explicit sexual material. With the exception of individuals on the premises
for repair or maintenance of the premises, equipment on the premises or
for the delivery of goods to the premises, all employees, guests, customers,
patrons or members must be age twenty-one (21) or older.
SEXUAL MATERIAL — Anything in print or writing, or any sexual picture,
drawing, photograph, motion picture film, videotape or videotape
production, or pictorial representation, or any sexual recording or
transcription, or any sexual mechanical, chemical or electrical
reproduction, or anything sexual which is or may be used as a means of
communication. Sexual material includes undeveloped sexual photographs,
printing plates and other latent representational objects.
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS — Any adult cabaret, nightclub, tavern,
bar, restaurant, café or similar commercial establishment that regularly,
commonly, habitually or consistently features or otherwise offers to the
public, customers, patrons or members any live exhibition, live theatrical
performance or dance by persons whose exhibition, performance or dance
includes any of the following:
1. Persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity, and
Persons who engage in erotic dancing or performances that are
intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or
customers.
2.
Section
400.035
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.035
100:485
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED TOYS OR NOVELTIES — Instruments, devices or
paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs
or female breasts or designed or marked primarily for use to stimulate
human genital organs. Leather goods marketed or presented in a context
to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices shall be considered
sexually-oriented toys or novelties.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of retail stores, planned and developed for
the site upon which they are built and owned and managed as a unit with
off-street parking provided on the property.
SITE PLAN — A plan, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a
parcel of land as required by the regulations involved. It includes lot lines,
streets, building sites, reserved open space, buildings, major landscape
features—both natural and manmade—and, depending on requirements, the
locations of proposed utility lines.
Any sex shop, adult video arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store,
adult hotel/motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater or escort
agency shall also be considered a sexually-oriented business. Any
business, commercial establishment or premises where ten percent
(10%) or more of its sales floor area publicly displays explicit sexual
material or services for sale, rental or viewing shall also be considered
a sexually-oriented business. No building, premises, structure or other
facility that contains any of the above-listed sexually-oriented
businesses shall contain any other type of the above-listed sexuallyoriented
businesses. All employees, performers, guests, customers,
patrons or members of any sexually-oriented business shall be
prohibited from knowingly and intentionally appearing in a state of
nudity or depicting, simulating or performing specified sexual
activities. Any sexually-oriented business shall be prohibited from
publicly displaying exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting or in any
fashion displaying in any location within the interior or exterior of said
sexually-oriented business any explicit sexual material, obscene item
or item portraying nudity, semi-nudity or specified sexual activities in
such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character
distinguished by normal unaided vision from adjacent businesses, the
property of others or when viewing it from a public or private street,
highway, sidewalk or multi-purpose trail. With the exception of
individuals on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises,
equipment on the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises,
all employees, guests, customers, patrons or members must be age
twenty-one (21) or older. A sexually-oriented business shall only be
permitted if a conditional use permit is granted by the City Council
per the requirements of Article VII of the Zoning Code. The review
of a conditional use permit for a proposed sexually-oriented business
shall follow the same procedure as the review of any other proposed
use within the City requiring a conditional use permit and shall not be
unduly delayed under any circumstance.
Section
400.035
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.035
100:486
SMALL LOAN ESTABLISHMENT — A business engaged in providing small
or short-term loans to the public including, but not limited to, small loan
companies operating pursuant to Sections 367.100 through 367.215,
RSMo.; payday lenders operating pursuant to Sections 408.500 through
408.506, RSMo.; consumer installment lenders operating pursuant to
Section 408.510, RSMo.; title lenders operating pursuant to Sections
367.500 through 367.533, RSMo., and any business which offers these or
substantially similar services. Small loan establishments shall not include:
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, fondling or other erotic touching of nude human genitals, pubic
regions, buttocks or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered.
STORY — That part of a building included between the surface of one (1)
floor and the surface of the floor next above or, if there be no floor above,
that part of the building which is between the surface of a floor and the
ceiling next above. A top story attic is a half story when the main line of the
eaves is not above the middle of the interior height of such story. The first
(1st) story is a half story when between fifty percent (50%) and seventy-five
percent (75%) of the area of its exterior walls are exposed to outside light
and air entirely above grade and which exterior walls contain windows or
doors permitting the entrance of daylight and outside air.
STREET — A general term denoting a public or private thoroughfare which
affords the principal means of access to abutting property. The term
includes all facilities which normally are found within the right-of-way;
it shall also include such other designations as highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, court, or
other such terms but shall not include pedestrian way or alley.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members
of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or the
addition of new electrical circuits or plumbing fixtures to the building.
STRUCTURE — Any improvement on land composed of manmade materials.
SUBDIVIDER — The owner, agent or person having control of such land
as the term is used in this Chapter. "Subdivision" shall mean the division
of land into two (2) or more parts including the resubdivision of a lot
or parcel. Any sale or rental of a division of land by metes and bounds
or lot description shall constitute a subdivision of land and shall require
compliance with this Chapter unless it is a separate parcel of record at the
time of the effective date of this Chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The partitioning of a parcel or tract of land by an owner or
developer into two (2) or more lots of any size for the purpose of sale, lease,
A State or Federally chartered bank, savings association or credit
union; or
1.
Establishments selling consumer goods, including consumables, where
the cashing of checks or money orders is clearly incidental to the main
purpose of the business.
2.
Section
400.035
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.035
100:487
or development, whether immediate or future; included are all changes in
street lines, dedication or platting of streets, and changes in lot lines.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
"start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT[Ord. No. 6531,
12-13-2018] —
TAVERN — Any business establishment that derives more than fifty percent
(50%) of its gross revenue from liquor sales, including package liquor sales.
TOWN HOUSE/VILLA — A residential building:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
1.
Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
2.
An establishment which offers and performs:
The placement of designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols, or other
marks upon or under the skin of any person with ink or any other
substance, resulting in the permanent coloration, markings or body
art of the skin, by the aid of needles or any other instrument
designed to touch or puncture the skin; and
a.
The penetration of the skin to make a hole, mark, or scar, generally
permanent in nature, not including the use of a mechanized,
presterilized ear piercing system that penetrates the outer
perimeter or lobe of the ear or both.
b.
1.
An establishment which limits its practice to cosmetic tattooing, as
defined in this Code, shall not be considered a tattoo and body piercing
establishment.
2.
Containing between two (2) and eight (8) dwelling units constructed
side-by-side,
1.
2. Constructed of one (1), two (2) or three (3) stories in height,
3. In which each dwelling unit is separated by common firewall(s),
Section
400.035
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.035
100:488
TRANSITION — A strip of land located between incompatible land uses
which is subject to private use restrictions, or a negative easement, or is
dedicated to public uses as open space, for the purpose of protecting the
built environment of a development or to enhance a street right-of-way, or
both.
TRAVEL TRAILERS — Including automobile tent trailers, recreational
vehicles, or house cars, designed to provide temporary mobile housing for
highway and recreational travelers. Such use shall be considered equivalent
to a hotel, tourist court or motel for zoning purposes.
USE — The purpose or activity for which a piece of land or its buildings is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE REQUIRING EVACUATION ASSISTANCE — Includes the following
uses:
4. In which each dwelling unit has its own entrance/exit, and
Each dwelling unit is sold separately from the others.
Depending upon the zoning district in which it is located, a town
house/villa can either be:
1. Platted as separate lots of record whereby the common firewall
separating the dwelling units form the side lot line(s), or
2. Located on a single platted lot of record whereby the individual
dwelling units are sold as condominium or town house/villa units
and the remainder of the lot is set aside as common elements or
common ground.
5.
1. Day care center;
2. Detention facilities;
3. Hospital;
4. Independent living or congregate living residence facility;
Inpatient care facilities exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet of
gross floor area;
5.
6. Nursing home;
7. Private primary educational facilities;
8. Private secondary educational facilities;
9. Public primary educational facilities;
10. Public secondary educational facilities;
11. Senior community;
12. Senior community center or community buildings;
Section
400.035
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.035
100:489
VARIANCE — A modification of the specific requirements of this Chapter
granted by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the terms of this
Chapter for the purpose of assuring that no property because of special
circumstances applicable to it shall be deprived of privileges commonly
enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and Zoning District. Such
modifications shall not include authorizing a use not among the uses
specified by this Chapter as permitted in the district in which such property
is located.
YARD — An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot
lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the
ground upward, except as otherwise provided. In measuring a yard for the
purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or
the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line
and the building shall be used. Where lots abut a street, all yards abutting
said street shall be measured from the street right-of-way.
YARD, FRONT — A yard across the full width of the lot extending from the
front line of the main building to the front line of the lot.
YARD, REAR — A yard between the rear lot line and the rear line of the main
building and the side lot lines.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the main building and the adjacent side line
of the lot, and extending entirely from a front yard to the rear yard.
ZERO LOT LINE DWELLING UNIT — A development approach in which a
freestanding building is sited on one (1) or more lot lines with no yard on the
zero (0) lot line side in order to increase the amount of usable open space on
the remaining area of the lot: zero (0) lot line dwellings are designed with
no windows facing the zero (0) lot line side and are internally oriented to an
enclosed, private courtyard or patio. Typically the zero (0) lot line unit is a
one (1) story, L-shaped single- family house designed as a two (2), three (3)
or four (4) bedroom unit on lots eighty (80) to one hundred (100) feet deep
by forty (40), fifty (50), or sixty (60) feet wide, at density of five (5) to seven
(7) families per gross acre. The zero (0) lot line unit is usually designed in
group or cluster arrangements and the land saved from conventional size
house lots are used as common open space for recreation or to preserve
natural features of the site.
ZONING CODE — The duly approved, enacted, and amended ordinance
which controls and regulates zoning in the City of O'Fallon.
13. Senior community residential subdivision.
Section
400.035
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.035
100:490
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
Section 400.040. Establishment of Districts. [R.O. 2007 §400.040;
Ord. No. 1161 §3.01, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 1361 §1, 8-11-1986]
The City is hereby divided into the following Zoning Districts as shown on
the Official Zoning Map, which together with all explanatory matter shown
thereon is hereby adopted by reference and declared part of this Chapter.
"R-1" Single-Family Residential District
"R-1A" Single-Family Suburban Residential District
"R-1B" Single-Family Estates Residential District
"R-2" Two-Family Residential District
"R-3" Garden Apartment Dwelling District
"R-4" Apartment House District
"R-5" Mobile Home Park District
"C-0" Office District
"C-1" Restricted Business District
"C-2" General Business District
"C-3" Highway Commercial District
"I-1" Light Industrial District
"I-2" Heavy Industrial District
"AG" Agricultural District
"P-R" Park Recreation District
"PD" Planned Development
"TGD" Transitional Growth District—St. Paul
"HTCD" High Tech Corridor District
Section 400.045. Changes To Official Zoning Map. [R.O. 2007
§400.045; Ord. No. 1161 §3.02, 10-16-1984]
If, in accordance with procedures of this Chapter and of Chapter 89, RSMo.,
as amended, a change is made in a Zoning District boundary, such change
shall be made by the City Administrator or his/her designee promptly after
the ordinance authorizing such change shall have been adopted by the City
Council and published, with an entry on the Official Zoning Map.
Section 400.050. Authority of Official Zoning Map. [R.O. 2007
§400.050; Ord. No. 1161 §3.03, 10-16-1984]
The Official Zoning Map shall be located in City Hall and shall be available
to public inspection, and shall be with the revised Code the final authority
Section
400.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:491
as to the current zoning status of any land, parcel, lot, district, use, building,
or structure in the City.
Section 400.055. Replacement of The Official Zoning Map. [R.O.
2007 §400.055; Ord. No. 1161 §3.04, 10-16-1984]
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed,
lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes
made thereto, the City Council may by ordinance adopt a new Official
Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new
Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions
on the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the
effect of amending the Zoning Code or the prior Official Zoning Map.
The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bear the following words: "This is to
certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in the Zoning Code,
adopted on October 1984; this Map replaces and supersedes the previous
Official Zoning Map." Unless the prior official Zoning Map has been lost, or
has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof
remaining shall be preserved together with all available records pertaining
to its adoption or amendment.
Section 400.060. Rules For Interpretation. [R.O. 2007 §400.060;
Ord. No. 1161 §3.05, 10-16-1984]
A. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of Zoning Districts as
shown on the Official Zoning Map the following rules for interpretation
shall apply:
1. A boundary indicated as approximately following the centerline of a
highway, street, alley or easement shall be construed as following
such centerline.
2. A boundary indicated as approximately following a recorded lot line
or the line bounding a parcel shall be construed as following such
line.
3. A boundary indicated as approximately following the corporate
boundary line of a City, Village, or Township shall be construed as
following such line.
4. A boundary indicated as following a railroad line shall be construed
as being midway between the main tracks.
5. A boundary indicated as following a shoreline shall be construed as
following such shoreline, and in the event of change in a shoreline
shall be construed as following the actual shoreline.
6. A boundary indicated as following the centerline of a stream, river,
canal, lake, or other body of water shall be construed as following
such centerline.
Section
400.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.060
100:492
Section 400.065. Application of Regulations. [R.O. 2007 §400.065;
Ord. No. 1161 §3.06, 10-16-1984]
The regulations established by this Chapter within each Zoning District
shall be minimum regulations for promoting and protecting the public
health, safety, and general welfare and shall be uniform for each class
of land or building, dwellings and structures throughout each district.
Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of this Chapter, the Board of Adjustment shall
have power in passing upon appeals to vary or modify any rules, regulations
or provisions of this Chapter so long as the intent and purposes of this
Chapter shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice
done.
Section 400.070. Scope of Provisions. [R.O. 2007 §400.070; Ord. No.
1161 §3.07, 10-16-1984]
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all uses, structures,
improvements, and alterations approved by the City after enactment of this
Chapter.
Section 400.075. Saving Clause. [R.O. 2007 §400.075; Ord. No. 1161
§3.08, 10-16-1984]
All rights or remedies of the City are expressly saved as to any and all
violations of any previous Zoning Code or amendments thereto, of the City
and that have accrued at the time of the effective date of this Chapter
(October 16, 1984) and such accrued violation of previous Zoning Codes
which would otherwise become non-conforming uses under this Article,
shall be considered as violations of this Chapter in the same manner that
they were violations of prior Zoning Codes of the City.
7. A distance not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map
shall be determined by the scale of the map.
8. Where a physical or cultural feature existing on the ground is at
variance with that shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in any
other circumstances not covered by Subsections (1 — 7) above, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall interpret the Zoning
District boundary. [Ord. No. 6171 §1, 1-14-2016]
9. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which is in single
ownership at the time of adoption of this Chapter, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may permit as a conditional use, the extension
of the regulations for either portion of the lot to the nearest lot line,
but not to exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the district line into the
remaining portion of the lot. [Ord. No. 6171 §1, 1-14-2016]
Section
400.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.075
100:493

ARTICLE IV
District Regulations
Section 400.080. "R-1" Single-Family Residential District. [R.O.
2007 §400.080; Ord. No. 1161 Art. 4, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 1335 §1,
6-5-1986; Ord. No. 1372 §1, 9-4-1986; Ord. No. 4994 §1, 5-3-2006;
Ord. No. 6291 §1, 1-12-2017]
A. Purpose. This District is composed of those areas of the City whose
principal use is and ought to be single-family dwellings on moderate to
small sized lots. The regulations of this District are designed to create
and preserve a predominately urban character as evidenced by lot
sizes, and street and drainage requirements. In addition to the dwelling
permitted in this District, certain compatible recreational and public
uses are conditionally allowed and strictly regulated to ensure harmony
with the principal use of this District.
B. Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses is set out in Appendix "A"
of this Title.
C. Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses is set out in Appendix
"A" of this Title.
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply:
1. Lot area.
a. Single-family dwellings shall be located on lots containing an
area ranging from ten thousand (10,000) square feet to twentyone
thousand, nine hundred ninety-nine (21,999) square feet.
b. For uses other than dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to
provide the yard area required by this District and the offstreet
parking required by Article XII.
c. Where a use is not connected to a public sewer, the lot area
shall be increased to the area determined as adequate by the
City Engineer to meet current health standards, but in no case
shall be smaller than three (3) acres in size, and shall require
the review and approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
2. Lot width and depth. The following minimum dimensions must be
provided:
Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Depth
(feet)
Minimum Lot Width
(feet) at the Building
Line
10,000—11,999 100 80
12,000—14,999 120 85
Section
400.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.080
100:495
Section 400.085. "R-1A" Single-Family Suburban Residential
District. [R.O. 2007 §400.085; Ord. No. 1161 Art. 5, 10-16-1984]
Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Depth
(feet)
Minimum Lot Width
(feet) at the Building
Line
15,000—21,999 120 100
Where a lot fronts a cul-de-sac a thirty-five (35) foot width
at the street right-of-way line is required.
3. Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed thirtyfive
percent (35%).
4. Yard requirements.
a. Front yard. Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Side yards. Not less than six (6) feet on each side of the
dwelling.
c. Rear yard. Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
5. Height requirements.
a. For buildings and structures. No building or structure shall
exceed a height of two and one-half (2½) stories, or thirty-five
(35) feet.
b. For accessory buildings. No detached accessory building shall
be higher than twenty-five (25) feet, nor higher than the main
building. (See Article VI, Supplementary District Regulations
for additional regulations for accessory buildings.)
6. Off-street parking. Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each single-family dwelling (See Article XII for
additional parking requirements.).
7. Landscaping regulations. See Chapter 402 of this Code.75
A. Purpose. This District is composed of those areas of the City whose
principal use is and ought to be single-family residences on medium to
large-sized lots. These Regulations are designed to preserve the open
suburban character of areas outlying the center of the City. In addition
to the dwelling permitted in this District, there are certain recreational
and public uses conditionally allowed and strictly regulated to ensure
harmony with the principal use of this District.
75.The reference herein to "Article X" was changed to "Chapter 402 of this Code", since ord.
no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Article X and enacted Chapter 402 as it's
replacement.
Section
400.080
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.085
100:496
B. Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses is set out in Appendix "A"
of this Title.
C. Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses is set out in Appendix
"A" of this Title.
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply:
1. Lot area.
a. Single-family dwellings shall provide a minimum lot area of
twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet.
b. For uses other than dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to
provide the yard areas required by this District and off-street
parking as required by Article XII.
c. Where a use is not connected to a public sewer, the lot shall be
increased to the area as determined as adequate by the City
Engineer to meet current health standards, but in no case shall
it be smaller than three (3) acres in size, and shall require the
review and approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Lot width and depth. The following minimum dimensions must be
provided:
Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot Depth
(feet)
Minimum Lot Width
(feet) at the
Building Line
22,000—32,999 180 110
33,000 and larger 200 125
3. Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage by buildings or structures
shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area.
4. Yard requirements.
a. Front yard. Not less than forty (40) feet.
b. Side yard. Not less than twelve (12) feet.
c. Rear yard. Not less than forty (40) feet.
5. Height.
a. For buildings and structures. No building or structure shall
exceed a height of two and one-half (2½) stories, or thirty-five
(35) feet.
b. For detached accessory buildings. No detached accessory
building shall exceed a height of twenty-five (25) feet, nor
Section
400.085
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.085
100:497
Section 400.090. "R-1B" Single-Family Estates Residential District.
[R.O. 2007 §400.090; Ord. No. 1161 Art. 5A, 10-16-1984; Ord. No.
1678 §1, 3-3-1989; Ord. No. 5883 §1, 5-24-2013]
higher than the main building. (See Article VI for additional
regulations for accessory buildings).
6. Off-street parking. Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each single-family dwelling (See Article XII for
additional parking requirements).
7. Landscaping regulations. See Chapter 402 of this Code.76
A. Purpose. This District is composed of those areas of the City whose
principal use is and ought to be single-family residences on large-sized
lots. These Regulations are designed to preserve the open estate
character of areas outlying the center of the City.
B. Permitted Uses. The only permitted use in this District is single-family
residences.
C. Conditional Uses. None.
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply:
1. Lot area.
a. Single-family dwellings shall provide a minimum lot area of five
(5) acres.
2. Lot width and depth. The following minimum dimensions must be
provided.
Lot Area
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum Lot Depth (feet)
at the Building Line
5 acres 200 150
3. Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage by structures shall not
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area.
4. Yard requirements.
a. Front yard. Not less than forty (40) feet.
b. Side yard. Not less than twenty (20) feet.
c. Rear yard. Not less than forty (40) feet.
76.The reference herein to "Article X" was changed to "Chapter 402 of this Code", since ord.
no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Article X and enacted Chapter 402 as it's
replacement.
Section
400.085
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.090
100:498
Section 400.095. "R-2" Two-Family Residential District. [R.O. 2007
§400.095; Ord. No. 1161 Art. 6, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 5083 §3,
10-12-2006]
5. Height.
a. For buildings and structures. No building or structure shall
exceed a height of two and one-half (2½) stories, or thirty-five
(35) feet.
b. For detached accessory buildings. No detached accessory
building shall exceed a height of twenty-five (25) feet, nor
higher than the main building. (See Article VI for additional
regulations for Accessory Buildings).
6. Off-street parking. Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each single-family dwelling (See Article XII for
additional parking requirements).
7. Landscaping requirements. See Chapter 402 of this Code.77
8. Utilities. The lots on these developments may be allowed to use
private septic systems and private wells in conformance with
current adopted building codes.
9. Streets. Minimum requirement of three (3) inch asphalt over six (6)
inch rock base or five (5) inches of concrete.
10. Other. The following requirements will not be applicable to the
Estates Residential District,
a. Sidewalks.
b. Stormwater detention facilities.
A. Purpose. This zoning district is intended for areas of the City which are
suitable for two (2) families living independently of each other in a
single building (two-family dwelling). This zoning district is intended to
be utilized in:
1. Areas of the City that consist primarily of single-family detached
homes that would not be negatively impacted by the two-family
dwellings,
2. Areas of the City that consist primarily of town houses and villas,
and
3. Areas of the City that consist of a mix of single-family detached
homes, town houses and villas. The two-family dwelling shall be
designed in accordance with one (1) of the following:
77.The reference herein to "Article X" was changed to "Chapter 402 of this Code", since ord.
no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Article X and enacted Chapter 402 as it's
replacement.
Section
400.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.095
100:499
a. The two-family dwelling is located on a single platted lot of
record that does not provide for the sale of the individual
dwelling units. The individual dwelling units may be located
side-by-side or with one (1) dwelling unit located above the
other dwelling unit.
b. The two-family dwelling is located on two (2) separately platted
lots of record and the interior side lot line (party lot line) runs
coincident with the common firewall separating the side-byside
units.
c. The two-family dwelling is located on a single platted lot of
record and:
(1) The individual dwelling units share a common firewall
separating the side-by-side units,
(2) The individual dwelling units are sold as condominium or
town house/villa units, and
(3) The remainder of the lot is set aside as common elements
or common ground.
B. Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses is established in Appendix
A of Title IV.
C. Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses is established in
Appendix A of Title IV.
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply:
1. Single-family detached. The regulations for the "R-1" Single-Family
Residential District established per Section 400.080 of the Zoning
Code shall apply.
2. Two-family dwelling (located on a single platted lot of record that
does not provide for the sale of the individual dwelling units). The
regulations for the "R-1" Single-Family Residential District
established per Section 400.080 of the Zoning Code shall apply
except for the following:
a. Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not
exceed forty-five percent (45%).
b. Rear yard. Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
3. Two-family dwelling (located on two (2) separately platted lots of
record and the interior side lot line runs coincident with the
common firewall separating the side-by-side units). The regulations
for the "R-1" Single-Family Residential District established per
Section 400.080 of the Zoning Code shall apply, except for the
following:
Section
400.095
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.095
100:500
Section 400.100. "R-3" Garden Apartment District. [R.O. 2007
§400.100; Ord. No. 1161 Art. 7, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 3101 §2,
a. Minimum lot area. Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
b. Minimum lot width (measured at the building line). Forty (40)
feet.
c. Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not
exceed fifty percent (50%).
d. Side yards. Not less than six (6) feet on each side of the
exterior side lot line. Not applicable to the interior side lot line
(party lot line).
e. Rear yard. Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
f. Allowance for single-family detached dwellings. Up to five
percent (5%) of the total number of dwelling units may consist
of single-family detached units on separately platted lots of
record. Said lots shall have a minimum lot width (measured at
the building line) of forty-six (46) feet.
4. Two-family dwelling (located on a single platted lot of record and:
a. The individual dwelling units share a common firewall
separating the side-by-side units,
b. The individual dwelling units are sold as condominium or town
house/villa units, and
c. The remainder of the lot is set aside as common elements or
common ground).
The regulations for the "R-1" Single-Family Residential
District established per Section 400.080 of the Zoning
Code shall apply, except for the following:
a. Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage
shall not exceed forty-five percent (45%).
b. Rear yard. Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
c. Allowance for single-family detached dwellings. Up
to five percent (5%) of the total number of dwelling
units may consist of single-family detached units on
separately platted lots of record with the individual
dwelling unit sold as a condominium or town house/
villa unit with the remainder of the lot set aside
as common elements or common ground. Said lots
shall have a minimum lot area of five thousand
(5,000) square feet and shall have a minimum lot
width (measured at the building line) of forty-six
(46) feet.
Section
400.095
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.100
100:501
2-15-1994; Ord. No. 4994 §2, 5-3-2006; Ord. No. 5083 §§4—8,
10-12-2006]
A. Purpose. This District is composed of those areas of the City whose
principle use is or ought to be multiple-family dwellings at a low to
moderate density. The regulations of this District are designed to
permit a low density of population and a moderate intensity of land use
in those areas which are served by a central water supply system and a
central sanitary sewerage system, and which abut or are adjacent to
such other uses, buildings, structures, or amenities which support,
complement, or serve such a density or intensity. In addition to the
dwellings permitted in this Zoning District, there are permitted certain
residential and public uses which have been strictly regulated to make
them compatible with the principle use of this District.
B. Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses is set out in Appendix "A"
of this Title.
C. Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses is set out in Appendix
"A" of this Title.
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply in all "R-3 Garden Apartment Districts:
1. Site area. Any site zoned "R-3" Garden Apartment District shall
have a minimum area of not less than one (1) acre unless the
project abuts an existing multi-family zone.
2. Minimum lot area.
a. Single-family dwelling. Seven thousand five hundred (7,500)
square feet.
b. Two-family dwelling.
(1) Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet for a twofamily
dwelling located on a single platted lot of record
that does not provide for the sale of the individual dwelling
units.
(2) Five thousand (5,000) square feet for a two-family
dwelling located on two (2) separately platted lots of
record and the interior side lot line (party lot line) runs
coincident with the common firewall separating the sideby-
side units. NOTE: Up to five percent (5%) of the total
number of dwelling units may consist of single-family
detached units on separately platted minimum five
thousand (5,000) square foot lots of record.
(3) Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet for a twofamily
dwelling located on a single platted lot of record
and:
Section
400.100
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.100
100:502
(a) The individual dwelling units share a common firewall
separating the side-by-side units,
(b) The individual dwelling units are sold as condominium
or town house/villa units, and
(c) The remainder of the lot is set aside as common
elements or common ground. NOTE: Up to five
percent (5%) of the total number of dwelling units may
consist of single-family detached units on separately
platted lots of record with the individual dwelling unit
sold as a condominium or town house/villa unit with
the remainder of the lot set aside as common elements
or common ground. Said lots shall have a minimum lot
area of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
c. Multi-family dwelling (buildings of two and one-half (2½)
stories or less). The total number of units per acre shall not
exceed ten (10). [Ord. No. 6452, 3-22-2018]
For non-residential permitted and conditionally
permitted uses in this zoning district per the allowances
of Appendix A, the minimum lot area shall be adequate,
as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
to provide the required yard requirements of this
zoning district and the required off-street parking per
Article XII of the Zoning Code.
3. Minimum lot width. (Measured at the building line.)
a. Single-family dwelling. Seventy (70) feet.
b. Two-family dwelling. Per the requirements of Section
400.095(D) of the Zoning Code.
c. Multi-family dwelling (buildings of two and one-half (2½)
stories or less). Seventy (70) feet.
For non-residential permitted and conditionally
permitted uses in this zoning district per the
allowances of Appendix A, the minimum lot width shall
be adequate, as determined by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, to provide the required yard
requirements of this zoning district and the required
off-street parking per Article XII of the Zoning Code.
4. Maximum lot coverage.
a. Single-family dwelling. Thirty-five percent (35%).
b. Two-family dwelling. Per the requirements of Section
400.095(D) of the Zoning Code.
Section
400.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.100
100:503
c. Multi-family dwelling (buildings of two and one-half (2½)
stories or less). Forty percent (40%).
5. Yard requirements.
a. Single-family dwelling. Per the requirements of Section
400.080(D)(4) of the Zoning Code.
b. Two-family dwelling. Per the requirements of Section
400.095(D) of the Zoning Code.
c. Multi-family dwelling (buildings of two and one-half (2½)
stories or less).
(1) Front yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
(2) Side yards. Not less than twenty (20) feet, except in the
case of a corner lot where the side yard on the road or
street side shall not be less than thirty (30) feet.
(3) Rear yard. Not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
(4) Accessory structures shall meet the same yard
requirements.
(5) The above requirements shall apply to every lot, building
or structure.
6. Height requirements.
a. No building or structure shall exceed two and one-half (2½)
stories above finished grade or forty-five (45) feet (whichever is
lesser) except as provided in Article VI.
b. Buildings containing three (3) stories may be occupied for
residential purposes provided that the main entry to such
buildings shall be located at mid level so that no occupant shall
be required to traverse more than one (1) story of stairs from
the main building entrance to the highest or lowest occupied
story.
7. Distance between grouped buildings (multi-family dwellings). In
addition to the yard requirements for multi-family dwellings listed
in 400.100(D)(5) of this Section, the following minimum distances
shall be required between buildings containing multi-family
dwellings:
a. Front to front. Fifty (50) feet.
b. Front to back. Fifty (50) feet.
c. Back to back. Fifty (50) feet.
d. Side to side. Twenty (20) feet.
Section
400.100
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.100
100:504
Section 400.105. "R-4" Apartment House District. [R.O. 2007
§400.105; Ord. No. 1161 Art. 8, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 3101 §3,
2-15-1994; Ord. No. 4994 §3, 5-3-2006; Ord. No. 5083 §§9—13,
10-12-2006]
e. Front to side. Thirty-five (35) feet.
f. Back to side. Thirty-five (35) feet.
g. Corner to corner. Fifteen (15) feet.
8. Off-street parking. As required in Article XII.
9. Site plan review. By Planning and Zoning Commission prior to
issuance of a Building Permit.
10. Utilities. Any area zoned "R-3" Garden Apartment District shall be
served by approved public water and sewer facilities.
11. Landscaping and screening regulations. See Chapter 402 of this
Code.78
12. Design. The construction of a covered parking space for each
dwelling unit shall be optional. The roof shape and materials of the
covered parking structure(s) shall match the roof shape and
materials of the multi-family residential structure(s). All multifamily
residential structures are to be constructed with brick
veneer, or comparable material, on the front portion of said
dwelling units and on any side or back that abuts single-family
"R-1" dwelling units. [Ord. No. 6350 § 1, 5-25-2017]
A. Purpose. This District is composed of those areas of the City whose
principle use is or ought to be multiple-family dwellings requiring
elevators at a moderate density. The regulations of this District are
designed to permit a moderate density of population and a moderate
intensity of land use in those areas which are served by a central water
supply system and a central sanitary sewerage system, and which abut
or are adjacent to such other uses, buildings, structures, or amenities
which support complement or serve such a density and intensity. In
addition to the dwellings permitted in this Zoning District, there are
permitted certain residential and public uses which have been strictly
regulated to make them compatible with the principle use of this
District.
B. Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses is set out in Appendix "A"
of this Title.
C. Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses is set out in Appendix
"A" of this Title.
78.The reference herein to "Article X" was changed to "Chapter 402 of this Code", since ord.
no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Article X and enacted Chapter 402 as it's
replacement.
Section
400.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.105
100:505
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply in all "R-4" Apartment House Districts:
1. Site area. Any site zoned "R-4" Apartment House District shall have
a minimum area of not less than one (1) acre unless the project
abuts an existing multi-family zone.
2. Minimum lot area.
a. Single-family dwelling. Seven thousand five hundred (7,500)
square feet.
b. Two-family dwelling.
(1) Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet for a twofamily
dwelling located on a single platted lot of record
that does not provide for the sale of the individual dwelling
units.
(2) Five thousand (5,000) square feet for a two-family
dwelling located on two (2) separately platted lots of
record and the interior side lot line (party lot line) runs
coincident with the common firewall separating the sideby-
side units. NOTE: Up to five percent (5%) of the total
number of dwelling units may consist of single-family
detached units on separately platted minimum five
thousand (5,000) square foot lots of record.
(3) Seven thousand (7,500) square feet for a two-family
dwelling located on a single platted lot of record and:
(a) The individual dwelling units share a common firewall
separating the side-by-side units,
(b) The individual dwelling units are sold as condominium
or town house/villa units, and
(c) The remainder of the lot is set aside as common
elements or common ground. NOTE: Up to five
percent (5%) of the total number of dwelling units may
consist of single-family detached units on separately
platted lots of record with the individual dwelling unit
sold as a condominium or town house/villa unit with
the remainder of the lot set aside as common elements
or common ground. Said lots shall have a minimum lot
area of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
Section
400.105
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.105
100:506
For non-residential permitted and conditionally
permitted uses in this zoning district per the
allowances of Appendix A, the minimum lot area shall
be adequate, as determined by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, to provide the required yard
requirements of this zoning district and the required
off-street parking per Article XII of the Zoning Code.
3. Minimum lot width. (Measured at the building line)
a. Single-family dwelling. Seventy (70) feet.
b. Two-family dwelling. Per the requirements of Section
400.095(D) of the Zoning Code.
c. Multi-family dwelling. Seventy (70) feet.
For non-residential permitted and conditionally
permitted uses in this zoning district per the
allowances of Appendix A, the minimum lot width shall
be adequate, as determined by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, to provide the required yard
requirements of this zoning district and the required
off-street parking per Article XII of the Zoning Code.
4. Maximum lot coverage.
a. Single-family dwelling. Thirty-five percent (35%).
b. Two-family dwelling. Per the requirements of Section
400.095(D) of the Zoning Code.
c. Multi-family dwelling. Forty percent (40%).
5. Yard requirements.
a. Single-family dwelling. Per the requirements of Section
400.080(D)(4) of the Zoning Code.
b. Two-family dwelling. Per the requirements of Section
400.095(D) of the Zoning Code.
c. Multi-family dwelling.
(1) Front yard. Not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
(2) Side yards. Not less than fifteen (15) feet, except in the
case of a corner lot where the side yard on the road or
street side shall not be less than thirty (30) feet.
(3) Rear yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
(4) Accessory structures shall meet the same yard
requirements.
Section
400.105
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.105
100:507
(5) The above requirements shall apply to every lot, building
or structure.
6. Height requirements. Except as is otherwise provided in Article VI,
no building shall exceed four (4) stories above finished grade or
fifty (50) feet, whichever is the lesser.
7. Distance between grouped buildings (multi-family dwellings). In
addition to the yard requirements for multi-family dwellings listed
in 400.105(D)(5) of this Section, the following minimum distances
shall be required between buildings containing multi-family
dwellings (elevator buildings of more than two and one-half (2½)
stories in height):
a. Front to front. Sixty (60) feet.
b. Front to back. Sixty (60) feet.
c. Back to back. Sixty (60) feet.
d. Side to side. Thirty (30) feet.
e. Front to side. Forty-five (45) feet.
f. Back to side. Forty-five (45) feet.
g. Corner to corner. Twenty (20) feet.
For multi-family dwelling buildings of two and onehalf
(2½) stories or less, the distance between grouped
buildings requirements contained within Section
400.100(D)(7) shall apply.
8. Off-street parking. As required in Article XII.
9. Site plan review. By Planning and Zoning Commission prior to
issuance of a Building Permit, as required in Article XIV.
10. Utilities. Any area zoned "R-4" Apartment House District shall be
served by approved public water and sewer facilities.
11. Landscaping and screening requirements. See Chapter 402 of this
Code.79
12. Design. The construction of a covered parking space for each
dwelling unit shall be optional. The roof shape and materials of the
covered parking structure(s) shall match the roof shape and
materials of the multi-family residential structure(s). All multifamily
residential structures are to be constructed with brick
veneer, or comparable material, on the front portion of said
79.The reference herein to "Article X" was changed to "Chapter 402 of this Code", since ord.
no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Article X and enacted Chapter 402 as it's
replacement.
Section
400.105
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.105
100:508
Section 400.110. "R-5" Mobile/Manufactured Home Park District.
[R.O. 2007 §400.110; Ord. No. 1161 Art. 9, 10-16-1984; Ord. No.
5083 §§14—22, 10-12-2006; Ord. No. 5371 §2, 9-11-2008; Ord. No.
5831 §2, 12-13-2012]
dwelling units and on any side or back that abuts single-family
"R-1" dwelling units. [Ord. No. 6350 § 2, 5-25-2017]
13. Density — Multi-Family Dwelling. The total number of units per
acre shall not exceed fourteen (14). [Ord. No. 6595, 8-22-2019]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for the development
of mobile/manufactured home developments and to:
1. Bring about mobile/manufactured home developments which are
an asset to the community and to prevent the development of those
which would be a detriment to the community.
2. To promote mobile/manufactured home developments with the
character of residential neighborhoods.
3. To protect the health, safety and welfare of mobile/manufactured
home residents and the surrounding community.
4. To harmonize this type of residential development with other
existing and proposed land uses.
5. To assure adequate service by essential public facilities and
services such as roads, police, water and sewers, drainage
structures; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the
management of the mobile/manufactured home development shall
be able to provide adequately such services; further, that the
establishment of any mobile/manufactured home development shall
not equal excessive expense for public facilities and services.
B. Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses is set out in Appendix "A"
of this Title.
C. Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses is established in
Appendix "A" of this Title.
D. General Regulations.
1. Building permit. Any structure erected or expanded within a
mobile/manufactured home development, including any structures
to be erected or expanded on any mobile/manufactured home site
therein, shall require a building permit to be issued therefore by
the City Building Official and shall meet all regulations of this
Chapter and the Building Code.
2. Application of regulations. A mobile/manufactured home unit shall
not be permitted to occupy a site either initially when brought into
a development or upon addition or replacement which violates the
Section
400.105
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.110
100:509
yard requirements, area requirements or minimum distances
between units except in non-conforming mobile/manufactured
home parks within this district.
3. Periodic inspection. The Director of Planning and Development or
any other agents authorized by the City are hereby granted the
power and authority to enter upon the premises of any such
development at any time for the purpose of determining and/or
enforcing any provision or provisions of this or any other City
ordinance applicable to the conduct and operation of mobile/
manufactured home developments.
4. Performance standards. Mobile/manufactured home developments
shall meet the performance standards as required by Article XIII.
5. Site plan review. Site plan review by the Planning and Zoning
Commission is required prior to issuance of building permits as
required in Article XIV. In those instances where the lots within a
mobile/manufactured home development are to be recorded for
sale purposes, the approval of a preliminary plat by the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall constitute compliance with this
requirement.
E. District Regulations And Performance Standards. The following
regulations shall apply:
1. Site area. Each mobile/manufactured home in a mobile/
manufactured home park district shall occupy a designated space
having at least forty-two hundred (4,200) square feet of area.
2. Site width. Each mobile/manufactured home space shall have a
width of at least eighty (80) feet, exclusive of common driveways.
3. The minimum size of the mobile/manufactured home unit shall be
six hundred (600) square feet. Two (2) accessory structures of not
more than five hundred fifty (550) square feet of total aggregate
area shall be permitted per mobile/manufactured home space with
a maximum lot coverage of fifty percent (50%).
4. Off-street parking. Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each mobile/manufactured home. In no case shall the
paved area designated for the required off-street parking encroach
upon the street right-of-way. (See Article XII for additional parking
requirements.)
5. Public sanitary sewer required. In no case shall any mobile/
manufactured home development be approved where the
development will not be connected to or provided with a public
sanitary sewer system.
6. Effect of regulations. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this Article shall be considered minimum
Section
400.110
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.110
100:510
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety
and welfare. However, recognizing the pre-manufactured nature
of mobile/manufactured home units, it is recognized that lots
exceeding the minimum yard and area requirements of this
Chapter may be required to accommodate some units, and that
suitable provision shall be made by potential developers of such
mobile/manufactured home developments in their advance
planning to provide for such units. Based upon this guideline, the
fact that the size of a particular mobile/manufactured home unit, or
class of mobile/manufactured home units, are such that a violation
of any of the minimum yard or area requirements would be created,
this in itself shall not be considered an adequate basis for the
granting of a variance from such requirements.
7. Dimensional requirements. From all mobile/manufactured home
stands, the following minimum distances shall be maintained:
a. Six (6) feet from the side and rear property lines.
b. Thirty (30) feet to the exterior boundary of such development
which is not a public street.
c. Fifty (50) feet to the right-of-way of any public street or
highway located on the exterior boundary of such
development.
d. Fifteen (15) feet to any interior right-of-way.
e. Fifty (50) feet to any parking area designed for general parking
in such development (general parking defines parking bays for
those persons other than residents).
f. Fifty (50) feet to any service building in such development.
g. No mobile/manufactured homes shall be closer to each other
than twelve (12) feet.
h. No attached additions, detached carports or any structure
shall be allowed closer than fifteen (15) feet to any street rightof-
way.
i. No building or structure shall exceed a height of twenty-five
(25) feet.
8. Minimum accommodations. Each mobile/manufactured home
within such development shall contain a flush toilet, sleeping
accommodations, a tub or shower bath, kitchen facilities and
plumbing and electrical connections designed for attachment to
appropriate external systems.
9. Landscaping required.
Section
400.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.110
100:511
a. Transition strip. A transition strip of trees and shrubs not less
than twenty (20) feet in depth shall be located and maintained
along all boundaries of such developments, excepting at
established entrances and exits serving such development.
Said transition strip shall be of such density as to totally
obscure all visible evidence of the development from adjoining
property.
b. Landscape plan. An organized landscape plan for the entire
development shall be prepared as a separate document and
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission during the
required site plan review for their review and approval. The
Commission may either approve, approve with specific
revisions or corrections or reject the submitted landscape plan.
Landscaping within non-conforming mobile/manufactured
home parks is as required in Chapter 402 of this Code.80
c. Landscape maintenance. Any and all plantings in the
development shall be hardy plant materials and maintained
thereafter in a neat and orderly manner. Withered and/or dead
plant material shall be replaced within a reasonable period of
time but no longer than one (1) growing season as reflected
upon the approved landscape plan.
10. Minimum design standards.
a. Safety standards. No mobile/manufactured home older than
1976 shall be allowed to move into the City of O'Fallon. Mobile/
manufactured homes which, at the time of construction, were
not built to the standards of the National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974
(effective 1976) are prohibited within the City of O'Fallon,
excepting that any existing 1976 or older mobile/manufactured
home within the City may be relocated by the owner or a
surviving heir.
11. Orientation of mobile/manufactured homes upon lots. All mobile/
manufactured homes within mobile/manufactured home
developments regulated by the requirements of this Chapter shall
be placed upon their individual lots in such a fashion that the long
axis of the mobile/manufactured home shall face the principal
street frontage upon which the lot itself faces. In the case of corner
lots, the mobile/manufactured home may face either street
frontage. In the case of double-frontage lots, access shall be
restricted to minor streets and not permitted upon collector or
arterial streets.
80.The reference herein to "Article X" was changed to "Chapter 402 of this Code", since ord.
no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-2011 repealed Article X and enacted Chapter 402 as it's
replacement.
Section
400.110
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.110
100:512
12. Minimum development area. The total land area of a mobile/
manufactured home development shall not be less than five (5)
acres.
13. Recreation area. At least five hundred (500) square feet of
recreational area shall be provided for each mobile/manufactured
home contained within a mobile/manufactured home park. The
improvements and equipment must be depicted on the preliminary
plat and/or site plan.
14. Storm shelters. The preliminary plat and/or site plan shall provide a
storm shelter or shelters. Such shelter facilities shall provide
fifteen (15) square feet of unobstructed floor space per
manufactured home in structures either below ground or above
ground with walls and a roof designed to withstand a wind load of
two hundred (200) miles per hour. The maximum distance to the
entrance of the shelter from any manufactured home stand shall be
one thousand (1,000) feet. Provisions shall be made for adequate
emergency lighting and ventilating. The developer shall submit
with his/her application and final development plan the details of
the storm shelter facilities together with a certification by an
architect or engineer licensed in the State of Missouri that such
proposed facilities meet the design standards of this Section.
15. Storage of flammable materials. The use of individual fuel oil or
propane gas storage tanks to supply each mobile/manufactured
home separately is prohibited.
16. Fire extinguishers. Every mobile/manufactured home park shall be
equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment in good
working order of such type, size and number and so located within
the park to satisfy the regulations of the Missouri State Fire
Marshall and the O'Fallon City Fire Marshall.
17. Park maintenance. Park owners and management are required to
maintain the physical and natural facilities and features of the park
in a neat, orderly and safe condition.
18. Accessory structures. Accessory buildings or structures under park
management shall be used only as office space, storage, laundry
facilities, recreation facilities, garage storage or other necessary
service for park resident use only. Accessory buildings owned by
park residents shall be used only for storage. No accessory building
or structure shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height nor two (2)
stories and shall meet the requirements of the City of O'Fallon
Building Code.
F. Public Improvements.
1. Sanitary sewerage and water facilities. Sanitary sewerage and
water facilities shall be of such capacity as to serve all users of the
development at peak periods. All lines shall be suitably sized and
Section
400.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.110
100:513
stubbed out to the property lines of the development to provide for
future extension of the City's sanitary sewerage and water systems
for the respective areas remaining to be served.
2. Storm drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be so
constructed as to protect those that will reside in the mobile home
development, as well as the property owners adjacent to the
development. Such facilities shall be of such capacity to insure
rapid and safe drainage and prevent the accumulation of stagnant
pools of water in or adjacent to the development.
3. Streets and driveways. All roads, driveways, motor vehicle parking
spaces shall be paved and constructed as to handle all anticipated
peak loads and adequately drained and lighted for safety and ease
of movement of pedestrians and vehicles. All roads and driveways
shall have curbs and gutters and must conform to all specifications
given in the Subdivision and Land Development Code (see Chapter
405 as to subdivision and land development regulations).
4. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be as required under Chapter 405.
5. Construction plans required. All improvements, whether public or
private, must conform to all standards and specifications of the
City. Engineering drawings of all such improvements shall be
submitted to and reviewed and approved by the City prior to the
authorization to proceed with the construction of said
improvements.
G. Mobile/Manufactured Home Setup Requirements.
1. Mobile/manufactured home stands. Each mobile/manufactured
home shall be provided with a stand consisting of either a solid
concrete pad not less than four (4) inches thick and not less than
the length and width of the mobile/manufactured home that will
use the site; solid concrete runners not less than six (6) inches thick
at least the length of the mobile/manufactured home; or on piers
corresponding to an approved anchoring system by the State of
Missouri. The stand shall be so constructed, graded, placed and
maintained to be durable and adequate for the support of the
maximum anticipated load during all seasons.
2. Blocks and tie downs. Each mobile/manufactured home shall be
supported on uniform jacks or locks and tied down as required by
City ordinance and State law.
3. Skirting. Uniform skirting of each mobile/manufactured home base
shall be required within fourteen (14) days after initial placement,
such skirting shall be of twenty-six (26) gauge solid sheet metal,
aluminum or other non-corrosive metal or material of equal
strength and so constructed and attached to this mobile/
manufactured home so as to deter and prevent entry of rodents and
insects.
Section
400.110
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.110
100:514
4. Underground lines. All electric, telephone and other lines from
supply poles outside the park or other sources to each mobile/
manufactured home site shall be underground.
5. Sanitary sewer and water connections. All water and sanitary
sewerage facilities, including the connection to all mobile/
manufactured home sites, shall be constructed so that all facilities
and lines are protected from freezing, from bumping, or from
creating any type of nuisance or health hazard. Such connections
shall not exceed ten (10) feet in length above ground.
6. Storage of goods and articles underneath any mobile/manufactured
home or out-of-doors at any mobile/manufactured home site shall
be prohibited.
H. Non-Conforming Mobile/Manufactured Home Parks. Where, on the date
of initial adoption (October 16, 1984) or amendment of this Chapter, a
lawful mobile/manufactured home park existed that is no longer
permissible under the provisions of this Chapter, such mobile/
manufactured home park may continue so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. Violations not validated. A non-conforming mobile/manufactured
home park in violation of a provision of this ordinance shall not be
validated by the adoption of this Chapter.
2. Enlargement. No such non-conforming mobile/manufactured home
park shall be enlarged, expanded or extended to occupy a greater
area of land than was occupied on the date of adoption or
amendment of this Chapter and no additional accessory use,
building or structure shall be established thereon unless in
complete compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. Nor
shall the mobile/manufactured homes within the existing site be
rearranged to increase their number or density within the existing
confines of the park.
3. Relocation. No such non-conforming mobile/manufactured home
park shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of such
parcel or lot not so occupied on the date of adoption of this Chapter
or to a parcel or lot not in conformance with this Chapter.
4. Destruction. Should any such non-conforming mobile/
manufactured home park be destroyed by any means to an extent
of fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the requirements of this
Chapter.
5. Discontinuance. If such non-conforming mobile/manufactured
home park ceases for any reason for a period of more than one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days (except where government
action causes such cessation), the subsequent use of such parcel or
Section
400.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.110
100:515
lot shall conform to the regulations and provisions set by this
Chapter for the district in which such parcel or lot is located.
6. Ownership. All non-conforming mobile/manufactured home parks
shall be and shall remain in one (1) ownership and primarily
designed for the purpose of renting spaces for the placement of
mobile/manufactured home dwelling units. In no instance shall a
non-conforming mobile/manufactured home park be sold as lots for
permanent mobile/manufactured home residence.
7. Registry. Each non-conforming mobile/manufactured home park
shall maintain an up-to-date registry of each mobile/manufactured
home unit and site showing the length, width and area of the site.
The registry shall be open to inspection by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
8. Limitation on permitted uses. Within all non-conforming mobile/
manufactured home parks, the permitted uses of such park shall be
limited to the following:
a. Mobile/manufactured homes.
b. Accessory buildings or structures, under park management
supervision shall be used only as office space, storage, laundry
facilities, recreation facilities, garage storage or other
necessary service for park resident use only. No accessory
building or structure shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in
height nor two (2) stories and shall meet the requirements of
the City of O'Fallon Building Code.
9. Minimum distance. Within all non-conforming mobile/
manufactured home parks, the minimum distances maintained
between mobile/manufactured homes shall be in conformity with
the requirements of the adopted City Building and Fire Codes,
applicable State laws, a development plan previously approved by
the City of O'Fallon or ten (10) feet, whichever standard being the
more restrictive. Detached carport supports within all nonconforming
mobile/manufactured home parks shall be no closer
than four (4) feet to the street or edge of the sidewalk, whichever
distance being the more restrictive. Detached carport roof
overhangs shall be no closer than two (2) feet to the street edge or
edge of the sidewalk, whichever distance being the more
restrictive.
10. Storage of flammable materials. The use of individual fuel oil or
propane gas storage tanks to supply each mobile/manufactured
home separately is allowed consistent with the requirements
contained with the current edition of International Fire Code or
other applicable regulations of the City of O'Fallon.
11. Fire extinguishers. Every mobile/manufactured home park shall be
equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment in good
Section
400.110
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.110
100:516
Section 400.112. "TGD" Transitional Growth District — St. Paul.
[R.O. 2007 §400.112; Ord. No. 4639 §1, 2-13-2004; Ord. No. 4992 §2,
4-14-2006; Ord. No. 4994 §4, 5-3-2006; Ord. No. 5727 §2,
8-25-2011]
working order of such type, size and number and so located within
the park to satisfy the regulations of the Missouri State Fire
Marshal and the O'Fallon City Fire Marshal.
12. Park maintenance. Park owners and management are required to
maintain the physical and natural facilities and features of the park
in a neat, orderly and safe condition.
13. Parking. No parking area or parking space which exists at the time
this Chapter becomes effective (October 16, 1984) or which
subsequent thereto is provided for the purpose of complying with
the provisions of this Chapter shall thereafter be relinquished or
reduced in any manner.
14. Existence of a non-conformity. In cases of doubt and on specific
questions raised concerning whether a mobile/manufactured home
park has non-conforming status, or if an element of such park has
non-conforming status, it shall be treated as a question of fact and
shall be decided by the Mayor and City Council upon receipt of a
report and recommendation on the matter from the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms have the
meaning assigned to them in this Subsection.
AMENITIES — Recreational facilities, walking trails, gazebos, etc.
BOUNDARY — That legal boundary shared by the City of O'Fallon and
the City of St. Paul.
CITY — The City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
PRIMARY AREA — That area of real property within any transitional
growth area that is located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any
boundary.
SECONDARY AREA — That area of real property within any transitional
growth area that is located within five hundred (500) feet of any
boundary, excluding any primary area within such area.
TERTIARY AREA — That area of real property within any transitional
growth area that is located within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any
boundary, excluding any primary area and secondary area within such
area.
T-G DISTRICT — That zoning classification described in this Section.
TRANSITIONAL GROWTH AREA — That area of real property within
the City extending from any boundary to a point not less than seven
hundred fifty (750) feet from any boundary.
Section
400.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.112
100:517
B. Application. All new territories which may hereafter be annexed into
the City that are within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the City of St.
Paul shall be required to petition for rezoning to the "T-G" Transitional
Growth District. The City shall use its Future Land Use map, as
contained within the adopted Comprehensive Plan, as a guide in setting
the appropriate zoning district classification for the newly annexed
property.
C. Purpose. This district is composed of those areas of the City which abut
or will abut the City of St. Paul with low density single-family housing,
and therefore whose principal use is and ought to be single-family
dwellings on large lots with a transition to moderate to small lots. These
regulations are designed to preserve the semi-rural character of these
areas immediately abutting the limits of the City of St. Paul while
allowing a transition to a more suburban character as the distance from
the shared municipal line is increased. In addition to the single-family
dwellings permitted in this district, certain compatible recreational and
public uses are conditionally allowed and strictly regulated to ensure
harmony with the principal use of this district. It is recognized that
unincorporated parcels annexed into the City, and being utilized for
something other than residential purposes, may not be appropriate to
be zoned as residential and may be given some other zoning district
classification.
D. Permitted Uses. The permitted uses within any Transitional Growth
District shall be limited to the following:
1. Single-family dwellings.
2. The collocation of wireless telecommunication antennas on existing
wireless telecommunication support structures.
3. Disguised telecommunication facilities.
4. Mounted antenna telecommunication facilities.
E. Conditional Uses. The conditional uses within any Transitional Growth
District shall be limited to the following:
1. Recreational uses.
2. Public uses.
3. Wireless telecommunication facilities that include new or modified
wireless telecommunication support structures.
F. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply within any "T-G" District:
1. Lot area.
a. Within any primary area, dwellings shall be located on lots
containing an area of not less than one (1) acre.
Section
400.112
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.112
100:518
b. Within any secondary area, dwellings shall be located on lots
containing an area of not less than twenty-two thousand
(22,000) square feet.
c. Within any tertiary area, dwellings shall be located on lots
containing an area of not less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet.
d. For uses other than dwellings, the lot shall be adequate to
provide the yard area required by this district and the off-street
parking required by Article XII.
2. Lot width and depth.
a. Within any primary area, the minimum lot depth shall be two
hundred fifty (250) feet and the minimum lot width shall be one
hundred fifty (150) feet.
b. Within any secondary area, the minimum lot depth shall be one
hundred eighty (180) feet and the minimum lot width shall be
one hundred ten (110) feet.
c. Within any tertiary area, the minimum lot depth shall be one
hundred (100) feet and the minimum lot width shall be eighty
(80) feet.
3. Lot coverage.
a. Within any primary or secondary area, the maximum lot
coverage by buildings or structures shall not exceed twentyfive
percent (25%).
b. Within any tertiary area, the maximum lot coverage shall not
exceed thirty-five percent (35%).
4. Yard requirements.
a. Front yard. Within any primary area or secondary area not less
than forty (40) feet. Within any tertiary area not less than
twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Side yard. Within any primary area not less than twenty (20)
feet. Within any secondary area not less than twelve (12) feet.
Within any tertiary area not less than six (6) feet.
c. Rear yard. Within any primary or secondary area not less than
forty (40) feet. Within any tertiary area not less than twentyfive
(25) feet.
5. Height requirements.
a. For buildings and structures. No building or structure shall
exceed a height of two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five
(35) feet.
Section
400.112
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.112
100:519
Section 400.115. "C-O" Office District. [R.O. 2007 §400.115; Ord.
No. 1161 Art. 10, 10-16-1984]
b. For detached accessory buildings and structures. No detached
accessory building or structure shall exceed a height of twentyfive
(25) feet nor higher than the main building. (See Article VI
for additional regulations for accessory buildings.)
6. Off-street parking. Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each single-family dwelling. (See Article XII for
additional parking requirements.)
7. No grade zones. Within any primary area, a fifty (50) foot wide no
grade zone shall be established along the shared municipal line.
Should any trees be damaged or killed within the no grade zone,
they shall be replaced with a similar tree four (4) inches in caliper.
8. Landscaping. Within any primary area, a twenty-five (25) foot wide
landscaping buffer containing a total of three (3) plant units (as
defined in Section 402.02081) per one hundred (100) linear feet
shall be required. Existing trees within the buffer may be credited
toward the minimum plant unit requirement.
9. Planned development procedure prohibited. Planned developments
(PDs) shall not be permitted within this zoning district in order to
seek relief from the dimensional or setback requirements.
Additionally, no amenities shall be required as a condition of
approval of any development within this district.
A. Purpose.
1. It is recognized by this Chapter that the value to the public of
designating certain areas of the City for office use is represented in
the employment opportunity to citizens and the resultant economic
benefits to the City. This use is characterized by a minimal amount
of such nuisance factors as noise, heat, glare, and the emission of
air pollutants.
2. This District has been located within the City to permit the
development of this office use, to protect adjacent residential areas
against the encroachment of incompatible uses, and to lessen
congestion on public streets and highways. To these ends, certain
uses which interfere with the operation of this type of business
activity and the purpose of this District have been excluded.
B. Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses is set out in Appendix "A"
of this Title.
81.The reference herein to "Section 400.425(D)" was changed to "Section 402.020", since
ord. no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed this subsection and enacted Chapter 402 and
more specifically Section 402.020 as it's replacement.
Section
400.112
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.115
100:520
Section 400.120. "C-1" Restricted Business District. [R.O. 2007
§400.120; Ord. No. 1161 Art. 11, 10-16-1984]
C. Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses is set out in Appendix
"A" of this Title.
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply in all "C-O" Office Districts:
1. Minimum site area. Five (5) acres unless the project abuts an
existing commercial or industrial zone.
2. Minimum lot width. Seventy-five (75) feet.
3. Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage by structures shall not
exceed twenty-five (25) percent.
4. Yard requirements.
a. Front yard. Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Side yard. Least width of either side yard shall not be less than
ten (10) feet, except in the case of a corner lot or parcel where
the side yard on the road or street shall not be less than
twenty-five (25) feet.
c. Rear yard. Not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
d. The above yard requirements shall apply to every lot, building,
or structure.
5. Height requirements. Except as is otherwise provided in Article VI
of this Chapter, no building or structure shall exceed three (3)
stories.
6. Landscaping and screening regulations. As required in Chapter
402 of this Code.82 (Note: of particular importance when adjacent
to residential uses.)
7. Off-street parking. As required in Article XII.
8. Site plan review. By Planning and Zoning Commission prior to
issuance of a Building Permit: As required in Article XIV.
9. Utilities. Any area zoned "C-O" Office District shall be served by
approved public water and sewer facilities.
A. Purpose. This District is composed of those areas of the City whose
principal use is and ought to be local retail, service and restricted
repair business activities which serve surrounding residential
neighborhoods. This District has been located within the City to permit
82.The reference herein to "Article X" was changed to "Chapter 402 of this Code", since ord.
no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Article X and enacted Chapter 402 as it's
replacement.
Section
400.115
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.120
100:521
the development of these business activities to protect adjacent areas
against the encroachment of incompatible uses, and to lessen
congestion on public streets. To these ends, certain uses which would
function more effectively in other districts and would interfere with the
operation of these business activities and the purpose of this District
have been excluded.
B. Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses is set out in Appendix "A"
of this Title.
C. Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses is set out in Appendix
"A" of this Title.
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply in "C-1" Residential Business Districts.
1. Minimum site area. One (1) acre, unless the project abuts an
existing commercial or industrial zone.
2. Minimum lot width. Seventy (70) feet.
3. Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage by structures shall not
exceed thirty percent (30%).
4. Yard and setback requirements.
a. Front yard. Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Side yards. Not required in this district except where a side
line of a "C-1" lot abuts the side line of a residential or office
lot; in that instance a side yard shall be provided of the same
dimensions required in the district it abuts. A side yard of
twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided on the side of a corner
lot.
c. Rear yards. Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
5. Height requirements. No building or structure shall exceed a
height of thirty-five (35) feet or three (3) stories.
6. Performance standards.
a. Wholesale sales are prohibited.
b. Outdoor storage or display of merchandise, materials, or
equipment is prohibited.
c. Other standards are required in Article VI herein.
d. No separate business establishment shall occupy more than
five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor space.
e. Flea markets, both those held inside and outside of a structure
are prohibited.
Section
400.120
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.120
100:522
Section 400.125. "C-2" General Business District. [R.O. 2007
§400.125; Ord. No. 1161 Art. 12, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 5168 §1,
5-10-2007; Ord. No. 5753 §2, 12-8-2011]
7. Off-street parking. As required in Article XII.
8. Site plan review. By Planning and Zoning Commission prior to
issuance of a Building Permit: As required in Article XII.
9. Landscaping and screening regulations. See Chapter 402 of this
Code.83
10. Utilities. Any area zoned "C-1" Restricted Business District shall be
served by approved public water and sewer facilities.
A. Purpose. This District is composed of those areas of the City whose
principal use is and ought to be general retail, service, and repair
business activities which serve the entire City and surrounding area.
This District has been located within the City to permit the development
of these business activities, to protect adjacent areas against
encroachment by incompatible uses, and to lessen congestion on public
streets. To these ends, certain uses which would function more
effectively in other districts and would interfere with the operation of
these business activities and the purpose of this District, have been
excluded.
B. Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses is set out in Appendix "A"
of this Title.
C. Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses is set out in Appendix
"A" of this Title.
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply in all "C-2" General Business District:
1. Minimum site area. Five (5) acres unless the project abuts existing
commercial or industrial zone.
2. Minimum lot width. Twenty-five (25) feet.
3. Maximum lot coverage. No limit.
4. Yard and setback requirements.
a. Front yard. Not less than twenty-five (25) feet, excluding all
signs, pump islands, and canopies of gasoline service stations.
b. Side yards. No side yard is required except that where a side
line of a lot in this district abuts the side line of a lot in any
residential or office district, a side yard shall then be provided
83.The reference herein to "Article X" was changed to "Chapter 402 of this Code", since ord.
no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Article X and enacted Chapter 402 as it's
replacement.
Section
400.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.125
100:523
Section 400.130. "C-3" Highway Commercial District. [R.O. 2007
§400.130; Ord. No. 1161 Art. 13, 10-16-1984]
the same as required in the district it abuts. A side yard of not
less than twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided on the street
side of a corner lot.
c. Rear yards. No rear yard is required except that where a rear
line of a lot in this district abuts lots zoned residential or office
a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided.
5. Height requirements. No building or structure shall exceed a
height of fifty (50) feet.
6. Off-street parking. As required in Article XII.
7. Site plan review. By Planning and Zoning Commission prior to
issuance of a Building Permit: As required in Article XIV.
8. Landscaping and screening regulations. As required in Chapter
402 of this Code.84 (Note: of particular importance when adjacent
to residential uses.)
9. Utilities. Any area zoned "C-2" General Business District shall be
served by approved public water and sewer facilities.
10. Any hotel or extended stay facility in existence in the City at the
time of the adoption of Ordinance No. 5161 (4-12-2007) and that is
currently more than five hundred (500) feet from any residentiallyzoned
property (regardless of political jurisdiction) shall not be
subject to the provisions and requirements of said Ordinance.
A. Purpose. This District is composed of those areas of the City whose
principal use is and ought to be general retail, service, and repair
business activities which serve the entire City and surrounding area.
This District has been located within the City to permit the development
of these business activities, to protect adjacent areas against
encroachment by incompatible uses, and to lessen congestion on public
streets. To these ends, certain uses which would function more
effectively in other districts and would interfere with the operation of
these business activities and the purpose of this District, have been
excluded.
B. Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses is set out in Appendix "A"
of this Title.
C. Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses is set out in Appendix
"A" of this Title.
84.The reference herein to "Article X" was changed to "Chapter 402 of this Code", since ord.
no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Article X and enacted Chapter 402 as it's
replacement.
Section
400.125
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.130
100:524
Section 400.140. "I-1" Light Industrial. [R.O. 2007 §400.140; Ord.
No. 1161 Art. 14, 10-16-1984]
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply in all "C-3" General Business District:
1. Minimum site area. Five (5) acres unless the project abuts existing
commercial or industrial zone.
2. Minimum lot width. Twenty-five (25) feet.
3. Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage by structures shall not
exceed thirty percent (30%).
4. Yard requirements.
a. Front yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet, excluding all signs,
pump islands of gasoline service stations.
b. Side yards. At least width of either yard shall not be less than
twenty (20) feet, except in the case of a corner lot or parcel
where the side yard on the road or street side shall not be less
than thirty (30) feet, excluding trash, recycling and grease
enclosures. [Ord. No. 6421, 1-11-2018]
c. Rear yards. No less than twenty-five (25) feet, excluding trash,
recycling and grease enclosures. [Ord. No. 6421, 1-11-2018]
5. Height requirements. No building or structure shall exceed a
height of thirty-five (35) feet.
6. Off-street parking. As required in Article XII.
7. Site plan review. By Planning and Zoning Commission prior to
issuance of a Building Permit: As required in Article XIV.
8. Landscaping and screening regulations. As required in Chapter
402 of this Code.85 (Note: of particular importance when adjacent
to residential uses.)
9. Utilities. Any area zoned "C-3" Highway Commercial District shall
be served by approved public water and sewer facilities.
A. Purpose. This District is composed of the area of the City whose
principal use is or ought to be light manufacturing, warehousing, and
other limited industrial uses. These uses generate a minimum of noise,
glare, odor, dust, vibration, air and water pollutants, fire, explosive,
radioactive and other hazards, and harmful or obnoxious matter. This
District has been located within the City to permit the development of
these industrial uses, to protect adjacent areas against encroachment
85.The reference herein to "Article X" was changed to "Chapter 402 of this Code", since ord.
no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Article X and enacted Chapter 402 as it's
replacement.
Section
400.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.140
100:525
by incompatible uses, and to lessen congestion on public streets. To
these ends, certain uses which would function more effectively in other
districts and would interfere with the operation of these industrial
activities and the purpose of this District have been excluded.
B. Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses is set out in Appendix "A"
of this Title.
C. Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses is set out in Appendix
"A" of this Title.
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply in all "I-1" Industrial Park Districts:
1. Site area. Five (5) acres minimum unless the proposed project
abuts an existing industrial zone.
2. Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
3. Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage by structures shall not
exceed fifty percent (50%).
4. Yard requirements.
a. Front yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
b. Side yard. Least width of either yard shall not be less than
twenty (20) feet, except in the case of a corner lot or parcel
where the side yard on the road or street side shall not, be less
than thirty (30) feet.
c. Rear yard. Not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
5. Height requirements. Except as otherwise provided in Article VI of
this Chapter, no building or structure should exceed a height of fifty
(50) feet or three (3) stories.
6. Landscaping and screening regulations. See Chapter 402 of this
Code.86 Note: Of particular importance where adjacent to
residential uses.
7. Utilities. Any area zoned "I-1" Light Industrial District shall be
served by approved public water and sewer facilities.
8. Off-street parking. As required in Article XII.
9. Site plan review. Prior to issuance of a Building Permit: As required
in Article XIV.
10. Performance standards.
86.The reference herein to "Article X" was changed to "Chapter 402 of this Code", since ord.
no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Article X and enacted Chapter 402 as it's
replacement.
Section
400.140
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.140
100:526
Section 400.145. "HTCD" High Tech Corridor District. [R.O. 2007
§400.145; Ord. No. 1161 Art. 14A, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 3096 §2,
1-18-1994; Ord. No. 3368 §2, 4-18-1996; Ord. No. 3424 §4, 9-6-1996;
Ord. No. 4231 §1, 7-23-2001; Ord. No. 4399 §1, 8-12-2002; Ord. No.
4482 §1, 2-18-2003; Ord. No. 4645 §§2—3, 3-16-2004; Ord. No. 4992
§§3—4, 4-14-2006; Ord. No. 5168 §2, 5-10-2007; Ord. No. 5325 §1,
5-8-2008; Ord. No. 5831 §3, 12-13-2012]
a. All industrial operations shall be conducted within a fully
enclosed building.
b. All storage of materials and equipment shall be within a fully
enclosed building or in a side or rear yard so screened by
berms, dense vegetative plantings, wooded fences, or brick
walls, or combinations of these materials at least eight (8) feet
in height so that said materials and equipment are not visible
at eye level within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property
line.
c. Other Performance Standards: See Article XIII.
A. Purpose. The purpose and intent of the "HTCD" High Tech Corridor
District is to provide a controlled and protected environment for the
orderly growth and development of high technology industries. This
district will allow some commercial, office and service industries
provided all uses conform to the "Regulations and Performance
Standards" in this Section as well as other applicable Sections of the
Zoning Code.
B. Permitted Uses. The following activities are permitted subject to the
development and performance standards set forth herein:
1. Agricultural uses, provided no sales are made on the property.
2. Federal, State, County, City or public utility owned and operated
buildings and uses.
3. Office buildings.
4. Precision and research instruments and engineering laboratories.
5. Educational, scientific and research organizations.
6. Research and development and light manufacturing supported by
research and development.
7. Educational facilities.
8. Computer programming and other software services.
9. Full-service dine-in restaurants.
10. Recreational facilities used for health, fitness and/or physical
therapy/rehabilitation activities.
Section
400.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.145
100:527
11. Banks, savings and loans and credit unions.
12. Buildings for the storage of documents, records, testing and
research equipment, experimental models and/or other personal
property related to a permitted use.
13. Administrative offices related to a permitted use.
14. Hospitals.
15. The collocation of wireless telecommunication antennas on existing
wireless telecommunication support structures.
16. Disguised telecommunication facilities.
17. Mounted antenna telecommunication facilities.
18. Medical marijuana cultivation facility entirely within an enclosed
building. [Ord. No. 6562, 3-28-2019]
19. Medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility. [Ord.
No. 6562, 3-28-2019]
20. Medical marijuana testing facility. [Ord. No. 6562, 3-28-2019]
21. Medical marijuana dispensary facility. [Ord. No. 6562,
3-28-2019]
C. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses, which support and/or
are adjunct to the permitted uses, will be allowed contingent upon the
granting of a conditional use permit. All requests for a conditional use
permit shall be processed as a conditional use permit under Article VII
of Chapter 400 of Title IV of this Code and shall be subject to all fees,
procedures and actions as provided in Article VII of Chapter 400 of Title
IV. All conditional uses will be subject to the development and
performance standards set forth herein:
1. Airfield.
2. Bus shelters, taxi stands, and/or any other mass transit pick up/
drop off points.
3. Wireless telecommunication facilities that include new or modified
wireless telecommunication support structures.
4. Living quarters for custodians and caretakers of a building or
facility that houses a permitted use.
5. Hotels and extended stay facilities.
6. Churches, synagogues and temples.
7. Day care facilities.
Section
400.145
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.145
100:528
8. Indoor sales or service. Indoor sales and service shall be allowed as
a conditional use subject to the supplemental requirements set
forth elsewhere in this Section.
For the purposes of this Section, "indoor sales or service" shall
be defined as: All land uses which conduct or display consumer
goods; rental merchandise or equipment; and/or non-personal or
non-professional services entirely within an enclosed building. In
no instance shall such products be displayed outside of an enclosed
building. No in-vehicle sales and service land uses, which perform
sales and/or services to persons in vehicles or to vehicles which
may be occupied at the time of such activity, shall be allowed,
except in cases of banking and other financial institutions and
pharmacies. Commercial recreation facilities, venues used for
individual or group entertainment, amusements or participatory
leisure activities shall also be included within the "indoor sales and
service" category. (Examples of commercial recreation facilities
include, but are not limited to, training studios (dance, art, martial
arts, etc.), bowling alleys and movie theaters.)
9. Helipads or helistops to service hospitals.
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply in all "HTCD" High Tech Corridor Districts:
1. Administrative requirements.
a. The applicant requesting "HTCD" zoning must submit a
preliminary development plan for the site with the zoning
application. The plan shall show the proposed uses for all lots,
the landscape plans, the design of common open space areas,
the location of signs, and any additional development
standards deemed necessary.
b. The applicant must also simultaneously file subdivision plats
for the tract and go through the platting process concurrently
with the rezoning.
c. The applicant shall include with the plat application, covenants
and restrictions for the development.
d. The applicant shall describe within the covenants and
restrictions, the organization and operation of the Governing
Board that is set up to enforce said covenants. The covenants
shall also address the integration of the site layout.
2. Site area. Five (5) acres minimum, unless the proposed project
abuts an existing "HTCD" or commercial zone.
3. Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be one hundred (100) feet.
4. Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all structures shall not
exceed fifty percent (50%).
Section
400.145
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.145
100:529
5. Lot use. All operations occurring within a "HTCD" zoned area must
take place within a fully enclosed building.
6. Building requirements.
a. The building on site must be finished on all sides.
b. The materials used in building construction must conform to
the standards set forth in Title IV, Chapter 400, Article XIII of
the City Code.
7. Yard requirements.
a. Front yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet. All required front
yards must be kept clear of parking, loading areas, accessory
uses and buildings.
b. Side yard. Not less than twenty (20) feet, except in the case of
a corner lot where the side yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
c. Rear yard. Not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
8. Height requirement. Except as otherwise provided in Article VI of
this Chapter, no building or structure should exceed fifty (50) feet
or three (3) stories. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
allow additional height to a maximum of six (6) stories where it is
determined that: [Ord. No. 6023 §1, 8-28-2014; Ord. No. 6421,
1-11-2018]
a. Additional height will not adversely impact the surrounding
land uses.
b. The building height will not interfere with the St. Charles
County's emergency microwave communications system. For
purposes of this Subsection, the lack of interference may be
shown by submitting a letter from or written findings of the St.
Charles County Emergency Communications System Manager
after review of the site and building plans.
c. The applicable fire protection district can provide the
necessary emergency fire protection and emergency access.
9. Landscaping and screening.
a. In addition to all of the required setbacks, all "HTCD"
developments will have to meet the landscaping, the
bufferyard and the screening requirements of a commercially
zoned property.
(1) The landscaping and bufferyards shall meet the standards
set forth in Chapter 402 of this Code.87
(2) For purposes of the "HTCD" where the bufferyard
requirement calls out for a "plant unit" or portion thereof,
Section
400.145
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.145
100:530
"two (2) deciduous trees three (3) inches in caliper plus
four (4) complimentary shrubs with a minimum size of five
(5) gallons (at time of installation)" will be used instead.
b. All front yards required under this Chapter shall be planted
with the number of trees necessary to comply with the street
tree requirements in addition to any other required
landscaping.
c. Screening shall be provided to obscure certain uses, or
portions of a specific use, which by the scale or design
represent a potential negative impact on adjacent properties.
This screening will be accomplished by the use of fences, walls,
hedges, landscaping, earth berms, natural buffers, or any
combination thereof.
d. The following specific uses or features shall be screened from
adjacent properties and from public view from any existing or
proposed public street, regardless of their size, scale or
location on the site:
(1) Dumpster and trash hauling areas.
(2) Service entrances and utility facilities.
(3) Loading docks or spaces.
e. In addition to the standards set forth in Section 400.278 of the
Zoning Code, the following standards apply to all screening:
(1) Minimum height of any screening shall be that which is
sufficient to visually separate uses within the subject
property from adjoining properties and streets.
(2) Height of any screening materials on a corner is controlled
by vehicular sight distances.
(3) Plant material used for screening shall be of evergreen
varieties and shall be at least six (6) feet in height and no
farther apart than ten (10) feet apart when planted.
10. Utilities.
a. Any area zoned "HTCD" High Tech Corridor District shall be
served by approved public water and sewer facilities.
b. All utilities serving the site must be placed underground.
87.The reference herein to "Article X" was changed to "Chapter 402 of this Code", since ord.
no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Article X and enacted Chapter 402 as it's
replacement.
Section
400.145
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.145
100:531
c. In the instance of external equipment such as transformers,
screening will be required as stated in Section 400.278 of the
Zoning Code.
11. Parking.
a. Parking areas. Shall be designed and constructed within the
provisions set forth in Article XII of the Zoning Code, unless
otherwise noted.
b. All uses within a development, both permitted and conditional,
shall maintain cross access and cross parking agreements and
will make use of joint parking facilities.
c. All parking areas within a development shall be connected by
common entries and drive aisles.
d. Loading areas shall not be located within any front yard and
shall be properly screened so as to be not visible from any
existing or proposed street.
e. Design of parking lot should encourage the use of mass transit
and ridesharing.
f. Access points shall minimize traffic congestion. Whenever
possible, access to a public road shall be made to service more
than one (1) lot.
g. All parking lot lighting fixtures shall be placed within
landscape islands.
12. Site plan review. In addition to the regulations outlined in Article
XIV, the following shall apply:
a. All structures, regardless of size, are required to be reviewed
by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
b. All site plans must include landscape architectural plans
addressing screening/landscaping requirements.
c. Site plans must include information on the percent of coverage
of the total site in buildings, parking areas and accessory uses.
13. Signs.
a. The location, design, color and lighting of all proposed signage
should be indicated on the site plans.
(1) All signs shall reflect the architectural design scheme of
the project.
b. The only signs permitted within the "HTCD" High Tech
Corridor District will be permanently installed signage used for
identification purposes and all signs shall be located on-
Section
400.145
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.145
100:532
premise. No temporary outdoor advertising signage or
billboards will be allowed.
c. All signs permitted for use within the "HTCD" shall comply
with all applicable provisions of Chapter 410 of the City Code.
All signs shall be approved under separate permit.
E. Supplemental Regulations And Performance Standards For "Indoor
Sales And Service Uses". In addition to all other "HTCD" requirements,
conditional uses defined as "indoor sales and service" uses will be
subject to the following development standards:
1. Facades and exterior walls.
a. The wall planes on any proposed structure shall incorporate
three-dimensional reliefs in their design. Projections, recesses
and offsets, as well as any other available architectural device,
shall be employed to prevent building facades from being static
and monolithic. No building facade shall extend for more than
seventy-five (75) linear feet without some type of threedimensional
relief.
(1) Using several smaller buildings with a common
architectural theme, as opposed to a single multi-tenant
building, will also meet this requirement provided no
building has a facade greater than seventy-five (75) linear
feet.
b. Ground floor facades that face public streets shall have
arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings or other such
features along no less than sixty percent (60%) of their
horizontal length.
c. Detail features. All buildings, regardless of the length of their
facades, must include a repeating pattern that includes no less
than three (3) of the following elements:
(1) Color change;
(2) Texture change;
(3) Material module change;
(4) An expression of architectural or structural bays through a
change in plane no less than twelve (12) inches in width,
such as an offset, reveal or projecting rib.
(a) Note: At least one (1) of elements (1), (2) or (3 ) shall
repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at
intervals of no more than thirty (30) feet, either
horizontally or vertically.
Section
400.145
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.145
100:533
2. Roofs. Roofs shall have no less than two (2) of the following
features:
a. Parapet walls that extend above the roof line (for buildings
with flat roofs).
(1) Flat roofs and rooftop equipment such as HVAC units shall
be screened from public view as required by Section
400.278 of the City Zoning Code.
(2) Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three (3) feet
past the supporting walls.
(3) Three (3) or more roof slope planes.
3. Materials and colors.
a. Predominant exterior building materials shall be high quality
materials including, but not limited to, brick, sandstone, other
native stone, and tinted/textured concrete masonry units.
(1) The materials used in building construction must conform
to the standards set forth in Title IV, Chapter 400, Article
XIII of the City Code. Exterior building materials shall not
include concrete block or tilt-up concrete panels with
smooth faces; or prefabricated steel panels.
b. Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth
tone colors. The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors,
black or fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
c. Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors,
including primary colors, but neon tubing shall not be an
acceptable feature for building trim or accent areas.
d. Colors should be of earth tones to blend with the environment.
4. Cross access easements. The site design must provide direct
connections and safe street crossings to adjacent land uses.
5. Planting requirements within parking areas. The following are the
minimum requirements for parking lot landscaping:
a. There shall be one (1) landscaped island installed within the
interior parking area for every twenty (20) parking and/or
loading spaces.
b. Minimum size of the landscape island shall be one hundred
fifty (150) square feet with a minimum width of eight (8) feet.
c. Landscape islands shall consist of two (2) deciduous trees
three (3) inches in caliper plus one (1) complimentary shrub
with a minimum size of five (5) gallons (at time of installation).
Section
400.145
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.145
100:534
d. Any damaged or dead plant units shall be replaced within one
(1) week unless it is the determination of the City that
extenuating circumstances exist, such as incompatibility with
the established planting season.
e. The landscape island shall be protected from vehicular contact
by a six (6) inch or greater vertical concrete curb.
f. No landscaping, tree, shrub, fence, wall or similar item shall be
placed in zones of ingress or egress at street corners or in the
intersection of a public right-of-way that will create an
obstruction to visibility or is a traffic hazard.
6. Pedestrian circulation.
a. Sidewalks at least four (4) feet in width shall be provided along
all sides of the lot that abut a public street.
b. Continuous internal pedestrian walkways, no less than eight
(8) feet in width, shall be provided from the public sidewalk or
right-of-way to the customer entrances of all establishments on
the site. At a minimum, walkways shall connect focal points of
pedestrian activity such as:
(1) Transit stops;
(2) Street crossings;
(3) Building and store entry points;
(4) Outdoor seating areas.
c. Sidewalks, no less than eight (8) feet in width, shall be
provided along the full length of the building along any street
frontage or building facade featuring a customer entrance.
Such sidewalks shall be located at least four (4) feet from the
facade of the building to provide planting beds for foundation
landscaping, except where features such as arcades or
entryways are part of the facade. The plant materials used
within the planting beds shall be provided in a size and number
that adequately covers the ground between the building and
sidewalk as demonstrated on the landscape plans. (Such plant
units may not be counted toward other landscape
requirements.)
(1) Internal pedestrian walkways provided in conformance
with part (6) (c) above shall provide one (1) bench for
every one hundred (100) linear feet of walkway.
(2) All internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished
from driving surfaces through the use of durable, low
maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks or
Section
400.145
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.145
100:535
Section 400.150. "I-2" Heavy Industrial District. [R.O. 2007
§400.150; Ord. No. 1161 Art. 15, 10-16-1984]
scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort
as well as the attractiveness of the walkways.
7. Central features and community space. Each retail establishment
subject to these standards shall contribute to the establishment or
enhancement of community and public spaces by providing at least
two (2) of the following:
a. Patio/seating area;
b. Pedestrian plaza with benches;
c. Outdoor playground area;
d. A pedestrian arcade or kiosk area;
e. Water feature;
f. Clock tower or other such deliberately shaped area and/or a
focal feature or amenity that, in the judgment of the City,
adequately enhances such community and public spaces.
g. Any such areas shall have direct access to the public sidewalk
network and such features shall not be constructed of
materials that are inferior to the principal materials of the
building and landscape.
8. Site specific operations. No delivery or loading activities, trash
removal or compaction, parking lot cleaning or other such
operations shall be permitted between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and
7:00 A.M.
F. Violations. Any person, authority, business, corporation, partnership or
limited partnership found to be in violation of any provisions of this
Section shall be subject to the penalty provision of Section 100.010 of
this Code but not limited to a fine of up to five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each day of violation.
A. Purpose. This District is designed to provide the location an space for
all manner of industrial uses, wholesale, commercial, and industrial
storage facilities. It is the purpose of these Regulations to permit the
development of certain functions, to protect the abutting residential
and commercial properties from incompatible industrial activities and
to restrict the intrusion of non-related uses such as residential, retail
business, and commercial. To these ends, certain uses are excluded
which would function more effectively in other districts and which
would interfere with the operation of the uses permitted in this District.
B. Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses is set out in Appendix "A"
of this Title.
Section
400.145
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.150
100:536
Section 400.155. "AG" Agricultural District. [R.O. 2007 §400.155;
Ord. No. 1161 Art. 16, 10-16-1984]
C. Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses is set out in Appendix
"A" of this Title.
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply in all "I-2" Heavy Industrial Districts.
1. Site area. Five (5) acres unless the proposed project abuts an
existing industrial zone.
2. Lot width. Seventy-five (75) feet minimum.
3. Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage by structures shall not
exceed fifty percent (50%).
4. Yard requirements.
a. Front yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
b. Side yards. Least width of either yard shall not be less than
twenty-five (25) feet, except in the case of a corner lot, where
the side yard on the road or street shall not be less than thirty
(30) feet.
c. Rear yard. Not less than fifty (50) feet.
d. Height requirements. Except as is otherwise provided in
Article VI of this Chapter, no building or structure shall exceed
a height of fifty (50) feet.
5. Landscaping and screening regulations. See Chapter 402 of this
Code.88 (Note: Of particular importance where adjacent to
residential uses.)
6. Utilities. Any area zoned "I-2" Heavy Industrial District shall be
served by approved public water and sewer facilities.
7. Off street parking. As required in Article XII.
8. Site plan review. By Planning and Zoning Commission prior to
issuance of a Building Permit: As required in Article XIV.
A. Purpose. This District is composed of those areas of the City whose
principal use is and ought to be farming. The regulations of this District
are designed to conserve, stabilize, enhance, and develop farming and
related resource utilization activities.
B. Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses is set out in Appendix "A"
of this Title.
88.The reference herein to "Article X" was changed to "Chapter 402 of this Code", since ord.
no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Article X and enacted Chapter 402 as it's
replacement.
Section
400.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.155
100:537
Section 400.160. "P-R" Park-Recreation District. [R.O. 2007
§400.160; Ord. No. 1161 Art. 17, 10-16-1984]
C. Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses is set out in Appendix
"A" of this Title.
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply in all "AG" Agricultural Districts.
1. Lot area. No building or structure shall be established on any lot
less than two (2) acres. The minimum lot area for the raising and
keeping of livestock shall be ten (10) acres.
2. Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be one hundred fifty (150)
feet.
3. Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage by structures shall not
exceed ten percent (10%).
4. Yard and setback requirements.
a. Front yard. Not less than fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way.
b. Side yards. Least width of either yard shall not be less than
thirty (30) feet except in the case of a corner lot where the side
yard on the street side shall not be less than fifty (50) feet.
c. Rear yard. Not less than fifty (50) feet.
d. The above requirements shall apply to every lot, building, or
structure, provided further that where livestock is raised or
kept, no structure or storage of hay, feed, or manure, shall be
located less than one hundred (100) feet from a property line.
5. Height requirement. Except as otherwise provided in Section
400.255, the following height requirements shall apply in this
District.
a. For dwelling and non-farm buildings and structures. No
dwelling or non-farm building or structure shall exceed a
height of two and one-half (2½) stories.
b. For general and specialized farm buildings and structures. No
general and specialized farm building and structures shall
exceed a height of fifty (50) feet.
6. Off-street parking. As required in Article XII.
7. Performance standards. As required in Article XIII.
A. Purpose. The value to the public of certain open areas of the City is
represented in their natural, undeveloped, or unbuilt condition. It is
recognized by this Chapter that the principal use of certain open areas
is and ought to be the development, management, and utilization of the
Section
400.155
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.160
100:538
Section 400.161. Mixed-Use Traditional Development District. [R.O.
2007 §400.161; Ord. No. 4123 §3, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 4673 §1,
6-14-2004; Ord. No. 4932 §§1—2, 12-14-2005; Ord. No. 4992 §§5—6,
4-14-2006; Ord. No. 5168 §3, 5-10-2007]
natural resource base possessed by these areas. In order that this
value may be maintained and this use encouraged, this Chapter has
established, based upon a well-considered plan, a Zoning District
designed to regulate the location of buildings and structures and the
use of parcels and lots, in order to protect and enhance the natural
resources, natural amenities, natural habitats of wildlife, watershed
and reservoir areas, agricultural capabilities, parks and public
recreation areas, and the public health, safety and welfare by reducing
the hardship and financial burdens imposed upon the City by the
wanton destruction of resources, the improper and wasteful use of open
land, wooded areas, and the periodic flooding and overflow of creeks
and streams.
B. Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses is set out in Appendix "A"
of this Title.
C. Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses is set out in Appendix
"A" of this Title.
D. Regulations And Performance Standards. The following regulations
shall apply in all Park-Recreation Districts:
1. Lot width. No restriction.
2. Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage by structures shall not
exceed ten percent (10%).
3. Yard and setback requirements.
a. Front yard. Not less than sixty (60) feet from the right-of-way.
b. Side yard. Least width of either yard shall not be less than
thirty (30) feet; except in the case of a corner lot where the
side yard on the road or street side shall not be less than sixty
(60) feet.
c. Rear yard. Not less than fifty (50) feet.
4. Height requirements. Except as otherwise provided in Article VI,
the following height requirements shall apply in this district for all
buildings and structures: no building or structure shall exceed two
(2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet.
5. Off-street parking. As required in Article XII.
6. Site plan review. By the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to
issuance of a Building Permit: As required in Article XIV.
Section
400.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.161
100:539
A. Purpose. The purpose and intent of the Mixed-Use Traditional
Development District (MUTDD) is to encourage a variety of land uses in
closer proximity to one another than would be permitted under the
City's more conventional zoning districts and to encourage building
configurations that create a distinctive and memorable sense of place.
Developments in this district are permitted to have a mixture of
residential, office, commercial, cultural, entertainment, recreational
and institutional uses under a single development plan, either within
single structures or within multiple structures. It is the purpose of this
district to encourage a diversification of uses and structures which
promote innovative and energy-conscious design, efficient and effective
circulation systems which minimize automobile travel, offer a variety of
housing types, styles and price ranges, encourage the conservation of
land resources, and locate employment and retail centers in close
proximity to housing. This Mixed-Use Traditional Development District
is intended to allow use flexibility and design flexibility and to
encourage the following development standards:
1. Provide for an efficient use of land and public resources resulting in
co-location of harmonious uses to share facilities and services in a
logical network of utilities and streets;
2. Enhance the appearance of land through preservation of natural
features, the provision of underground utilities and the provision of
recreation areas and open space in excess of existing standards in
other zoning districts;
3. Ensure a more rational and compatible relationship between
residential and non-residential uses for the benefit of all;
4. Provide a range of residential, commercial, cultural and
institutional land uses;
5. Offer a range of housing opportunities;
6. Establish a neighborhood identity and focus;
7. Provide safe and efficient neighborhood identity and focus;
8. Encourage concentrated land use patterns which decrease the
length of automobile travel, allow trip consolidation and encourage
pedestrian circulation between land uses;
9. Increase and promote the use of pedestrian routes, bicycle routes,
and the use of non-motorized vehicles;
10. Use vertical or horizontal integration of residential and commercial
uses;
11. Design which provide for the compatible cohabitation of residential
and non-residential uses;
12. Permit flexible property development regulations;
Section
400.161
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.161
100:540
13. Utilize multiple-family homes to provide a transition area between
commercial uses and adjacent residential development; and
14. Apply certain development regulations to the entire district rather
than to individual lots such as, but not limited to:
a. Access;
b. Parking;
c. Lot size and dimensions;
d. Lot frontage; and
e. Landscaping.
B. Permitted Uses. The Mixed-Use Traditional Development District shall
offer a mix of land uses in order to provide commercial services and
employment opportunities for the residential population and
surrounding areas. Commercial, residential, cultural, recreational and
institutional uses shall be in accordance with the following listing of
permitted uses:
1. Residential land uses. Single-family, multiple-family, senior citizens
and apartment dwellings on moderate to small sized lots and,
where appropriate, in conjunction with commercial and retail uses
are permitted. This form of development permits higher overall
densities than permitted under conventional suburban-type
development, permits unique dwelling unit types, the size, width
and height of which may be limited but only by consistency with the
character of the development. This form of development permits
and may require slightly smaller lots than permitted within other
zoning districts, higher maximum heights, as well as restricted
maximum and minimum setbacks for single-family, multiple-family
and apartment dwellings than permitted under other zoning
districts. Based on the total acreage of any mixed-use development
under a single development plan, the overall residential density of
the entire development shall not exceed six (6) dwelling units per
acre. However, the maximum density of the residential area within
any mixed-use development under a single development plan shall
not exceed twenty (20) dwelling units per acre.
2. Institutional land uses. Passive outdoor public recreational uses,
active outdoor public recreational uses, indoor institutional uses,
outdoor institutional uses, public service and utilities uses and
institutional residential uses are permitted uses as described
below:
a. Passive outdoor public recreational uses. Passive outdoor
public recreational land uses including all recreational land
uses located on public property which involve passive
recreational activities. Such land uses include arboretums,
Section
400.161
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.161
100:541
nature areas, wildlife areas, hiking trails, bike trails, crosscountry
trails, horse trails, open grassed areas not associated
with any particular active recreational land use, picnic areas,
picnic shelters, gardens, fishing areas and similar land uses.
b. Active outdoor public recreational uses. Active outdoor public
recreational land uses including all recreational land uses
located on public property which involve active recreational
activities. Such land uses include play courts (such as tennis
courts and basketball courts), playfields (such as ball
diamonds, football fields and soccer fields), tot lots, outdoor
swimming pools, swimming beach areas, fitness courses,
public golf courses and similar land uses.
c. Indoor institutional uses. Indoor institutional land uses include
all indoor public and not-for-profit recreational facilities (such
as gymnasiums, swimming pools, libraries, museums and
community centers), public and private schools, churches,
funeral homes, non-profit civic organizations, non-profit
fraternal organizations, convention centers, conferencing
centers, telecommunication learning centers and similar land
uses.
d. Outdoor institutional uses. Outdoor institutional land uses
include privately held permanently protected green space
areas, country clubs, non-public golf courses, public and/or
private art and cultural displays both transient and permanent
and similar land uses.
e. Public service and utilities uses. Public service and utilities
land uses include all City, County, State and Federal facilities
(except those otherwise treated in this Section), emergency
service facilities such as fire departments and rescue
operations, wastewater treatment plants, public and/or private
utility substations, water towers, utility and public service
related distribution facilities and similar land uses.
f. Institutional residential uses. Institutional residential land uses
include group homes, convents, monasteries, senior citizen
housing within assisted living or long-term/skilled nursing
facilities, and similar land uses not considered to be
community living arrangements.
3. Commercial land uses. Traditional commercial activities providing
employment opportunity to residents of the City, and economic
activity primarily to serve adjacent residential areas are permitted
uses as described herein. Certain uses which would function more
effectively in other districts and which would interfere with the
operation of these business activities, adjacent residential areas or
the purpose of this Mixed-Use Traditional Development District are
excluded. As with residential uses within this district, this form of
Section
400.161
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.161
100:542
development permits and may require slightly smaller lots than
permitted within other zoning districts, higher maximum heights,
as well as restricted maximum and minimum setbacks different
from those permitted under other zoning districts. This land use
permits commercial uses identified as office, personal or
professional service, indoor sales or service, indoor commercial
entertainment, invehicle sales and service, outdoor display and
sales, commercial animal boarding, commercial indoor lodging,
group day care center (six (6) or more children) as described
below:
a. Office. Office land uses include all exclusively indoor land uses
whose primary functions are the handling of information or
administrative services. Such land uses do not typically
provide services directly to customers on a walk-in or onappointment
basis.
b. Personal or professional service. Personal service and
professional service land uses include all exclusively indoor
land uses whose primary function is the provision of services
directly to an individual on a walk-in or on-appointment basis.
Examples of such land uses include professional services,
insurance services, realty offices, financial services, medical
offices and clinics, banking and financial institutions,
veterinary clinics, barber and beauty shops and related land
uses.
c. Indoor sales or service. Indoor sales and service land uses
include all land uses which conduct or display sales or rental
merchandise or equipment, or non-personal or nonprofessional
services, entirely within an enclosed building.
This includes self-service facilities such as coin-operated
laundromats, artisan craft production, such as consumer
ceramics, custom woodmaking, or other production activities
directly associated with retail sales are permitted as accessory
uses. Other accessory uses include display stands or service
areas located outdoors, in limited space, immediately and only
adjacent to the primary sales or service facility.
d. Indoor commercial entertainment. Indoor commercial
entertainment land uses include all land uses which provide
entertainment services entirely within an enclosed building.
Examples of such land uses include restaurants, taverns,
theaters, health or fitness centers, training studios (dance, art,
martial arts, etc.), bowling alleys, arcades, roller rinks and pool
halls. All commercial establishments which offer live
entertainment shall be required to obtain a live entertainment
business license per Chapter 635 of the Municipal Code.
e. In-vehicle sales and service. In-vehicle sales and service land
uses include all land uses which conduct sales and/or perform
Section
400.161
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.161
100:543
services to persons in vehicles or to vehicles which may be
occupied at the time of such activity. Such land uses often have
traffic volumes which exhibit their highest levels concurrent
with peak traffic flows on adjacent roads. Examples of such
land uses include drive-in, drive-up and drive-through
facilities, vehicular fuel stations and all forms of car washes.
If performed in conjunction with a principal land use (for
example, a convenience store, restaurant or bank), in-vehicle
sales and service land uses shall be considered an accessory
use. This use shall require approval of a conditional use permit.
If this conditional use was not part of the approved area plan,
it shall require review and approval of an amended area plan.
f. Outdoor display and sales. Outdoor display and sales land uses
are typically permitted only as an accessory use and include all
land uses which conduct sales or display merchandise or
equipment on a permanent basis outside of an enclosed
building accessory to or incidental to a principal use on the lot,
including patio seating for restaurants and/or outdoor kiosks.
Outdoor display and sales shall be permitted as a primary use
such as a farmer's market or similar type use with the approval
of a conditional use permit. If this conditional use was not part
of the approval area plan, it shall require review and approval
of an amended area plan.
g. Commercial animal boarding. Commercial animal boarding
land uses include land uses which provide short-term and/or
long-term boarding for animals. Examples of these land uses
include commercial kennels and commercial stables. Exercise
yards, fields, training areas and trails associated with such
land uses are considered accessory to such land uses and do
not require separate approval. This use shall require approval
of a conditional use permit. If this conditional use was not part
of the approval area plan, it shall require review and approval
of an amended area plan.
h. Hotels. Hotels, as such are defined in this Chapter and on-site
facilities such as indoor recreational facilities for the exclusive
use of the hotel's transient guests. Restaurants, arcades,
fitness centers and other on-site facilities available to the
general public are considered accessory uses.
i. Group day care center (six (6) or more children). Group day
care centers are land uses in which qualified persons provide
child care services for six (6) or more children. Examples of
such land uses include day care centers and nursery schools.
Such land uses shall not be located within a residential
building. Such land uses may be operated on a for-profit or a
not-for-profit basis. Such land uses may be operated in
conjunction with another principal land use on the same
environs, such as a church, school, business or civic
Section
400.161
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.161
100:544
organization. This use shall require approval of a conditional
use permit. If this conditional use was not part of the approval
area plan, it shall require review and approval of an amended
area plan.
4. Additional accessory uses. Accessory uses are land uses which are
incidental to the principal activity conducted on the subject
property. With the exception of a carriage house (see (a) and (b),
below), in no instance shall an accessory use, cellar, basement, tent
or trailer be used as a residence. In addition to the specific
regulations below for individual accessory uses and structures, all
such uses and structures shall conform with the following
standards:
a. Carriage house. A carriage house means secondary dwelling or
office unit located on the same lot as the principal single-family
dwelling. Only carriage houses used as a secondary dwelling
shall not be considered "dwelling units" for the purpose of
calculating maximum allowable density for the Mixed-Use
Traditional Development District. A carriage house may be an
accessory dwelling that is a complete, independent living
facility equipped with a kitchen and with provisions for
sanitation and sleeping or an accessory office.
(1) A carriage house used as a second (2nd) dwelling may
include a garage alone, a garage and apartment or an
apartment alone and shall comply with the following
supplementary use standards:
(a) Number of units. A maximum of one (1) dwelling may
be permitted as an accessory use to a single-family
dwelling. The accessory dwelling may be attached to
the principal dwelling unit or may be freestanding.
(b) Floor area. The accessory dwelling shall not exceed
eight hundred (800) square feet floor area, except
when located on a lot that is at least one (1) acre in
size, in which case the dwelling shall not exceed one
thousand (1,000) gross square feet floor area. The
floor area calculation shall include only that area of
the accessory dwelling under a solid roof.
(c) Additional floor area. Floor area under a solid roof
that is utilized as a porch, patio, porte cochere or
carport shall not exceed five hundred (500) square
feet and this area shall not be enclosed.
(d) Number of bedrooms. Accessory dwellings shall
contain a maximum of one (1) bedroom.
(e) Compatibility. The accessory dwelling shall be
architecturally compatible in character and materials
Section
400.161
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.161
100:545
and be subordinate in size to the principal dwelling
unit.
(f) No separate ownership. The accessory dwelling shall
remain accessory to and under the same ownership as
the principal single-family dwelling unit and shall not
be subdivided or sold as a condominium.
(2) A carriage house used as an office unit may include a
garage alone, a garage and apartment, or an apartment
alone shall comply with home office use regulations as
contained herein and shall comply with the following
supplementary use standards:
(a) Number of units. A maximum of one (1) office may be
permitted as an accessory use to a carriage house.
(b) Floor area. The office unit shall not exceed eight
hundred (800) gross square feet floor area, except
when located on a lot that is at least one (1) acre in
size, in which case the dwelling shall not exceed one
thousand (1,000) gross square feet floor area. The
floor area calculation shall include only that area of
the accessory office under a solid roof.
(c) Additional floor area. Floor area under a solid roof
that is utilized as a porch, patio, porte cochere,
carport or garage shall not exceed five hundred (500)
square feet and this area shall not be enclosed.
(d) Compatibility. The accessory office unit shall be
architecturally compatible in character and materials
and be subordinate in size to the principal dwelling
unit.
(e) Setbacks. The accessory office unit shall comply with
the minimum yard setbacks applicable to the principal
single-family dwelling unit.
(f) No separate ownership. The accessory dwelling shall
remain accessory to and under the same ownership as
the principal single-family dwelling unit and shall not
be subdivided or sold as a condominium.
b. On-site parking lot. On-site parking lots are any areas located
on the same site as the principal land use which are used for
the temporary parking of vehicles which are fully registered,
licensed and operable. Parking lots shall be designed in
accordance with Article XII of the Zoning Code.
c. Private residential recreational facility. This land use includes
all active outdoor recreational facilities located on a private
Section
400.161
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.161
100:546
residential lot including basketball courts, tennis courts,
swimming pools and recreation-type equipment. Facilities
using night lighting of activity areas shall require approval of
a conditional use permit. If this conditional use was not part of
the approval area plan, it shall require review and approval of
an amended area plan.
d. Company cafeteria. A company cafeteria is a food service
operation which provides food only to company employees and
their guests, which meets the State of Missouri and/or St.
Charles County food service requirements, and is located on
the same property as a principal land use engaged in an
operation other than food service.
e. Company provided on-site recreation. A company provided onsite
recreational facility is any active or passive recreational
facility located on the same site as a principal land use and
which is reserved solely for the use of company employees and
their guests. Facilities using night lighting of activity areas
shall require approval of a conditional use permit. If this
conditional use was not part of the approval area plan, it shall
require review and approval of an amended area plan.
f. The collocation of wireless telecommunication antennas on
existing wireless telecommunication support structures,
disguised telecommunication facilities and mounted antenna
telecommunication facilities.
g. Home occupations. Home occupation means a business,
profession, occupation, trade, artisan or hand craft conducted
within a dwelling unit for gain or support by a resident of the
dwelling unit pursuant to the limits of this Section. A home
occupation use shall not include those businesses which are
required by State agencies to be open to the public such as gun
dealers. A home occupation use shall be subject to the
following supplementary use standards:
(1) Incidental nature. The home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and secondary to the residential use of the
building and shall be confined to no more than ten percent
(10%) of the total floor area of the dwelling.
(2) Location. A home occupation with the exception of outside
instructional services shall be conducted within the
principal dwelling or off-site and shall not be conducted
within any accessory building or structure, other than as
provided for carriage houses, or within any open porch or
carport that is attached to and part of the principal
structure. Instructional services, which by their nature
must be conducted outside of the principal structure, such
Section
400.161
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.161
100:547
as swimming lessons, shall be located in a rear or side
yard.
(3) Character of dwelling. The home occupation shall not
change the essential residential character of the dwelling
in terms of exterior appearance and interior space.
(4) Employee. Home occupations shall only be conducted by
members of the immediate family residing in the dwelling
unit. A maximum of one (1) person who is not a member of
the immediate family may assist in the operation of the
home occupations.
(5) Business license. Home occupations shall be operated
pursuant to a valid business license for the use held by a
resident of the dwelling.
(6) No advertising. No external evidence or sign shall
advertise, display or otherwise indicate the presence of
the home occupation, nor shall the street address of the
home occupation be advertised through signs, billboards,
television, radio or newspapers.
(7) No on-premises sales. A home occupation shall not involve
the sale of any stock in trade, supplies, products or
services on the premises, except for home instructional
services.
(8) No outside storage. No equipment or materials used in the
home occupation shall be stored or displayed outside of
the dwelling including driveways.
(9) Nuisances prohibited. No home occupation shall involve
the use of any mechanical, electrical or other equipment,
materials or items which produce noise, electrical or
magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare, smoke, dust,
odor or other nuisance outside the residential building.
There shall be no storage of hazardous or noxious
materials on the site of the home occupation. There shall
be no noise of an objectionable nature from the home
occupation audible at adjoining property lines.
(10) Violations or hazard. If any of the above requirements are
violated, or if the use, or any part thereof, is determined by
the City to create a health or safety hazard, then the
occupational license may be revoked.
(11) Vehicles. One (1) business related vehicle per dwelling
unit not over one (1) ton rated capacity may be parked at
the home, providing all of the following conditions are met:
vehicle is registered or licensed and operable; used by a
resident of the premises; gross weight does not exceed ten
Section
400.161
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.161
100:548
thousand (10,000) pounds, including load; height does not
exceed nine (9) feet, including any load, bed or box; and
total vehicle length does not exceed twenty-six (26) feet;
the vehicle has no permanent signage related to the home
occupation contained anywhere on the vehicle; and the
vehicle is not construction equipment (such as a backhoe,
bulldozer, forklift, etc.).
(12) Temporary uses.
(a) Contractor's project office. Includes any structure
containing an on-site construction management office
for an active construction project;
(b) Contractor's on-site equipment storage facility.
Includes any structure or outdoor storage area
designed for the on-site storage of construction
equipment and/or materials for an active construction
project; and
(c) On-site real estate sales office. Includes any building
which serves as an on-site office for a development
project.
C. Development Procedures And Standards.
1. Rezoning to the Mixed-Use Traditional Development District. A
petition may be submitted for rezoning to the Mixed-Use
Traditional Development District in conjunction with an application
for area plan approval or prior to area plan submittal. However,
with the exception of grading, no development may take place on a
site rezoned to the Mixed-Use Traditional Development District
until both an area plan and final plan have been approved by the
City Council.
2. Minimum lot area. The minimum land area to be developed under
any single development plan shall be five (5) acres.
3. Required mix of uses. All mixed-use developments shall be
designed and developed to provide an appropriate interrelationship
between the residential and non-residential uses within the
development area in accordance with the following requirements:
a. A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the land area within any
mixed-use development under a single development plan shall
be devoted to residential use. A minimum of twenty percent
(20%) of the land area within any mixed-use development
under a single development plan shall be devoted to nonresidential
development. The remaining development area may
go to either residential or non-residential use, up to a
maximum of eighty percent (80%). These percentages shall be
calculated using the square feet of gross land area devoted to
Section
400.161
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.161
100:549
each the residential and non-residential uses, minus the area
devoted to public right-of-way. The percentage of land area
devoted to buildings with combined residential and nonresidential
uses shall be permitted to be calculated towards
either the percentage of land area devoted to residential or
non-residential use in order to meet this requirement.
b. Residential land uses in an institutional setting, such as group
homes, convalescent homes, rehabilitation centers, limited
care facilities, senior citizen housing within assisted living or
long-term/skilled nursing facilities, convents, monasteries and
similar land uses, shall not be permitted to be calculated
towards the minimum twenty percent (20%) land area
requirement for residential or non-residential uses outlined
above.
4. Residential density. Based on the total acreage of any mixed-use
development under a single development plan, the overall
residential density of the entire development shall not exceed six
(6) dwelling units per acre. However, the maximum density of any
exclusively residential area within any mixed-use development
under a single development plan shall not exceed twenty (20)
dwelling units per acre.
5. Maximum building heights. No building or structure should exceed
fifty (50) feet or three (3) stories. The Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council may allow additional height to a
maximum of six (6) stories when it is determined: [Ord. No. 6023
§2, 8-28-2014]
a. The building heights are in appropriate scale to their
surroundings both internal and external to the site.
b. Building design and orientation effectively preserve clearly
identified significant view corridors from and through the
development site.
c. The applicable fire protection district can provide the
necessary emergency fire protection and emergency access.
d. The building height will not interfere with St. Charles County's
emergency microwave communications system. For purposes
of this Subsection, the lack of interference may be shown by
submitting a letter from or written findings of the St. Charles
County Emergency Communications System Manager after
review of the site and building plans.
6. Off-street parking and loading. The minimum off-street parking and
loading requirements for any use or building in the Mixed-Use
Traditional Development District shall not be reduced below that
required per Article XII of the Zoning Code for the same use or
building in any other zoning district.
Section
400.161
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.161
100:550
7. Standards for review of the area plan. The area plan shall be
reviewed on the basis of whether or not it is meeting the purposes
and intent of the Mixed-Use Traditional Development District
including: A balanced land use mix, which develops neighborhoods;
treats edged areas as a network of connecting open-spaced
corridors; provides a pedestrian orientation in scale within the
neighborhoods at a human scale; offers connections between the
neighborhoods, residences, shopping, employment and
recreational uses so that they are connected by sidewalks or
pedestrian paths, bicycle paths or bicycle lanes and driveways and
local streets; creates neighborhoods where there is mixed use
(residential and non-residential uses), buildings having vertical
integration and encouraging by design the cloistering of living,
working, recreation, open space, shopping and civic uses; and
offers a range of housing so that people of different social and
economic backgrounds may live in the same neighborhood,
including a range of housing types such as single-family detached,
town house, multiple-family and accessory structures.
a. The area plan for the Mixed-Use Traditional Development
District shall show a design for a circulation system based
upon a hierarchy of transportation methods. The hierarchy
shall attempt to consider pedestrians as the most important
followed by cyclists, non-motorized vehicles and then
automobiles. This system shall be designed to connect and
provide access between different land uses within each
neighborhood and the surrounding areas by providing
pedestrian and bicycle linkages including, but not limited to,
walking paths, sidewalks and bike trails or bike lanes. Parking
areas shall be designed to encourage the pedestrian nature of
the development. The area plan shall provide facilities for
seating, bicycle parking, etc., to encourage non-vehicular onsite
circulation.
b. As part of the area plan submittal a general summary of the
proposed development standards including architectural
guidelines for each land use within the development shall be
provided. At the time of final plan approval, detailed
information including the covenants and restrictions on the
development standards and architectural controls shall be
provided. Such standards and controls shall be consistent with
the concepts of Mixed-Use Traditional Development District as
outlined within this Section.
c. Public hearing notification and sign posting requirements. The
Area Plan shall be subject to the Public Hearing Notification
and Sign Posting Requirements established in Section 400.685
of the Zoning Code.
8. Standards for review of the final plan. The area plan shall be
followed by the final plan(s). The final plan(s) shall be submitted in
Section
400.161
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.161
100:551
accordance with the requirements of Article V—Planned
Developments of the Zoning Code. The final plan(s) shall be subject
to the public hearing notification and sign posting requirements
established in Section 400.685 of the Zoning Code.
D. Conditional Uses. The following conditional use procedures and
standards apply to all conditional uses identified under Subsection (B)
hereof. The purpose of these provisions, modeled on and adopting
certain of the provisions of Article VII of Chapter 400 of the City of
O'Fallon Zoning Code relating to conditional uses, is to facilitate site
planning and community planning within the Mixed- Use Traditional
Development District. These procedures and standards are intended to
achieve the objectives of the Mixed-Use Traditional Development
District and safeguard the present and future use and development of
the Mixed-Use Traditional Development District while promoting and
protecting the public health, safety and welfare of the City.
1. In addition to those conditional uses identified under Subsection
(B) hereof, conditional uses, as defined herein, are those types of
uses, not identified on the area plan or the amended area plan,
which are considered by the City to be essentially desirable and
necessary, or convenient to the community, but which by their
natures or in their operation:
a. Adjoin too closely to a permitted use within the Mixed-Use
Traditional Development District such that the conditional use
could have a detrimental impact on the value or potential
development of the adjacent properties; or
b. Have a tendency to generate excessive traffic; or
c. Have a potential for attracting a large number of persons to the
Mixed-Use Traditional Development District, thus creating
noise or other pollutants; or
d. Have an extraordinary potential for accidents or danger to
public health or safety.
2. Remaining provisions apply. The provisions of Sections 400.305,
400.310, 400.320 and 400.330 for conditional uses under Article
VII of the Zoning Code, shall be applied with the same force and
effect for the application and approval process for conditional uses
in this Mixed-Use Traditional Development District.
3. Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City
Council. Upon receiving the application for conditional use permit
from the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council shall
publish notice and hold public hearings on the proposal.
Procedures for public hearings shall be handled the same as a
zoning amendment as described in Article XVI of the Zoning Code.
The decision to recommend approval or denial of the proposed
conditional use shall be based on the following criteria:
Section
400.161
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.161
100:552
a. The proposed conditional use complies with all applicable
provisions in place for the area plan of the Mixed-Use
Traditional Development District.
b. The proposed conditional use at the specified location will
contribute to and promote the welfare and convenience of the
public.
c. The proposed conditional use will not cause substantial injury
to the value of other property in the area in which it is to be
located.
d. The location and size of the conditional use, the nature and
intensity of the operation involved in or conducted in
connection with it, and the location of the site with respect to
streets giving access to it are such that the conditional use will
not prevent development and use of property within the Mixed-
Use Traditional Development District in accordance with uses
identified in Subsection (B) hereof.
e. Adequate utility, drainage, and other such necessary facilities
have been or will be provided.
f. Adequate access, entrance and exit drives will be provided and
shall be designed to prevent traffic hazards and to minimize
traffic congestion and parking congestion in the area.
g. The proposed conditional use complies with all the applicable
provisions of Section 400.330 (additional development
requirements of certain conditional uses).
h. In consideration of requests for any conditional use permit, the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall
require such conditions of use, not inconsistent with the
approved area plan and the trust indentures/covenants/deed
restrictions for the area, as deemed necessary to protect the
best interests of the City and the surrounding property and to
achieve the objectives of this Mixed-Use Traditional
Development District. If this conditional use was not part of the
approved area plan, it shall require review and approval of an
amended area plan.
4. Additional development requirements of enumerated conditional
uses.
a. In-vehicle sales and services. This conditional use shall not be
permitted in exclusively residential areas within the Mixed-Use
Traditional Development District and as identified in the
approved area plan. This conditional use shall not be permitted
within an area designated as a village center or exclusively
residential area on the approved area plan. If this conditional
Section
400.161
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.161
100:553
use was not part of the approved area plan, it shall require
review and approval of an amended area plan.
b. Commercial animal boarding. This conditional use shall not be
permitted in exclusively residential areas within the Mixed-Use
Traditional Development District as identified in the approved
area plan. If this conditional use was not part of the approved
area plan, it shall require review and approval of an amended
area plan.
c. Group day care center (six (6) or more children). This
conditional use shall not be permitted in exclusively residential
areas within the Mixed-Use Traditional Development District
as identified in the approved area plan. If this conditional use
was not part of the approved area plan, it shall require review
and approval of an amended area plan.
d. Night lighting of private residential recreational facility. Any
approval for night lighting of activities as an accessory use for
private residential recreational facilities within the Mixed-Use
Traditional Development District shall require a conditional
use permit and be conditioned on:
(1) That the height of the night lighting not exceed the height
of the primary residential unit on the residential lot; and
(2) That the primary beam of lighting be permanently directed
away from sight from other residences and completely
comply with the City's exterior lighting standards.
(3) If this conditional use was not part of the approved area
plan, it shall require review and approval of an amended
area plan.
e. Night lighting of company provided on-site recreation. Any
approval for night lighting of activities as an accessory use for
company provided on-site recreation within the Mixed-Use
Traditional Development District shall require a conditional
use permit and be conditioned on:
(1) That the height of the night lighting not exceed thirty (30)
feet;
(2) That the primary beam of lighting be permanently directed
away from sight from residences and will completely
comply with the City's exterior lighting standards;
(3) That the activity for which nighttime lighting is used shall
be limited to company uses and shall not be allowed within
exclusively residential areas.
Section
400.161
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.161
100:554
Section 400.162. Senior Community Overlay District. [R.O. 2007
§400.162; Ord. No. 4383 §8, 7-1-2002; Ord. No. 4660 §§1—2,
6-1-2004; Ord. No. 5727 §3, 8-25-2011]
(4) If this conditional use was not part of the approved area
plan, it shall require review and approval of an amended
area plan.
f. Wireless telecommunication facilities that include new or
modified wireless telecommunication support structures.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Senior Community Overlay District is to
encourage development of residential communities for persons fifty-five
(55) years of age and older by allowing for a greater variety of uses and
building types at a higher density than would normally be allowed and
allowing greater flexibility in site planning so as to promote affordable
housing and the preservation of open space within the development. It
is intended that a senior community development provide a range of
housing types and facilities that are responsive to the health care and
recreational needs of senior residents. The senior community should be
a well integrated development in terms of land use, functional systems,
and major design elements such as buildings, roads, utilities, sewers,
drainage systems and open space. Design standards should be
supportive of a cohesive development while providing a sense of
community.
B. General Requirements.
1. Locations. The Senior Community Overlay District is an overlay
zoning district that shall be superimposed on the "R-1", "R-2",
"R-3", "R-4", "R-5", "C-O", "C-2" and "MUTDD" Districts.
2. Conditional use permit. Senior communities shall be authorized
only by a conditional use permit granted by the City Council in
compliance with Section 400.300 et seq. of this Code.
C. Permitted Uses.
1. Uses allowed by right. The following uses shall be allowed by right
within the Senior Community Overlay District:
a. All uses permitted by right in the underlying base zoning
district.
2. Uses allowed by conditional use permit. In addition to the
conditional uses listed in Appendix A, the following uses may be
permitted within a Senior Community Overlay District upon the
granting of a conditional use permit:
a. A senior community development (senior community).
D. General Standards And Density Determination.
Section
400.161
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.162
100:555
1. General standards. A senior community shall comply with the
following general standards:
a. All dwellings in a senior community shall be subject to an age
restriction described in a deed/deed rider or restrictive
covenant and shall be reviewed by the City Attorney and
approved by the City Council. The age restriction shall limit the
dwelling units to occupancy by seniors age fifty-five (55) or
older; or their spouses of any age; or other persons if medical
need can be established to the satisfaction of the association.
The conditional use permit and the age restrictions described
above shall run with the land and shall be enforceable by any
owner(s) of dwelling units in the senior community.
b. A senior community shall contain a minimum of four (4)
housing units as defined in this Section.
c. Upon approval by the Council, a senior community may include
accessory retail uses intended for use and benefit of the senior
community residents. The total amount of gross building floor
area used for accessory retail uses shall not exceed five
percent (5%) of the total gross building floor area for the entire
senior community.
d. Upon approval by the Council, a senior community also may
include a Senior Community Center or community building(s)
intended for the use and benefit of the senior community
residents, provided that such use(s) shall not occupy more than
ten percent (10%) of the total gross building floor area
constructed within the approved senior community. The
maintenance of such facilities shall be the responsibility of the
residents, owners or their agents.
2. Density determination.
a. For the purposes of this Section, one (1) housing unit shall be
defined as equal to:
(1) One (1) home site in a senior community residential
subdivision or one (1) senior community townhouse;
(2) Two (2) dwelling units or rooms in an assisted living or
congregate living residence facility, or independent living
residence facility;
(3) Three (3) dwelling units or rooms in a long-term care or
skilled nursing facility.
Section
400.162
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.162
100:556
TABLE ONE "R-1" and "R-2"
"R-3", "R-4",
"R-5", "C-O",
"C-2" and
"MUTDD"
Single-Family
Homes Townhouses
4 housing units
per acre
8 housing units
per acre
Assisted Living or
Independent Living
8 housing units
per acre
12 housing units
per acre
Long-Term or
Skilled Nursing
12 housing units
per acre
16 housing units
per acre
b. The preceding table illustrates the maximum number of
housing units per acre permitted for a given senior community
site.
c. An applicant or developer of a senior community is not entitled
to the maximum number of housing units described above. The
allowable increased density, up to the calculated maximum
number of housing units for the given senior community site, is
at the discretion of the Council based on an evaluation of the
proposed development plan's impacts and benefits.
E. Senior Community Site Development Standards.
1. Open space standards.
a. Provide a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the lot area as
permanent, protected open space.
b. A minimum of forty percent (40%) of the required senior
community open space shall be suitable for use for passive
and/or active recreational purposes.
c. The following shall not be counted as part of the required
senior community open space: median strips, landscaped areas
within parking lots, constructed stormwater management
facilities including retention basins, lawn/landscaped areas on
individual home site lots or private residential yards.
2. Dimensional standards.
a. There shall be no minimum standards for internal setbacks
within the senior community unless required by the Council in
its issuance of a conditional use permit based on specific
findings that there is need for greater physical separation of
specific buildings or uses, except where noted in this Section.
b. In a senior community residential subdivision, each lot in the
senior community shall have a minimum front yard of not less
than twenty-five (25) feet; a side yard of not less than six (6)
feet, except in the case of a corner lot or parcel where the side
Section
400.162
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.162
100:557
yard on the road or street shall not be less than twenty-five (25)
feet; and a rear yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
c. Each building in the senior community shall be set back a
minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from a senior community's
perimeter lot lines This minimum setback shall be increased by
two (2) feet for each foot the proposed building is over thirty
(30) feet in height. The maximum height of any structure in a
senior community shall be no greater than thirty-five (35) feet,
except buildings in the "R-4" Residence District and the "C-O"
and "C-2" Commercial Districts where the maximum height of
any structure shall be no greater than forty-five (45) feet. The
setback or buffer area shall be maintained as a densely planted
landscape buffer.
d. In a senior community residential subdivision, each lot shall be
a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet. All other
provisions of the Chapter 405 Subdivision and Land
Development shall be met as applicable.
3. Parking standards.
a. Within a senior community residential subdivision, a minimum
of one (1) off-street parking space shall be required for each
dwelling unit; a minimum of five-tenths (0.5) parking spaces
shall be provided for each independent living or congregate
living unit; a minimum of two-tenths (0.2) parking space for
each assisted living facility, long-term care or skilled nursing
facility. Additionally, one (1) space for every two (2) employees
on the maximum shift plus one (1) space for every vehicle
customarily used in the operation of the use shall be provided.
b. The parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the
dwellings or on a contiguous lot within the senior community
provided that there are easements ensuring rights of access,
use and maintenance. The Council may, as a condition of
granting a conditional use permit for the senior community,
require additional off-street parking areas be provided for use
in common by dwelling unit owners, employees of the facility
and guests.
c. No parking facility shall contain more than fifty (50) parking
spaces and shall be sited to the side or rear of buildings and
shall minimize visibility from public and private streets.
d. Parking facilities shall be adequately buffered and shaded.
Parking lots containing three (3) or more spaces shall be
planted with at least two (2) trees per three (3) spaces. Shade
trees shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2½) inches in
diameter.
Section
400.162
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.162
100:558
e. A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be required
for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross building area
occupied by a permitted accessory retail use. The Council may
reduce this requirement if the nature and design of a particular
senior community indicates that parking demand will be lower
due to enhanced pedestrian access or a reduced reliance on
motor vehicle travel within the senior community. The required
parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the
permitted use or on a contiguous lot (within the senior
community) provided that there are easements ensuring rights
of access, use and maintenance. The Council may, as a
condition of granting a conditional use permit for the senior
community, require additional off-street parking areas to be
provided for accessory uses within the senior community.
4. Landscaping, shade trees and infrastructure.
a. Street trees shall be planted on each side of public and private
streets. Street trees shall be at least two and one-half (2½)
inches in diameter and shall be spaced at intervals no greater
than twenty (20) feet along both sides of the street.
b. Senior community perimeter bufferyards shall provide for a
minimum of five (5) plant units, as defined in Section 402.02089
of this Code, for every one hundred (100) lineal feet of frontage
where the bufferyard is required when abutting commercial,
industrial, high tech and mixed use districts and two and onehalf
(2½) plant units when abutting residential districts.
Landscape materials shall consist of evergreen trees
measuring eight (8) to ten (10) feet tall, deciduous trees
measuring four (4) inches in caliper, flowering or ornamental
trees measuring two (2) inches in caliper and shrubs
measuring twenty-four (24) inches tall.
c. All roadways and driveways serving more than one (1) dwelling
shall be a maximum paved width of twenty-five (25) feet.
Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of the street.
d. All private roadways, driveways and parking areas within the
senior community shall be maintained by the applicant,
developer of the senior community, its assigns or owners or
their agents in perpetuity unless dedicated for public use.
e. All utilities shall be underground.
f. No mobile homes or trailers shall be allowed to be used as
dwelling units in the senior community.
89.The reference herein to "Section 400.425(D)" was changed to "Section 402.020", since
ord. no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed this subsection and enacted Chapter 402 and
more specifically Section 402.020 as it's replacement.
Section
400.162
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.162
100:559
Section 400.163. Downtown Overlay District. [Ord. No. 6541,
1-24-2019]
g. Solid waste storage, air conditioners, loading areas and the
like shall be shielded from view by walls, dense vegetation or
fences.
5. Compliance.
a. No conditional use permit shall be issued without appropriate
restrictions to ensure that the provisions of this Section are
made binding upon the applicant and his/her successors and
heirs. These deed restrictions and indentures shall be
enforceable by the City and can not be changed or otherwise
amended without the City's consent.
b. No certificate of occupancy, temporary or permanent, shall be
issued for any unit in a senior community until all deed
restrictions, covenants, transactions and/or other documents
necessary to ensure compliance by the applicant with the
requirements of this Section have been submitted and
executed.
A. Purpose Of The District. The purpose of this district is to recognize the
unique and historic attributes of the area identified as Downtown on the
Official Zoning District Map and to encourage the redevelopment and
revitalization of this area with a mix of retail, service, office,
government, institutional, religious, restaurant and hospitality uses
together with residential uses. The regulations of this overlay district
are intended to allow greater design flexibility in development than is
permitted by the other district regulations. The regulations are further
intended to enhance the aesthetic appearance and streetscape of the
public and private spaces within the area.
1. Because of the flexibility afforded by these regulations, the
Planning and Development Department will be responsible for
researching all property owners whose boundary limits are
abutting (excluding right-of-way) the property which is the subject
of a site plan submission. The Department shall notify all such
abutting property owners of the Planning and Zoning Commission
meeting when the site plan will be considered. Notices shall be
postmarked at least seven (7) days prior to the Planning and Zoning
Commission meeting. In addition, the Planning and Development
Department shall erect a sign, at least six (6) square feet in size, on
the property advertising notice of the meeting at least seven (7)
days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting.
2. Furthermore, a written explanation shall be included with any
development applications that outlines any minimum code
requirements that are being requested to be modified as allowed by
the Downtown Overlay District.
Section
400.162
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.163
100:560
3. The City recognizes the importance of technology and supports any
steps necessary to upgrade and increase the capacity and
capabilities of digital networks in the Downtown area.
B. Zoning Categories And Application Of Overlay District Regulations To
Existing Uses.
1. The following zoning categories and permitted and conditional uses
therein are allowed in the Downtown Overlay District:
a. "R-2," "R-3," "R-4," "C-O," "C-1," "C-2" and P-R:
(1) Permitted Uses. The listing of permitted uses in "R-2,"
"R-3," "R-4," "C-O," "C-1" and "C-2" is set out in Section
400.163(N).
(2) Conditional Uses. The listing of conditional uses in "R-2,"
"R-3," "R-4," "C-O," "C-1" and "C-2" is set out in Section
400.163(N).
b. Mixed-Use Traditional Development District. The listing of
permitted and conditional uses is set out in Section
400.161(B).
2. Existing land uses which are otherwise permitted under the
Downtown Overlay District regulations shall be considered
conforming uses even if the property has a different zoning
category than those set forth in Subsection (B)(1) above.
3. Non-Conforming Uses.
a. Existing land uses which are not permitted under the
Downtown Overlay District shall be considered nonconforming
uses. Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter
400 pertaining to non-conforming uses, the owner of such
property may make improvements to the parcel on which the
non-conforming use is located as long as the improvements do
not result in more than a minor increase in the intensity of the
non-conforming use. Under no circumstances shall the
property used for the non-conforming use be expanded. Such
determination shall be made by the Planning and Zoning
Commission as part of site plan review and approval.
b. Any improvements to property used for a non-conforming use
shall comply with the underlying district regulations applicable
to such improvements. A non-conforming use shall not benefit
from the flexibility afforded by these Downtown Overlay
District regulations.
4. Existing land uses which are considered conditional uses under the
Downtown Overlay District shall require a conditional use permit
before any improvements or changes are made with respect to the
parcel or the use.
Section
400.163
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.163
100:561
C. Building/Structure Height. No building or structure should exceed fifty
(50) feet or three (3) stories. The Planning and Zoning Commission and
City Council may allow additional height to a maximum of six (6) stories
when it is determined that:
1. The building heights are in appropriate scale to their surroundings
both internal and external to the site.
2. Building design and orientation effectively preserve clearly
identified significant view corridors from and through the
development site.
3. The applicable fire protection district can provide the necessary
emergency fire protection and emergency access.
4. The building height will not interfere with St. Charles County's
emergency microwave communications system. For purposes of
this Subsection, the lack of interference may be shown by
submitting a letter from or written findings of the St. Charles
County Emergency Communications System Manager after review
of the site and building plans.
D. Lot Area Requirements. There are no minimum lot area requirements in
this District; provided, however, that the lot size shall be sufficient to
accommodate the proposed use with all appurtenant requirements
which shall be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission as
part of site plan review and approval.
E. Lot Coverage Requirements. There are no lot coverage requirements in
this District except that a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the lot
shall be landscaped green space. However, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may require additional landscaping in order to mitigate
adverse conditions on surrounding property or may allow additional lot
coverage because of unique conditions of the parcel and such is
compatible with surrounding areas. Those determinations shall be
made by the Planning and Zoning Commission on an individual basis
and as part of site plan review and approval.
F. Setback Requirements. Setback requirements shall be consistent with
the underlying zoning district. The setbacks can be reduced by the
Planning and Zoning Commission to accommodate distinctive layout of
improvements on the lot which is consistent with the character of the
neighborhood, to protect features on the lot or because of unique
conditions of the lot. Such determination shall be made by the Planning
and Zoning Commission on an individual basis as reviewed and
approved as part of a site plan.
G. Bufferyard Requirements. Setback requirements shall be consistent
with the underlying zoning district. The setbacks can be reduced by the
Planning and Zoning Commission to accommodate distinctive layout of
improvements on the lot which is consistent with the character of the
neighborhood or because of unique conditions of the lot. Such
Section
400.163
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.163
100:562
determination shall be made by the Planning and Zoning Commission
on an individual basis as reviewed and approved as part of a site plan.
H. Parking Requirements.
1. The parking requirements for each development shall be as
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in conjunction
with site plan review and approval. Parking requirements shall be
consistent with ordinance requirements when possible, but will be
reviewed and considered on an individual basis after evaluating
existing conditions and space available. In cases where minimum
parking requirements cannot be provided on site or a shared
parking agreement cannot be acquired, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall review a parking plan. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall inform the City Council of the action taken on the
parking plan.
2. For residential uses and businesses locating in the downtown area
on previously developed property and which do not need site plan
approval, the parking requirements shall be reviewed as part of the
business license application. In cases where minimum parking
spaces cannot be provided on site or a shared parking agreement
cannot be reached, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
review a parking plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
inform the City Council of the action taken on the parking plan.
3. For businesses and residential uses that do not meet the City
minimum on-site parking requirements and have been approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission, a contribution of one
thousand seven hundred dollars ($1,700.00) plus land cost per
parking space below the minimum requirement shall be provided to
the City. The funds gathered from these contributions will be used
for the City to create or maintain public parking opportunities
within the Downtown Overlay District.
I. Building Code Requirements For Existing Buildings. The City has
adopted the International Existing Building Code. The current version
as adopted by the City Council shall be followed for existing buildings in
all cases as published by the International Code Council and is set out
in Section 500.500 of the Municipal Code.
J. Screening Requirements. Screening shall be provided to obscure
certain uses, or portions of a specific use, which by the scale or design
represent a potential negative impact on adjacent properties. This
screening will be accomplished by the use of fences, walls, hedges,
landscaping, earth berms, natural buffers, or any combination thereof,
as reviewed and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
1. The following specific uses or features shall be screened from
adjacent properties and from public view from any existing or
proposed public street, regardless of their size, scale or location on
the site:
Section
400.163
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.163
100:563
a. Dumpster and trash hauling areas.
b. Service entrances and utility facilities.
c. Loading docks or spaces.
d. Areas used for the outdoor storage of materials or equipment.
2. In addition to the standards set forth in Section 400.278 of the
Zoning Code, the following standards apply to all screening:
a. Minimum height of any screening shall be that which is
sufficient to visually separate uses within the subject property
from adjoining properties and streets.
b. Height of any screening materials on a corner is controlled by
vehicular sight distances.
c. Plant material used for screening shall be of evergreen
varieties and shall be at least six (6) feet in height and no
farther apart than ten (10) feet apart when planted.
d. All screening must be maintained and replaced as required to
stay in compliance.
K. Public Roadway And Sidewalk Upgrades And Right-Of-Way Dedication.
Because of space constraints, it is recognized that the traditional
roadway and sidewalk cross sections established by the City Code will
not work in many areas of this Downtown Overlay District. With this in
mind, the Planning and Zoning Commission can determine the extent of
public roadway and sidewalk improvements and right-of-way dedication
to be required on new developments. A traffic study could be required
to determine what improvements are necessary. In cases where a traffic
study is not warranted the City Engineer can determine the extent of
the reduced roadway or sidewalk cross-section improvements to be
used. For the purpose of being consistent, as the City approves
developments in the downtown area and on specific streets within the
downtown area, the City will develop a pattern of the approved roadway
and sidewalk cross sections, and these will provide a template for
future projects. The Engineering Division shall collect and maintain a
library of the roadway and sidewalk cross sections that get approved on
projects within this district.
L. Detention Requirements. If it is proven that a detention basin cannot be
accommodated on the site, stormwater facilities as described in the
regulations outlined in Section 405.240(D)(2) of the Subdivision Code
shall be required.
M. Architectural, Site Design And Signage Guidelines. The following
guidelines are considered voluntary and not a requirement. Please note
that if a guideline is chosen to be followed there are standards provided
herein that will need to be followed.
Section
400.163
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.163
100:564
1. Sign Guidelines.
a. Setbacks can be reduced in circumstances where the minimum
setbacks cannot be met. Sight triangle and sight distance
requirements shall not be modified.
b. Projecting signs are allowed. If projecting into the City right-ofway
a license agreement would be required.
c. The City's Sign Code includes further sign requirements as
outlined in Chapter 410 of the Municipal Code.
2. Building Placement Guidelines.
a. Locate buildings close to the street [within twenty-five (25) feet
of the curb] with off-street parking behind and/or beside
buildings.
b. If the building is located at a street intersection, place the main
building, or part of the building, at the corner. Parking, loading
or service should not be located at an intersection without
review and approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
c. To maximize the street frontage of buildings and minimize the
street frontage of parking lots, buildings should be articulated
so that the long side fronts on the street.
3. Outdoor Lighting Guidelines.
a. Use low intensity of high-quality white light, which will provide
good, uniform visibility while avoiding light pollutions.
b. Cutoff fixtures are preferred because they are more efficient
than non-cutoff fixtures at casting light on the sidewalk and
avoiding light spillage and pollution.
c. Use decorative bases, posts, luminaries and bollards in lieu of
standard wood poles.
d. A lighting program should consider the illumination of
sidewalks and other multiuse pathways using low-intensity
fixtures that provide an even distribution of light while
avoiding areas of intense shadows.
e. To consolidate the number of fixtures placed within the rightof-
way, consider the colocation of light fixtures along with
other streetscape elements on single poles (i.e., street lighting,
pedestrian lighting and banners).
f. A substantial amount of lighting for pedestrians should be
provided from the storefronts using either indirect illumination
from within the building or direct illumination under canopies
or awnings.
Section
400.163
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.163
100:565
4. Site Landscaping Guidelines. The corners of street intersections,
particularly gateways and site entries (entries from both street and
sidewalk) should be distinguished by special landscape treatments:
flower displays, specimen trees and shrubs, accent rocks, low
walls, signage, decorative lighting, sculpture, architectural
elements, and/or special paving. Features for vehicular entry points
must meet the City's sight triangle requirements.
5. Vehicular Circulation Guidelines.
a. Whenever possible, internal access drives should be located to
join together existing public streets and/or connect to adjacent
private drives, so that the internal circulation functions as an
integral part of the surrounding transportation network.
b. Provide at least one (1) vehicular link to each abutting property
to the extent practical. This is most often accomplished by
joining adjacent parking lots. If the lot is undeveloped or
underdeveloped, provide (at an appropriate grade) part of the
connection or maintain the potential for a future link.
c. Minimize or eliminate curb cuts along a public street. Where
possible, share vehicular access with adjacent properties and/
or utilize alleys for access.
6. Automobile Parking Guidelines.
a. Parking lots should be located behind buildings or in the
interior of a block whenever possible. Parking lots should not
occupy more than one-third (1/3) of the frontage of the
adjacent building or no more than sixty-four (64) feet,
whichever is less.
b. Shared parking is strongly encouraged between adjacent or
vertically mixed uses whose peak demand is off-set from each
other (e.g., office and housing).
c. Large surface parking lots larger than seventy-five thousand
(75,000) square feet of vehicular surface should be visually and
functionally segmented into several smaller lots enclosed by
landscaping.
d. Parking lots along the street must be screened from the
adjacent street and sidewalk by walls, fences, or landscaping.
7. General Street And Sidewalk Design Principle Guidelines.
a. Streets should be designed with street trees planted in a
manner appropriate to their function. Commercial streets
should have trees which complement the face of the buildings
and which shade the sidewalk. Residential streets should
provide for an appropriate canopy, which shades both the
street and sidewalk, and serves as a visual buffer between the
Section
400.163
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.163
100:566
street and the home. The typical width of the street tree
landscape strip is six (6) - eight (8) feet. This width ensures
healthy street trees, precludes tree roots from heaving the
sidewalk, and provides adequate pedestrian buffering.
b. Trees may be planted in tree wells with grates over the top to
protect the roots. Irrigation should be provided. Large canopy
trees such as oaks and maples should be planted a minimum of
thirty (30) feet on center. Unit pavers are preferred over
concrete. Where no on-street parking exists, all street trees
shall be set back from the edge of the curb a minimum of four
(4) feet.
8. General Building Design Guidelines.
a. New buildings should strive for a contextual approach to
design. A contextual design approach is not intended to
necessarily mean a historic approach, but rather one that is
sensitive to the surrounding urban, built and natural
conditions.
b. Adjacent buildings should relate in similarity of scale, height
and configuration.
9. Facade Treatment Guidelines.
a. The primary entrance shall be both architecturally and
functionally designed on the front facade of the building facing
the primary public street. Such entrances shall be designed to
convey their prominence on the fronting facade.
b. Buildings at street corners should be designed to address the
corner, that is, to engage the interest of drivers, pedestrians
and bicyclists at the intersection. Provide a building entry,
additional building mass, and distinctive architectural
elements at the corner.
c. Use building massing, special architectural features, signage,
and changes in the roofline to emphasize building entrances.
d. The ground level of the building must offer pedestrian interest
along sidewalks and paths. This includes windows, entrances,
and architectural details. Signage, awnings, benches and
ornamentation are encouraged.
e. Canopies and awnings should be canvas or similar material
and may be permitted to encroach over a sidewalk to within
two (2) feet of a public street curb.
N. Listing of Permitted and Conditional Uses within the Downtown Overlay
District.
Section
400.163
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.163
100:567
Note – The letter P shall mean that the land use is outright "permitted"
in the corresponding Zoning District. The letter C shall mean the land
use is "conditionally permitted" in the corresponding Zoning District
(thus requiring a conditional use permit granted by the City Council).
The letter C-A shall mean the land use is "conditionally permitted"
in the corresponding Zoning District (where a conditional use permit
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission is required).
Note – The abbreviations for the Zoning Districts are as follows:
R-2 Two-Family Residential District
R-3 Garden Apartment District
R-4 Apartment House District
C-O Office District
C-1 Restricted Business District
C-2 General Business District
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR
CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C)
R-2 R-3 R-4 C-O C-1 C-2
A
Alcoholic beverages
(liquor, beer and wine) —
retail
P P
Alcoholic beverages
(liquor, beer and wine) —
wholesale
C
Ambulance and fire
protection services
P C P
Amphitheaters C C C C
Animal adoption centers C
Antique stores P P
Appliances (household) —
repair services
P
Appliances (including
parts and equipment) —
retail
C P
Aquariums P
Arboretums and botanical
gardens
P
Arcades P
Section
400.163
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.163
100:568
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR
CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C)
R-2 R-3 R-4 C-O C-1 C-2
Arenas and fieldhouses C
Armed forces recruiting
centers
P
Artist galleries P P P
Arts and crafts supply
stores
P
Athletic fields,
playgrounds, and tot lots
P P P P P P
Auditoriums P
Automobile and other
motor vehicles — fuel
sales (without repair
services)
C C
Automobile and other
passenger motor vehicles
— rental services
P
Automobile parking lots
and garages
(commercial)
C C C
B
Bait shops P
Banks, savings and loans,
and credit unions
P P P
Banquet halls and party
centers
C
Bars, pubs, nightclubs,
and taverns
C-A
Bed-and-breakfasts C C
Bicycles (including parts
and equipment) — retail
P P
Bicycles — rental
services
P P
Books, magazines,
newspapers, and similar
printed materials — retail
P P P
Section
400.163
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.163
100:569
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR
CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C)
R-2 R-3 R-4 C-O C-1 C-2
Books, magazines,
newspapers, and similar
printed materials —
wholesale
C
Bowling alleys P
Broadcast studios
(Internet, radio, and
television)
C P
Building and construction
materials — retail
P
Bus (passenger
terminals)
C
Business associations and
professional membership
organizations
P P
C
Camera and photographic
supplies — retail
P P
Carpet and floor covering
stores
P
Casinos C
Cemeteries and
mausoleums (humans)
C C C C C C
Charitable and welfare
services
P P
China, glassware, and
metalware — retail
P P
City facilities C C C P P P
Civic, social, and
fraternal associations
P P P
Civil defense and related
activities
P P P
Clothing and apparel —
retail
P P
Clothing and apparel —
wholesale
C
Section
400.163
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.163
100:570
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR
CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C)
R-2 R-3 R-4 C-O C-1 C-2
Commercial recreation
not elsewhere listed
(indoor)
C
Commercial recreation
not elsewhere listed
(outdoor)
C
Contractor services
(carpentry, electrical,
general construction,
HVAC, plumbing, roofing,
and similar services)
C
Convenience stores (with
fuel sales)
C C
Convenience stores
(without fuel sales)
C C
Convention centers C
Country clubs C C C C C C
Curtains, drapery, and
upholstery — retail
P
D
Daycare center, adult C C C C-A C-A C-A
Daycare center, child C C C C-A C-A C-A
Delicatessens C P P
Department and home
improvement stores
P
Detective, private
investigative, and
protective services
P P
Discount and variety
stores
P
Drug stores and
pharmacies
C P P
Dry cleaners and
laundering services
P P
Dwellings (boarding and
rooming homes)
C C
Section
400.163
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.163
100:571
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR
CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C)
R-2 R-3 R-4 C-O C-1 C-2
Dwellings (college and
university dormitories)
C C
Dwellings (convents and
rectories)
P P P P P P
Dwellings (in a nonresidential-
zoned
structure)
C C C
Dwellings (group homes) P P P
Dwellings (multifamily) P P
Dwellings (orphanages) C C
Dwellings (senior
community overlay
district)
C C C C C
Dwellings (single-family
attached)
P P P
Dwellings (single-family
detached)
P P P
Dwellings (fraternity and
sorority homes — off
campus)
C C C C C
Dwellings (fraternity and
sorority homes — on
campus)
C C
Dwellings (two-family) P P P
E
Electricity regulating
substations
C C C C C P
Electronic apparatus and
components — retail
C P
Electronic apparatus and
components — wholesale
C
Electronic entertainment
and communication
products — repair
C P
Section
400.163
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.163
100:572
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR
CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C)
R-2 R-3 R-4 C-O C-1 C-2
Electronic entertainment
and communication
products (including parts
and equipment) — retail
C
Exhibition halls P
Exterminating and
disinfecting services
P
F
Farmers markets C
Farm machinery and
equipment — retail
C
Farm supplies (including
feeds, grains, and hay) —
retail
C
Farms (roadside stands) C C
Flea markets (indoor and
outdoor)
C
Florists P P P
Food and beverage
products (excluding
alcoholic beverages) for
human consumption
(excludes bakeries, coffee
shops, restaurants) —
wholesale
C
Funeral homes,
mortuaries, and
crematoriums
P
Furniture and home/
office furnishings —
repair
P
Furniture and home/
office furnishings — retail
C P
G
Section
400.163
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.163
100:573
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR
CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C)
R-2 R-3 R-4 C-O C-1 C-2
Garden centers,
greenhouses
(commercial) and
nurseries
P P
General stores and retail
trade not elsewhere
listed
P P P
Gift, novelty, and
souvenir stores
C P P
Golf courses and golf
driving ranges (outdoors)
C C C
Golf (miniature) P
Grocery stores P P
Grooming (pet) P P
Gun shops and gunsmiths C
H
Hardware stores P P
Health and fitness clubs P P
Heliport pads C C
Historic monuments and
sites
P P P P P P
Hobby stores P P
Hospitals C P
Hotels C
I
Ice cream and frozen
desserts — retail
P P P
Ice skating and roller
skating rinks (indoor)
P
J
Janitorial and cleaning
services
C P
Jewelry, watches, and
clocks (including repair)
— retail
P P
Section
400.163
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.163
100:574
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR
CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C)
R-2 R-3 R-4 C-O C-1 C-2
K
L
Labor unions and similar
labor organizations
P P
Landscape nurseries and
garden supply stores
P P
Laundromats P P
Laundry pickup and
delivery services
(clothing, diapers, linen,
and similar services)
C
Libraries C C C P P P
Liquified petroleum gas
and other fuel oils —
retail
C
Locksmiths P P
M
Mail order facilities P
Martial arts studios P P P
Medical devices,
equipment, and supply
stores
C P P
Microbreweries within
restaurants and do-ityourself
beer and winemaking
stores
C-A C-A C-A
Military administration,
command, and
communication centers
C C C
Monuments — retail P
Motion picture
distribution services
P P
Motion picture
production studios
C
Museums P C P
Section
400.163
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.163
100:575
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR
CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C)
R-2 R-3 R-4 C-O C-1 C-2
Musical instruments
(including parts and
supplies) — retail
P P
N
Natural gas (pipeline
rights-of-way)
P P P P P P
Natural gas (pressure
control stations)
C C C C C C
Nursing, convalescent,
and rest homes (not
within a senior
community overlay
district)
C
O
Office equipment and
business machines —
repair
C P
Office equipment and
business machines —
retail
P
Offices — medical
services
P P P
Offices — professional
services
P P P
P
Paper products —
wholesale
C
Parks (public) P P P P P P
Personal care services
(health spas, tanning
beds, massage services
license by State of
Missouri, barber and
beauty shops and similar
uses)
P P P
Petroleum and other
hazardous liquids
(pipeline rights-of-way)
P P P P P P
Section
400.163
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.163
100:576
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR
CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C)
R-2 R-3 R-4 C-O C-1 C-2
Pet stores C P
Photocopying and
printing services
P P P
Photoengraving C
Photofinishing services P P P
Photographic equipment
(including parts and
supplies) — retail
P P
Photography studios P P P
Pool and billiard halls C
Post offices and private
postal services
P P
Printing and publishing
(books, newspapers,
magazines, and similar
printed products)
P
Private clubs C
Q
R
Radio and television
transmitting stations and
relay towers
C C C
Railroads (passenger
terminals)
C C C P P P
Railroads (right-of-way) C C C P P P
Recording studios P
Recreation centers C P P
Religious places of
worship (churches,
temples, synagogues,
mosques)
C C C P C P
Research, development,
and testing services
C P
Resorts C
Section
400.163
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.163
100:577
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR
CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C)
R-2 R-3 R-4 C-O C-1 C-2
Restaurants, coffee
shops, bakeries, and
similar dining
establishments with
drive-through windows
C C C
Restaurants, coffee
shops, bakeries, and
similar dining
establishments without
drive-through windows
P P P
Restaurants, coffee
shops, bakeries and
similar dining
establishments (without
drive-through windows)
which sell or serve
alcoholic beverages by
the drink
C-A C-A C-A
Restaurants, coffee
shops, bakeries and
similar dining
establishments (without
drive-through windows)
which do not sell or serve
alcoholic beverages by
the drink
P P P
S
Schools (colleges and
universities)
C C
Schools (athletic, trade
and vocational)
P
Schools, private and
public
C C C
Secondhand merchandise
(including consignment)
— retail
C P
Sewage pressure control
stations
C C C C C C
Section
400.163
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.163
100:578
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR
CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C)
R-2 R-3 R-4 C-O C-1 C-2
Sewage treatment
facilities (membrane
bioreactors)
C C C C C C
Signs and advertising
displays — manufacturing
C
Small engine repair P
Sporting goods stores P P
Stadiums C
Substance abuse facility C
T
Tailoring, garment, shoe,
and upholstery repair
P P
Taxicab, limousine, and
car service dispatch
P
Telephone (business
office)
P C P
Telephone (exchange
stations)
C C C P P P
Theaters, motion picture
(indoor)
P
Theaters, performing arts
(indoor)
P C P
Tobacco products
(chewing tobacco, cigars,
cigarettes, pipe tobacco,
snuff, and similar
products) — retail
P P
Toy stores P
U
V
Veterinarian clinics and
animal hospitals
C C P
Video game arcades P
W
Water storage C C C C C C
Section
400.163
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.163
100:579
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR
CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C)
R-2 R-3 R-4 C-O C-1 C-2
Wineries (including the
manufacturing and sale
of wine)
C
Wireless
telecommunication
facilities (that do not
include new or modified
wireless
telecommunication
support structures)
P P P P P P
Wireless
telecommunication
facilities (that include
new or modified wireless
telecommunication
support structures)
C C C C C C
X
Y
Z
Section
400.163
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.163
100:580
ARTICLE V
Planned Developments and Planned Unit Development
Section 400.165. Definition, Purpose, Designation and Exceptions.
[R.O. 2007 §400.165; Ord. No. 4910 §1, 9-26-2005]
A. Definition. The term "Planned Development" refers to a specific parcel
of land or several contiguous parcels of land under common ownership
or control which, when designed in accordance with this Article and
approved by the City Council, allow for the development of residential,
commercial, office, high-tech or industrial land by means of an
alternate, more flexible method than would be permitted utilizing the
City's conventional Zoning Code and Subdivision and Land
Development Code regulations. A proposed Planned Development will
only be reviewed if it is determined to meet the qualifying objectives to
the satisfaction of the City Council of one (1) of the three (3) types of
permitted Planned Developments outlined below. Under no
circumstances will a Planned Development be permitted when the same
development objectives can be accomplished utilizing the City's
conventional Zoning Code and Subdivision and Land Development Code
regulations.
B. Purpose. A Planned Development permitted in accordance with this
Article shall be considered as an alternative method for the
development of land under special circumstances described herein and
only upon terms agreeable to the City Council. Because of this
alternative method of development, special design standards are
hereby established to govern and guide the creation of a Planned
Development. To enable thorough analysis of a Planned Development,
more information is demanded about the proposed development than
would be required if the development were being proposed under the
City's conventional Zoning Code and Subdivision and Land
Development Code regulations. Therefore, all proposed Planned
Developments must undergo a two-stage (area plan and final plan)
review process through both the Planning and Zoning Commission and
City Council per the requirements of this Article. It should be clearly
understood that the review and approval of a Planned Development is a
privilege to be earned based on the design of the project in full
compliance with this Article. The decision to approve a proposed
Planned Development shall be at the sole discretion of the City Council.
C. Planned Development Designation. With the exception of the zoning
districts listed below, the City Council may attach the designation of
Planned Development to land within any of the City's residential,
commercial, high-tech or industrial zoning districts in conjunction with
the approval of an area plan per the requirements of this Article.
D. Exceptions To The Planned Development Designation. Under no
circumstances shall the Planned Development designation be attached
to the City's "R-5" Mobile Home Park District, "AG" Agricultural
District, "P-R" Park-Recreation District, "T-G" Transitional Growth
Section
400.165
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.165
100:581
Section 400.170. Types of Planned Developments and The
Qualifying Objectives. [R.O. 2007 §400.170; Ord. No. 4910 §1,
9-26-2005]
District or the Senior Community Overlay District. In addition, the
Planned Development designation shall only be attached to the City's
"R-3" Garden Apartment District and "R-4" Apartment House District
if multi-family housing is proposed (either rental or owner-occupied).
The Planned Development designation shall not be attached to the
City's "MUTDD" Mixed-Use Traditional Development District. However,
proposed developments utilizing the City's "MUTDD" Mixed-Use
Traditional Development Zoning District must undergo the same twostage
(area plan and final plan) review process through both the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council per the
requirements of this Article.
A. Types Of Planned Developments And The Qualifying Objectives. The
City Council shall only attach the Planned Development Designation to
a site and subsequently approve a Planned Development if it is
determined to meet the qualifying objectives to the satisfaction of the
Council of one (1) of the three (3) types of permitted Planned
Developments outlined below:
1. Environmental protection planned developments. A proposed
environmental protection planned development is for a residential,
commercial, office, high-tech or industrial site that must, to the
satisfaction of the City Council, provide for the permanent
protection and preservation of the natural features and
environmentally sensitive areas of the site.
a. Qualifying objectives. The qualifying objectives for permitting
the review of a proposed environmental protection planned
development is to encourage the permanent protection of the
environmentally sensitive areas of a site while still allowing for
the site's development by concentrating development away
from these environmentally sensitive areas. In order to
accomplish the separation of the environmentally sensitive
areas from the areas of the site suitable for development,
limited departure from strict conformance to the underlying
zoning district regulations and/or Subdivision and Land
Development Code regulations may be permitted by the City
Council in accordance with the allowances of this Article.
2. Redevelopment planned developments. A proposed redevelopment
planned development is for residential, commercial, office, hightech
or industrial development at a specific site or location within
the City that, as determined by the City Council, is in a state of
decline and/or in need of redevelopment.
a. Qualifying objectives. The qualifying objectives for permitting
the review of a proposed redevelopment planned development
Section
400.165
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.170
100:582
is to provide an incentive for the development community to
develop at these specific sites or locations. The incentive
provided to the developer would be through the permitted
flexibility of the design of the site by allowing for limited
departure from strict conformance to the underlying zoning
district regulations and/or Subdivision and Land Development
Code regulations per the allowances of this Article. By allowing
for the limited departure from strict conformance to these
regulations, proposed developments that may not otherwise be
financially feasible may become attractive to the development
community. Although many proposed developments of this
nature will instead be encouraged to utilize the City's
"MUTDD" Mixed-Use Traditional Development Zoning District
classification (which must follow the same two-stage area plan
and final plan review and approval process outlined in this
Article), there may be instances where proposed developments
cannot meet the required size and/or required mix of
residential and non-residential uses necessary to utilize the
City "MUTDD" zoning classification.
3. Special exception planned developments. A proposed special
exception planned development is for a commercial, office, hightech
or industrial site that, due to its irregular shape and size,
would necessitate the need for variances from the City's Zoning
Code and/or Subdivision and Land Development Code through the
Board of Adjustment after the initial approval of the proposed
development by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
a. Qualifying objectives. The qualifying objectives for permitting
the review of a proposed special exception planned
development is to allow for both the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council to comprehensively review the
proposed development in its entirety (without the involvement
of the Board of Adjustment) per the required two-stage area
plan and final plan requirements of this Article. The variances
needed for the proposed development would instead be
reviewed as the proposed modifications to the underlying
zoning district regulations and/or Subdivision and Land
Development Code regulations per the allowances of this
Article. This would no longer place the burden upon the
Planning and Zoning Commission of having to decide whether
a proposed development should be approved contingent upon
receiving variances through the Board of Adjustment. This
would also no longer place the burden upon the Board of
Adjustment of having to decide whether or not to grant the
requested variances on a proposed development that they have
limited familiarity with that was approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission contingent upon receiving the variances.
Section
400.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.175
100:583
Section 400.175. Design Standards. [R.O. 2007 §400.175; Ord. No.
4910 §1, 9-26-2005]
A. Size Requirements. There shall be no minimum or maximum size
requirement for a site to be developed as a Planned Development.
B. Permitted Modifications To The Zoning District Regulations. Upon
approval by the City Council, a Planned Development may depart from
strict conformance to certain underlying zoning district regulations to
which the Planned Development designation has been attached. The
departure from strict conformance to these underlying zoning district
regulations shall only be permitted if deemed necessary for the proper
design of the Planned Development. Proposed modifications to the
underlying zoning district regulations are limited to one (1) or more of
the following:
1. Reduction of the minimum lot area requirements.
2. Reduction of the minimum lot width requirements.
3. Reduction of the minimum lot depth requirements.
4. Reduction of the front yard setback requirements.
5. Reduction of the side yard setback requirements.
6. Reduction of the rear yard setback requirements.
7. Reduction of the distance between grouped buildings
requirements.
8. Increase in the maximum lot coverage requirements.
9. Increase in the maximum height requirements.
10. Modification to the landscaping requirements.
11. Modification to the off-street parking and loading requirements.
C. Permitted Modifications To The Subdivision And Land Development
Code Regulations. Upon approval by the City Council, a Planned
Development may depart from strict conformance to certain
regulations of the Subdivision and Land Development Code. The
departure from strict conformance to these Subdivision and Land
Development Code regulations shall only be permitted if deemed
necessary for the proper design of the Planned Development. Proposed
modifications to the Subdivision and Land Development Code are
limited to one (1) or more of the following:
1. Reduction of the minimum right-of-way requirements for minor
residential and cul-de-sac streets.
2. Reduction of the minimum centerline radii for minor residential
and cul-de-sac streets.
Section
400.175
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.175
100:584
3. Reduction of the minimum corner radii at the back of curb for
minor residential and cul-de-sac streets.
4. Reduction of the minimum block length.
5. Increase in the maximum block length.
6. Increase in the maximum length of cul-de-sacs.
7. Modification to the requirements for private alleys.
8. Modification to the requirements for sidewalks.
9. Modification to the requirements for street tree placement.
D. Regulations Which May Not Be Modified. A Planned Development must
meet the use and density limitations of the underlying zoning district in
which the development is to be located. All requirements of the
underlying zoning district and the Subdivision and Land Development
Code remain applicable except as specifically modified pursuant to the
allowance of this Article as approved by the City Council. Under no
circumstances shall the applicable flood hazard prevention
requirements, stormwater detention requirements, grading
requirements, soil erosion and sediment control requirements, central
utility requirements, tree preservation requirements, screening of
outdoor equipment requirements, or performance standards (e.g., air
and water pollution, noise, odor, fire hazard, etc.) be modified in
conjunction with the approval of a Planned Development. In addition,
all other City, County, State, and Federal regulations and development
requirements shall apply to the Planned Development.
E. Residential Density. Under no circumstances shall the residential
density of a Planned Development exceed that which would normally be
permitted in the underlying residential zoning district to which the
Planned Development designation has been attached.
1. Calculation of density. The computation of residential density shall
be based on the dwelling units per net acreage of the residentially
zoned portion of the site. Net acreage is determined by subtracting
the area devoted to public street rights-of-way, private alleys and
dry detention basins from the gross acreage of the residentially
zoned portion of the site. To compute residential density, the net
acreage of the residentially zoned portion of the site shall be
divided by the smallest minimum lot size allowed in the underlying
residential zoning district to which the Planned Development
designation has been attached. In situations where a Planned
Development designation is attached to two (2) or more underlying
residential zoning districts, the residential density shall be
calculated separately for each of the underlying residential zoning
district to which the Planned Development designation has been
attached.
Section
400.175
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.175
100:585
F. Permanent Protection Of Environmentally Sensitive Areas. All
environmental protection planned developments shall, to the
satisfaction of the City Council, be designed in accordance with the
following requirements:
1. No modification, alteration or construction of any type may occur in
flood hazard areas. This includes all floodways, all floodway fringe
areas, areas of 500-year flood, areas of 100-year flood with average
depths of less than one (1) foot or with drainage areas less than one
(1) square mile, and areas protected by levees from 100-year flood.
2. No modification, alteration or construction of any type may occur in
areas containing wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corp of
Engineers.
3. No modification, alteration or construction of any type may occur in
ditches, creeks, streams, or other watercourses and natural
drainage ways vital to the natural performance of the watershed as
determined by the City's Storm Water Engineer.
4. No modification, alteration or construction of any type may occur in
areas where slopes are in excess of forty percent (40%). To the
maximum extent feasible, cutting, filling and benching or terracing
of areas with slopes ranging from fifteen percent (15%) to forty
percent (40%) for the purpose of creating additional building area
or larger building sites shall be prohibited.
5. No modification, alteration or construction of any type may occur in
areas containing soils classified as A-6 to A-8 on the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(A.A.S.H.T.O.) Soil Classification System. These soils are classified
as either easily erodible, clayey or highly organic as defined by the
Soil Survey of St. Charles County, Missouri, published by the
United States Department of Agriculture (U.S.D.A.) Soil
Conservation Service. The water table may not be higher than one
(1) foot below the lowest floor in any proposed structure.
6. No modification, alteration or construction of any type may occur in
areas determined to be vital aquifer recharge or discharge areas as
determined by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources, the
U.S. Army Corp of Engineers or the City's Storm Water Engineer.
7. No modification, alteration or construction of any type may occur in
areas determined to be vital for the protection of wildlife as
determined by the Missouri Department of Conservation.
8. No modification, alteration or construction of any type may occur in
areas determined to be of archaeological or historical significance
as determined by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources
State Historic Preservation Office.
Section
400.175
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.175
100:586
9. Existing trees preserved within the areas within the environmental
protection planned development subject to the above-listed
requirements may be counted towards meeting the tree
preservation requirements of Chapter 40290 "Trees and
Landscaping" of this Code.
10. All areas within the environmental protection planned development
subject to the above-listed requirements shall be identified on a
separate environmentally sensitive area protection plan included
as part of both the area plan and final plan applications. The
environmentally sensitive area protection plan may be combined
with the tree preservation plan required per Chapter 40291 of this
Code.
11. All areas within the environmental protection planned development
subject to the above-listed requirements shall be protected through
the establishment of a permanent conservation easement held by
the landowner(s), a homeowner's association or a land trust.
G. Common Ground Requirements. At least twenty percent (20%) of the
gross land area of a environmental protection planned development or
a residential redevelopment planned development, or an area of a size
equivalent to one (1) acre for each one hundred (100) persons of
expected population of the development, whichever is greater, shall be
set aside as common ground. The expected population shall be
determined by multiplying the total number of dwelling units by three
(3) persons (the City's average household size per the 2000 Census).
Common ground shall be designed in accordance with the following
requirements:
1. Private alleys and dry detention basins may not be counted towards
meeting the common ground requirement.
2. The natural areas protected through the establishment of the
required permanent conservation easement in an environmental
protection planned development may be included in meeting all or
part of the common ground requirement. The extent that these
natural areas may be counted towards meeting the common ground
requirement will be dependent upon the suitability of the natural
areas for use by residents as determined by the City Council.
3. To the satisfaction of the City Council, throughout environmental
protection planned developments and residential redevelopment
planned developments, common ground shall be equitably
distributed in relation to the dwelling units that such common
ground is intended to serve and shall be connected via a series of
sidewalks, paths or multi-purpose trails.
90.The reference herein to "Chapter 230" was changed to "Chapter 402", since ord. no. 5752
§1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Chapter 230 and enacted Chapter 402 as it's replacement.
91.The reference herein to "Chapter 230" was changed to "Chapter 402", since ord. no. 5752
§1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Chapter 230 and enacted Chapter 402 as it's replacement.
Section
400.175
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.175
100:587
4. Lakes that serve the dual purpose of stormwater retention may be
counted towards meeting one-fourth (¼) of the common ground
requirement.
5. Areas within common ground that contain recreational amenities
shall be counted towards meeting the common ground
requirement.
6. The use, operation and maintenance of common ground within an
environmental protection planned development or a residential
redevelopment planned development shall be guaranteed by the
establishment of trust indentures providing for the establishment
of a homeowners' association. Said trust indentures shall be
approved by the City staff prior to recording the trust indentures
simultaneously with the recording of the record plat.
H. Perimeter Buffering Requirements. Regardless of political boundaries,
when a residential Planned Development is proposed adjacent to an
existing residential development or residential zoning district, there
shall be a minimum twenty (20) foot wide permanent buffer area.
Regardless of political boundaries, when a residential Planned
Development is proposed adjacent to an existing commercial, office,
high-tech or industrial land use or non-residential zoning district, there
shall be a minimum thirty (30) foot wide permanent buffer area.
Regardless of political boundaries, when a non-residential Planned
Development is proposed adjacent to an existing residential
development or residential zoning district, there shall be a minimum
thirty (30) foot wide permanent buffer area. These buffer areas shall be:
1) uniform in setback at all points on the perimeter of the Planned
Development, 2) kept in a natural state (if sufficient tree mass exists) or
landscaped and/or otherwise provided with screening (i.e., sightproof
fencing and/or landscaped earthen berms) to the satisfaction of the City
Council, and 3) be kept free of buildings, structures and impervious
surfaces. These buffer areas may be designated as common ground or
placed within permanent easements on the individual lots. If these
buffer areas are placed within permanent easements on the individual
lots, the required building setbacks shall be measured from the inside
line of the permanent easements.
I. Perimeter Minimum Lot Size Requirements. The perimeter lots within a
proposed residential Planned Development adjacent to any existing,
proposed, approved or under construction residential subdivision
(regardless of political boundaries) must meet or exceed the size and
dimensional configuration of the adjacent residential lots in the
neighboring subdivision. The only exception to this requirement is
when the perimeter lots of a proposed residential Planned Development
are adjacent to existing, proposed, approved or under construction
residential lots in a neighboring subdivision (regardless of political
boundaries) that are two (2) acres or greater in size. When the
perimeter lots of a proposed residential Planned Development are
adjacent to existing, proposed, approved or under construction
Section
400.175
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.175
100:588
Section 400.180. Procedures For Review of A Planned Development.
[R.O. 2007 §400.180; Ord. No. 4910 §1, 9-26-2005]
residential lots in a neighboring subdivision (regardless of political
boundaries) that are two (2) acres or greater in size, the perimeter lots
of a proposed residential Planned Development adjacent to these lots
shall be a minimum of two (2) acres in size.
A. Pre-Application Conference. Not more than three (3) months prior to or
less than one (1) month before filing the area plan application, the
owner(s) of record or any person(s) acting on behalf of the owner(s) of
record shall request and attend a mandatory pre-application conference
with the Planning and Development Department to discuss the
proposed Planned Development, submission procedures and the
provisions of this Article. The purpose of the pre-application conference
is to discuss the overall concept of the proposed Planned Development
in order to ensure conformity with this Article and other applicable City
ordinances and requirements prior to the preparation of detailed plans.
In addition, the Planning and Development Department will make the
determination as to the need for a traffic study for the site of the
proposed Planned Development and the surrounding area as part of the
area plan application. This procedure allows the developer to determine
the suitability of proposed Planned Development before the applicant
has made substantial financial commitments. A memo shall be
forwarded by the Director of Planning and Development to both the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council within seven (7)
days of the pre-application conference outlining the proposed Planned
Development. The applicant shall bring the following to the preapplication
conference:
1. Provide a written correspondence which: 1) identifies the type of
proposed Planned Development and how it meets the qualifying
objectives for this type of Planned Development outlined within
Section 400.170 of this Article, 2) identifies why the proposed
development cannot be constructed utilizing the City's
conventional zoning district and/or Subdivision and Land
Development Code regulations, 3) provides a description of the
proposed zoning district and/or Subdivision and Land Development
Code regulations proposed to be modified (including the extent of
the proposed modification) per the permitted modifications
outlined within Sections 400.175(B) and 400.175(C) of this Article,
and 4) identifies how the proposed Planned Development is in
conformance with the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan.
2. A sketch plan which identifies the following: 1) the location, size,
existing ownership and existing zoning of the site of the proposed
Planned Development, 2) an estimate of the location, number and
type of residential and non-residential land uses, 3) the preliminary
identification of the proposed transportation network (including
pedestrian and bicycle accommodations), 4) the preliminary
Section
400.175
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.180
100:589
identification of the proposed provisions for central utilities, and 5)
the identification of the site's natural features and environmentally
sensitive areas.
B. Area Plan. The owner(s) of record or any person(s) legally acting on
behalf of the owner(s) of record may apply for the review of an area
plan and the Planned Development designation for the proposed
Planned Development in accordance with Section 400.185 of this
Article. When a Planned Development involves the subdivision of land,
the review of the area plan shall also serve as the simultaneous review
of the preliminary plat. Following the review of the area plan
application and Planned Development designation during a public
hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission, unless tabled by
the Planning and Zoning Commission, the application shall be
forwarded with a recommendation of approval, approval with
conditions, or denial to the City Council. First (1st) reading before the
City Council shall include a public hearing on the proposed area plan
application and Planned Development designation followed by the
second (2nd) reading at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
City Council. After the second (2nd) reading, unless tabled by the City
Council, the Council shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
area plan and Planned Development designation.
C. Final Plan. Only after the City Council has approved the area plan and
Planned Development designation for the proposed Planned
Development may the owner(s) of record or any person(s) legally acting
on behalf of the owner(s) of record may apply for the review of a final
plan in accordance with Section 400.205 of this Article. The application
for a final plan shall be for the entire Planned Development, or portion
thereof, if the proposed development is to occur in phases. Following
the review of the final plan application during a public hearing before
the Planning and Zoning Commission, unless tabled by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, the application shall be forwarded with a
recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or denial to the
City Council. First (1st) reading before the City Council will include a
public hearing on the proposed final plan application followed by the
second (2nd) reading at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
City Council. After the second (2nd) reading, unless tabled by the City
Council, the Council shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
final plan.
D. Miscellaneous Approvals.
1. Rezoning/zoning. An application for review of the rezoning/zoning
of the underlying zoning district may be submitted in conjunction
with the application for the review of an area plan and the Planned
Development designation. The rezoning/zoning application will be
reviewed concurrently with the review of the area plan application
by both the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.
The public hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission
Section
400.180
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.180
100:590
and the City Council may, if deemed appropriate, be for both the
area plan application and the application for rezoning/zoning.
2. Grading plans. After the City Council has approved the area plan
and Planned Development designation for the proposed Planned
Unit Development, the applicant may submit grading plans for
review and approval by the Staff of the City's Planning and
Development Department. Grading plans may also be submitted in
conjunction with the construction plans after final plan approval
has been granted.
3. Construction plans. Only after the final plan for the entire Planned
Development (or portion thereof if the proposed development is to
occur in phases) has been approved by the City Council may the
applicant submit construction plans for review and approval by the
staff of the City's Planning and Development Department. Grading
plans may also be submitted in conjunction with the construction
plans.
4. Display house plat. Only after the final plan for the entire Planned
Development (or portion thereof if the proposed development is to
occur in phases) has been approved by the City Council may the
applicant submit a display house plat for review and approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commission. A display house plat may be
submitted for review and approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission prior to the review and approval of construction plans
by City staff.
5. Record plat. Only after the construction plans have been reviewed
and approved by the staff of the City's Public Works Department
and Planning and Development Department may the applicant
submit the record plat for the entire Planned Development (or
portion thereof if the proposed development is to occur in phases)
to the City Council for review and approval.
6. Building permits. Only after the construction plans have been
reviewed and approved by the Staff of the City's Planning and
Development Department and the record plat for the entire
Planned Development (or portion thereof if the proposed
development is to occur in phases) has been approved by the City
Council may the applicant attempt to obtain building permits
through the City's Building Safety Department.
Table 400.180(E)—Procedures for the Review of Planned
Development
Step 1—Pre-Application Conference (required)
Step 2—Review of the Area Plan/PUD Designation (and
Rezoning/Zoning, if applicable)
Section
400.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.180
100:591
Table 400.180(E)—Procedures for the Review of Planned
Development
Area plan
submitted to
the Planning
and
Development
Department.
Review by the
Planning and
Development
Department.
Public hearing
before the
Planning and
Zoning
Commission.
Recommendation
to the City
Council.
Public hearing
and 1st reading
before the City
Council. Vote to
approve,
approve with
conditions, or
deny after 2nd
reading before
the City
Council.
Step 3—Review of Grading Plans (may be submitted with
Construction Plans)
Grading plans
submitted to the
Planning and
Development
Department.
Review by the
Planning and
Development
Department.
Approval granted by
staff only after all
requirements are
met.
Step 4—Review of the Final Plan
Final plan
submitted to
the Planning
and
Development
Department.
Review by the
Planning and
Development
Department.
Public hearing
before the
Planning
Commission.
Recommendation
to the City
Council.
Public hearing
and 1st reading
before the City
Council. Vote to
approve,
approve with
conditions, or
deny after 2nd
reading before
the City
Council.
Step 5—Review of Construction Plans
Construction plans
submitted to the
Planning and
Development
Department.
Review by the
Planning and
Development
Department.
Approval granted by
staff only after all
requirements are
met.
Section
400.180
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.180
100:592
Section 400.185. Area Plan—Application and Submission
Requirements. [R.O. 2007 §400.185; Ord. No. 4910 §1, 9-26-2005;
Ord. No. 5033 §1, 7-18-2006]
Step 6—Review of Display House Plat (may be submitted
prior to Construction Plans)
Display house plat
submitted to the
Planning and
Development
Department.
Review by the
Planning and
Development
Department.
Review by the
Planning and Zoning
Commission. Vote to
approve, approve
with conditions, or
deny by the Planning
and Zoning
Commission.
Step 7—Review of Record Plat and Performance Guarantees
Record plat and
performance
guarantees
submitted to the
Public Works
Department.
Review by the
Planning and
Development
Department and
Public Works
Department.
1st reading before
the City Council. Vote
to approve, approve
with conditions, or
deny after 2nd
reading before the
City Council.
Step 8—Review of Building Permits
Building permits
submitted to the
Building Safety
Department.
Review by the staff
of the Building
Safety Department.
Approval granted by
staff only after all
requirements are
met.
A. Pre-Application Conference Requirement. Prior to submitting an area
plan application, the owner(s) of record or any person(s) acting on
behalf of the owner(s) of record shall request and attend a mandatory
pre-application conference with the Director of Planning and
Development to discuss the proposed Planned Development per the
requirements of Section 400.180(A) of this Article.
B. Sign Posting And Application Submission Requirements. Meeting dates,
application fees, and application submittal deadlines for the Planning
and Zoning Commission and City Council are posted on the City's
website (www.ofallon.mo.us) or can be obtained by calling the Planning
and Development Department. For first (1st) submittal, as outlined in
Section 400.190(B) of this Article, fifteen (15) folded and collated sets
of the area plan, supporting information and building elevations are
required. For second (2nd) submittal, as outlined in Section 400.190(B)
of this Article, twenty-five (25) folded and collated sets of the area plan,
supporting information and building elevations are required. The area
plan shall be on sheets no larger than twenty-four inches (24") x thirtysix
inches (36") and be designed and stamped by a qualified land
Section
400.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.185
100:593
planner, registered professional architect, civil engineer or land
surveyor. In addition to the application fee, the applicant shall be
responsible for the cost of the legal notices advertising the public
hearings and a mailing fee for the notification of adjacent property
owner whose property limits are within an area determined by lines
drawn parallel to and within a distance of three hundred (300) feet
of the subject site. The area plan application and public hearing sign
posting requirements are as follows:
1. Public hearing notification and sign posting requirements. The area
plan shall be subject to the public hearing notification and sign
posting requirements established in Section 400.685 of the Zoning
Code.
2. Supporting information. The following supporting information shall
be included with the area plan application:
a. Provide a completed and signed area plan application that
includes the names, addresses and phone numbers of the
applicant, property owner(s), developer and contract
purchaser (if applicable).
b. If the underlying zoning district is proposed to be rezoned/
zoned, provide a completed and signed rezoning application
per the requirements of Article XVI of the Zoning Code.
c. Provide a legal description of the site (both a printed copy and
an electronic copy).
d. Provide a written correspondence which: 1) identifies the type
of proposed Planned Development and how it meets the
qualifying objectives for this type of Planned Development
outlined within Section 400.170 of this Article, 2) identifies
why the proposed development cannot be constructed utilizing
the City's conventional zoning district and/or Subdivision and
Land Development Code regulations, 3) includes a comparison
table which identifies the exact zoning district and/or
Subdivision and Land Development Code regulations proposed
to be modified per the permitted modifications outlined within
Sections 400.175(B) and 400.175(C) of this Article and the
corresponding requirements within the underlying zoning
district and/or Subdivision and Land Development Code, and 4)
identifies how the proposed Planned Development is in
conformance with the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan.
e. Provide letters from the applicable school district(s), fire
protection district(s), potable water district(s) and sanitary
sewer district(s) that verify that they have the capacity to
provide service to the proposed Planned Development.
Section
400.185
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.185
100:594
f. Provide a letter from the St. Charles County Planning
Department approving the name of the proposed Planned
Development and all proposed street names.
g. If deemed necessary by the Planning and Development
Department, provide a traffic study for the site of the proposed
Planned Development and the surrounding area.
3. Building elevations. The following colored building elevations shall
be included with the area plan application:
a. Proposed Planned Developments which include single-family
and two-family homes shall include conceptual colored
building elevations of all the typical, representative housing
styles within the proposed development that as closely as
possible resemble how they will appear upon completion.
b. Proposed Planned Developments which include multi-family
residential, commercial and industrial components shall
include conceptual colored building elevations of all sides of all
proposed buildings as closely as possible as they will appear
upon completion. The colored building elevations should be
prepared by a licensed architect, registered engineer or a
building designer certified through the National Council of
Building Designer Certification Program and drawn to an
identified scale of 3/32", ?" or ¼"=1'. The colored building
elevations should be labeled north, south, east, and west, as
well as front, rear, left and right sides. The colored building
elevations should identify dimensions, exterior colors, exterior
materials and textures. The colored building elevations shall
demonstrate that all rooftop mechanical apparatus will be
thoroughly screened from the view of adjacent streets and
properties. In order to fully and more accurately portray the
proposed development, the applicant is highly encouraged to
provide as much of the additional detail and information as
possible that will be required as part of the final plan
application (streetscape renderings, a material and color
sample board, roof plan, etc.).
4. Area plan. The following information shall be included on the area
plan on sheets no larger than twenty-four inches (24") x thirty-six
inches (36"):
a. Identify the name of the proposed Planned Development. The
name shall be original and must be approved by the St. Charles
County Planning Department.
b. Provide a site location map that shows site in relation to the
surrounding area. Provide a north arrow and scale on each
page of the plans. The identified scales shall be 1"=20' through
1"=200'.
Section
400.185
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.185
100:595
c. Provide on the plans a comparison table which identifies the
exact zoning district and/or Subdivision and Land Development
Code regulations proposed to be modified per the permitted
modifications outlined within Sections 400.175(B) and
400.175(C) of this Article and the corresponding requirement
within the underlying zoning district and/or Subdivision and
Land Development Code.
d. Identify the boundaries of the site, including bearings and
distances, and size of the subject property correlated with the
legal description of said property. Identify the existing and
proposed zoning of the Planned Development. If the proposed
Planned Development encompasses more then one (1) zoning
district, all district boundary lines shall be clearly indicated.
Identify the boundary lines of applicable school districts, fire
protection districts, potable water districts, sanitary sewer
districts, and adjacent municipal and County limits.
e. Identify the existing zoning and land use of all adjacent
properties (regardless of political boundaries) whose property
limits are within an area determined by lines drawn parallel to
and within a distance of three hundred (300) feet of the site of
the proposed Planned Development. Within this area, identify
the names of all adjacent subdivisions, public and private
streets, alleys, right-of-way widths, easements, and public
walkways adjacent to or connecting with the subject site.
f. Provide the total gross land area of the proposed Planned
Development in acres. Provide a breakdown of the total gross
area by proposed land uses types. Proposed Planned
Developments which include residential uses shall provide a
breakdown of the number of residential units for each housing
type, density calculations, the average lot size, and the size of
the ten (10) smallest lots.
g. Proposed Planned Developments which include commercial,
high-tech and industrial uses shall provide site coverage
calculations in acreage, square feet and percentage that
identify the area proposed for building coverage, paved areas
and landscape/open space. The combined totals of the site
coverage calculation shall equal one hundred percent (100%)
of the site.
h. Identify the layout of the entire proposed Planned
Development showing proposed land uses, lot configurations,
building footprints, building square footage, building heights,
yard setbacks, existing and proposed streets, existing and
required sidewalks and multi-purpose trails, location of trash
enclosures, required off-street vehicular and bicycle parking
(including supporting calculations), required landscaping
(including a legend and supporting calculations), required
Section
400.185
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.185
100:596
bufferyards (including fencing and landscaped earthen berms),
and open space and recreational areas. Identify the lot sizes
and dimensional configurations of all existing, proposed,
approved or under construction residential lots (regardless
of political boundaries) that border the site of the proposed
Planned Development. Provide typical sections and a lot data
table for all proposed residential lot sizes and types within
the proposed Planned Development (including perimeter lots
subject to the minimum lot size requirements of Section
400.175(G) of this Article). Identify all land areas to be
dedicated and reserved for public use and/or areas to be
dedicated as common ground under the control of a
homeowners' association. Identify and label all existing
structures on the site to both remain and be removed.
i. Identify the layout, right-of-way width, surfacing material, and
names of all existing and proposed public streets, private
streets and alleys within the proposed Planned Development.
In addition, show existing and proposed driveways, curb cuts
and easements of cross-access both within the proposed
Planned Development and within one hundred (100) feet of the
site.
j. Label all existing utilities (public and private) such as water,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electrical, gas, and indicate their
location and size. Identify the proposed layout of the public
sanitary, storm and water systems that would serve the
Planned Development as well as all other utilities (both public
and private), including location and size. Indicate how
stormwater detention will be provided per Section 405.240 of
the Subdivision and Land Development Code.
k. Label all existing easements, high tension power lines and
towers, cell towers, bridges, culverts, drains, etc. In
accordance with Section 400.250 of the Zoning Code, identify
all hazardous pipeline easements and the exact location of the
pipeline(s) within the pipeline easements within five hundred
(500) feet of the site of the proposed Planned Development.
l. Identify all natural features of the site, including steep slopes,
tree masses, lakes, ponds, wetlands, streams, creeks, ditches,
dry river beds, and other natural watercourses and
drainageways. Identify the topography of the site in at least
five (5) foot intervals. When terrain is irregular and/or slopes
exceed forty percent (40%), contours shall be at two (2) foot
intervals.
m. Identify the existing 100-year floodplain and floodway
boundaries (where applicable). Include a note stating whether
the site is within or outside the 100-year floodplain and
reference the applicable Flood Insurance Rate Map panel
Section
400.185
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.185
100:597
Section 400.190. Procedure For The Review of An Area Plan. [R.O.
2007 §400.190; Ord. No. 4910 §1, 9-26-2005]
number and date. Identify wetlands subject to U.S. Army Corp
of Engineer regulations.
n. Proposed environmental protection planned developments
shall provide a separate environmentally sensitive area
protection plan that demonstrates compliance with the
requirements of Section 400.175(F) of this Article.
o. Provide a separate tree preservation plan in compliance with
Chapter 40292 "Trees and Landscaping" of this Code. Proposed
environmental protection planned developments may
incorporate the required environmentally sensitive area
protection plan with the tree preservation plan.
p. Provide a complete set of notations and descriptions of all
relevant site information needed to demonstrate compliance
with all applicable codes, requirements and restrictions.
A. Advertisement Of The Public Hearings. The Planning and Development
Department will prepare legal notices advertising the public hearings
for the review of the area plan application before both the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council. The legal notices shall be placed
at least fifteen (15) days prior to the dates of the public hearings in a
newspaper of general circulation throughout the City. The public
hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission will be scheduled
within thirty-five (35) days of the area plan application deadline during
a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
The public hearing before the City Council will be scheduled for the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council following the
public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission. The City
will be responsible for researching and notifying by mail all property
owners whose property limits are within an area determined by lines
drawn parallel to and within a distance of three hundred (300) feet from
the site of the proposed Planned Development. In the event that the
area plan application is tabled at the request of the applicant or their
authorized or designated representative(s), the applicant shall be
responsible for both the cost of readvertising the public hearings and
the re-notification of the adjacent property owners. The applicant is
responsible for posting a sign(s) upon the subject property advertising
the public hearings per the requirements of Section 400.185(B)(1) of
this Article.
B. Review Of The Area Plan Application. Upon receipt of the area plan
application, staff of the City's Planning and Development Department
will determine if it is contains all the necessary information to proceed
92.The reference herein to "Chapter 230" was changed to "Chapter 402", since ord. no. 5752
§1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Chapter 230 and enacted Chapter 402 as it's replacement.
Section
400.185
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.190
100:598
with the review. If it is determined that it is complete, staff from
the City's Planning and Development Department will conduct a
comprehensive review of the applicant's first (1st) submittal and
provide a written list of any items that will need to be corrected,
modified or amended in order to meet the requirements of this Article.
The applicant will then be given the opportunity to make the needed
corrections, modifications and amendments on their second (2nd)
submittal. If the applicant fails to address the needed corrections,
modifications and amendments on the second (2nd) submittal to the
satisfaction of the Director of the Planning and Development
Department, staff will recommend to the Planning and Zoning
Commission that this item be tabled. If tabled by the Planning and
Zoning Commission for failure of the applicant to address the needed
corrections, modifications and amendments on the second (2nd)
submittal to the satisfaction of the Director of the Planning and
Development Department, the applicant will be responsible for the
cost of readvertising the public hearing(s) and renotifying the adjacent
property owners.
C. Preparation Of A Staff Report. The Planning and Development
Department will prepare a staff report containing an analysis of the
proposed Planned Development and the area plan application. A copy of
the area plan application and the staff report will be distributed to each
of the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission. A copy of the
staff report will be provided to the applicant. The staff report will also
be available for public review in the City's Community Development
Department.
D. Review By The Planning And Zoning Commission. The Planning and
Zoning Commission will review the area plan application and Planned
Development designation and conduct a public hearing on the proposed
Planned Development. The public hearing is open to all citizens. The
applicant and/or their authorized or designated representative(s) must
attend the meeting and make a formal presentation to the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Failure of the applicant and/or their authorized or
designated representative(s) to attend the meeting shall cause the
Planning and Zoning Commission to table the request for area plan
approval. If tabled by the Planning and Zoning Commission for failure
of the applicant and/or their authorized or designated representative(s)
to attend the meeting, the applicant will be responsible for the cost of
readvertising the public hearing(s) and renotifying the adjacent
property owners. During the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning
Commission will entertain comments from both proponents and
opponents of the proposed Planned Development. After the public
hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a formal
vote on the area plan application and Planned Development designation
and either: 1) table the request due to lack of sufficient information to
make a formal recommendation to the City Council, 2) recommend
approval to the City Council, 3) recommend approval with conditions to
the City Council, or 4) recommend denial to the City Council.
Section
400.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.190
100:599
Section 400.195. Criteria For Approving An Area Plan. [R.O. 2007
§400.195; Ord. No. 4910 §1, 9-26-2005]
E. Review By The City Council. During the first (1st) reading, the City
Council will review the staff report and the recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission to approve, approve with conditions,
or deny the area plan application and Planned Development
designation. The applicant and/or their authorized or designated
representative(s) must attend the meeting and make a formal
presentation to the City Council. Failure of the applicant and/or their
authorized or designated representative(s) to attend the meeting shall
cause the City Council to table the first (1st) reading and public
hearing. If tabled by the City Council for failure of the applicant and/or
their authorized or designated representative(s) to attend the meeting,
the applicant will be responsible for the cost of readvertising the public
hearing(s) and renotifying the adjacent property owners. During the
public hearing which is part of first (1st) reading, the City Council will
entertain comments from both proponents and opponents of the
proposed Planned Development. Following the second (2nd) reading,
which usually takes place at the next regularly scheduled meeting,
unless tabled by the City Council, the Council shall approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the area plan application and Planned
Development designation.
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall only recommend approval
or approval with conditions of an area plan and the Planned
Development designation to the City Council, and the Council shall only
approve or approve with conditions said area plan and Planned
Development designation if the proposed Planned Development meets
all of the following criteria:
1. The proposed Planned Development meets the qualifying
objectives to the satisfaction of the City Council of one (1) of the
three (3) types of permitted Planned Developments outlined in
Section 400.170 of this Article.
2. The proposed modification to the zoning district regulations and/or
the Subdivision and Land Development Code regulations are
limited to those specifically outlined in Section 400.175(B) and
Section 400.175(C) of this Article and are deemed necessary for the
proper design of the proposed Planned Development.
3. The proposed Planned Development is in conformance with the
permitted uses of the underlying zoning district in which the
proposed Planned Development is to be located.
4. The proposed Planned Development meets or exceeds all of the
design standards outlined in Section 400.175 of this Article that
pertains to the type of proposed Planned Development. If the
proposed Planned Development is to be constructed in phases,
each phase must meet or exceed these design standards.
Section
400.190
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.195
100:600
Section 400.200. Effect of The Approval/Denial of An Area Plan.
[R.O. 2007 §400.200; Ord. No. 4910 §1, 9-26-2005]
5. The density of a proposed residential Planned Development does
not exceed that which would normally be permitted in the
underlying zoning district to which the Planned Development
designation has been proposed.
6. The proposed Planned Development is in conformance with the
City's adopted Comprehensive Plan.
7. The proposed Planned Development will be adequately served by
public facilities and services. If certain public facilities and services
are not currently available at the site of the proposed Planned
Development, the applicant must have demonstrated that they will
be available at the site prior to the need for these services and
facilities.
8. Ingress and egress to the proposed Planned Development is
designed to minimize traffic congestion on the public streets
outside of the Planned Development and to facilitate the free flow
of traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, within the Planned
Development.
A. Effect Of An Approved Area Plan. The approval of an area plan by the
City Council shall authorize the applicant to request approval of the
final plan(s) for the proposed Planned Development per the
requirements of this Article. The approval of an area plan shall run with
the land and shall remain valid if there is a subsequent change in the
ownership of any or all of the area encompassing the Planned
Development. If the Planned Development involves the subdivision of
land, the approval of the area plan also serves as the simultaneous
approval of a preliminary plat. In addition, the approval of the area plan
allows the developer to seek approval of grading plans for the site per
the requirements of Section 405.070 of the Subdivision and Land
Development Code.
B. Official Planned Development Designation. Within five (5) working days
of approval of the area plan and Planned Development designation by
the City Council, the Mayor shall accurately note, and the City Clerk
shall attest, the Planned Development designation for the site in
question on the City's Official Zoning Map. The symbol "PD" will be
placed over the underlying zoning district classification.
C. Expiration Of An Approved Area Plan. The approved area plan for a
Planned Development that is to be constructed in a single phase shall
expire and be deemed null and void and without force or effect one (1)
year after the date of approval unless a final plan has been approved by
the City Council. For a Planned Development that is to be constructed
in two (2) or more phases, the approved area plan shall expire and be
deemed null and void and without force or effect one (1) year after the
Section
400.195
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.200
100:601
date of approval unless a final plan has been approved by the City
Council for the initial phase. The final plans for all subsequent phases
must be approved by the City Council within two (2) years of the date
of the original area plan approval.
D. Extension Of Time Of An Approved Area Plan. Upon written request by
the applicant, if good cause can be shown, the City Council, in its
discretion, may grant an extension of time of up to one (1) year from the
date of the initial expiration of the area plan for the date of approval for
the final plan by the City Council (or initial final plan for a Planned
Development that is to be constructed in two (2) or more phases). In
granting said extension, the City Council may attach any additional
conditions deemed necessary above and beyond those required of the
original approved area plan.
E. Modifications Of An Approved Area Plan. The final plan(s) submitted for
review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall
conform to the area plan approved by the City Council. However, if
deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission during
their initial review of the final plan(s), minor variations from the
approved area plan may be permitted. Major modifications shall require
a revised area plan application. Minor modifications are limited to the
following:
1. A reduction in the land area to be included in the Planned
Development if the proposed lot layout and transportation system
remain relatively unaffected.
2. An increase in the land area to be included in the Planned
Development not to exceed five percent (5%) if the proposed lot
layout and transportation system remain relatively unaffected.
3. A reduction in the number of total dwelling units if the proposed lot
layout and transportation system remain relatively unaffected.
4. An increase in the number of total dwelling units not to exceed five
percent (5%) if the proposed lot layout and transportation system
remain relatively unaffected and the density remains at or below
that permitted in the underlying zoning district.
5. A change in the proposed housing style or type if the proposed lot
layout and transportation system remain relatively unaffected.
6. A reduction in the gross square footage of non-residential
structures if the proposed lot layout and transportation system
remain relatively unaffected.
7. An increase in the gross square footage of non-residential
structures not to exceed five percent (5%) if the proposed lot layout
and transportation system remain relatively unaffected.
Section
400.200
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.200
100:602
Section 400.205. Final Plan — Application and Submission
Requirements. [R.O. 2007 §400.205; Ord. No. 4910 §1, 9-26-2005;
Ord. No. 5033 §2, 7-18-2006]
8. A minor change in the style of non-residential structures if the
proposed lot layout and transportation system remain relatively
unaffected.
9. An increase in the amount and/or location of common ground if the
proposed lot layout and transportation system remain relatively
unaffected.
10. A reduction in the amount of common ground not to exceed five
percent (5%) if the proposed lot layout and transportation system
remain relatively unaffected and the amount of common ground
remains at or above the minimum requirements as established per
Section 400.175(E) of this Article.
11. A minor change in the type and location of proposed recreational
amenities if the proposed lot layout and transportation system
remain relatively unaffected.
12. A minor change in the orientation of buildings, location of off-street
parking, location of detention areas, and the type of proposed
landscaping if the proposed lot layout and transportation system
remain relatively unaffected.
13. A minor realignment of streets or the location of utility lines due to
engineering necessity.
14. Revisions similar in nature to those listed above as determined by
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
F. Effect Of The Denial Of An Area Plan. No area plan application which
has been denied by the City Council shall be resubmitted for a period of
one (1) year from the date of said denial, except on the grounds of new
evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the Director of
Planning and Development.
A. Approved Area Plan And Planned Development Designation Required.
Only after the City Council has approved the area plan and Planned
Development designation for the proposed Planned Development may
the owner(s) of record or any person(s) legally acting on behalf of the
owner(s) of record may apply for the review and approval of a final plan
in accordance with this Article. The application for a final plan shall be
for the entire Planned Development, or portion thereof, if the proposed
development is to occur in phases.
B. Sign Posting And Application Submission Requirements. Meeting dates,
application fees and application submittal deadlines for the Planning
and Zoning Commission and City Council are posted on the City's
website (www.ofallon.mo.us) or can be obtained by calling the Planning
Section
400.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.205
100:603
and Development Department. For first (1st) submittal as outlined in
Section 400.210(B) of this Article, fifteen (15) folded and collated sets
of the final plan, supporting information, building elevations, roof plans
and streetscape renderings are required. For second (2nd) submittal as
outlined in Section 400.210(B) of this Article, twenty-five (25) folded
and collated sets of the final plan, supporting information, building
elevations, roof plans and streetscape renderings are required. The
final plan shall be on sheets no larger than twenty-four inches (24")
by thirty-six inches (36") and be designed and stamped by a qualified
land planner, registered professional architect, civil engineer or land
surveyor. In addition to the application fee, the applicant shall be
responsible for the cost of the legal notices advertising the public
hearings and a mailing fee for the notification of adjacent property
owner whose property limits are within an area determined by lines
drawn parallel to and within a distance of three hundred (300) feet
of the subject site. The final plan application and public hearing sign
posting requirements are as follows:
1. Public hearing notification and sign posting requirements. The final
plan shall be subject to the public hearing notification and sign
posting requirements established in Section 400.685 of the Zoning
Code.
2. Supporting information. The following supporting information shall
be included with the final plan application:
a. Provide a completed and signed final plan application that
includes the names, addresses and phone numbers of the
applicant, property owner(s), developer and contract
purchaser (if applicable).
b. Provide a legal description of the site (both a printed copy and
an electronic copy).
c. Provide a written correspondence which: 1) identifies the type
of proposed Planned Development and how it meets the
qualifying objectives for this type of Planned Development
outlined within Section 400.170 of this Article, 2) identifies
why the proposed development cannot be constructed utilizing
the City's conventional zoning district and/or Subdivision and
Land Development Code regulations, 3) includes a comparison
table which identifies the exact zoning district and/or
Subdivision and Land Development Code regulations proposed
to be modified per the permitted modifications outlined within
Sections 400.175(B) and 400.175(C) of this Article and the
corresponding requirements within the underlying zoning
district and/or Subdivision and Land Development Code, 4)
identifies any proposed minor variations from the approved
area plan per the allowances of Section 400.200(E) of this
Article, and 5) identifies how the proposed Planned
Section
400.205
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.205
100:604
Development is in conformance with the City's adopted
Comprehensive Plan.
d. Provide the traffic study (if applicable) that was deemed
necessary by the Planning and Development Department and
was included in the review of the area plan for the site of the
proposed Planned Development and the surrounding area. If a
condition of approval of the area plan was to provide a traffic
study for the site of the proposed Planned Development and
the surrounding area as part of the final plan application,
provide said traffic study.
e. Provide a copy of the trust indentures, covenants or deed
restrictions in accordance with the Subdivision and Land
Development Code that address the maintenance of common
ground, recreational amenities, stormwater detention, private
roads and parking lots, and other regulations pertaining to the
buildings and structures within the proposed Planned
Development.
f. Provide a copy of all existing and proposed easements
(including cross-access easements) or other restrictions
proposed to be imposed upon the use of land, buildings and
structures, including proposed easements or grants for public
utilities.
g. For a proposed environmental protection planned
development, provide a copy of the conservation easement that
will permanently protect the environmentally sensitive areas of
the site.
h. Provide letters from the applicable school district(s), fire
protection district(s), potable water district(s) and sanitary
sewer district(s) that verify that they have the capacity to
provide service to the proposed Planned Development.
i. Provide a letter from the St. Charles County Planning
Department approving the name of the proposed Planned
Development and all proposed street names.
3. Building elevations, roof plans, streetscape renderings, and
material and color samples. The following colored building
elevations, roof plans, streetscape renderings, and material and
color samples shall be included with the final plan application:
a. Proposed Planned Developments which include single-family
and two-family homes shall include colored building elevations
of all the typical, representative housing styles within the
proposed development that as closely as possible resemble
how they will appear upon completion.
Section
400.205
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.205
100:605
b. Proposed Planned Developments which include multi-family
residential, commercial and industrial components shall
include colored building elevations of all sides of all nonspeculative
buildings and accessory structures (fences, trash
enclosures, retaining walls, mailboxes, carports, exterior
lighting fixtures, bike racks and other site furnishings) as they
will appear upon completion. The colored building elevations
should be prepared by a licensed architect, registered
engineer or a building designer certified through the National
Council of Building Designer Certification Program and drawn
to an identified scale of 3/32", ?" or ¼"=1'. The colored
building elevations should be labeled north, south, east, and
west, as well as front, rear, left and right sides. The colored
building elevations should identify all dimensions, exterior
colors, exterior materials (siding, trim, roof, accoutrements,
window treatments, door treatments, foundation treatments,
etc.) and textures. The location of proposed signs, including
address numbers, shall be shown on the colored building
elevations with dimensions for preliminary review (final review
and approval of signs requires a separate application). All
buildings having rooftop mechanical units shall additionally
provide a roof plan with cross sections indicating the size,
location and proposed screening material for all mechanical
units. A written description of the proposed general design,
arrangement, texture, material and color of the buildings and
accessory structures is additionally required. For multibuilding
sites, at least one (1) of the buildings must have
detailed colored building elevations submitted as outlined
above. For speculative building(s) on the remainder of the site,
"concept elevations" that identify how the building(s) will be
architecturally compatible with the remainder of the site may
be submitted in lieu of detailed colored building elevations.
c. Proposed Planned Developments which include multi-family
residential, commercial and industrial components shall
include colored streetscape renderings and/or perspective
drawings of all sides of the building(s) that front on a public or
private street. The colored streetscape renderings shall be
keyed to the colored building elevations and demonstrate the
design, character, depth and physical relationship of the
proposed building(s) to surrounding buildings and structures.
In addition to the proposed building(s), the colored streetscape
renderings shall include parking areas, landscaping (at fiveyear
growth), lighting fixtures, and any other features
proposed to be placed in front of the building. In order to
demonstrate the scale of the site, the use of human figures and
automobiles placed in the foreground is highly recommended.
d. A material and color sample board shall be presented by the
applicant and/or their authorized or designated
Section
400.205
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.205
100:606
representatives(s) during the formal presentation of all
commercial, industrial, or multi-family residential final plans
to both the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City
Council. The material and color sample board should show all
exterior materials, finishes, treatments and colors (keyed to
the colored building elevations). For materials such as roof
tile, decorative tile and trim, photographs or manufacturer's
specification sheet of the material clearly showing the
textures, colors, etc., may be presented in place of the actual
material samples.
4. Final plan. The final plan shall incorporate all of the conditions of
approval of the area plan approved by the City Council. The
following information shall be included on the final plan on sheets
no larger than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches (24"
x 36"):
a. Identify the name of the proposed Planned Development. The
name shall be original and must be approved by the St. Charles
County Planning Department.
b. Provide a site location map that shows site in relation to the
surrounding area. Provide a north arrow and scale on each
page of the plans. The identified scales shall be 1"=20' through
1"=200'.
c. Provide on the plans a comparison table which identifies the
exact zoning district and/or Subdivision and Land Development
Code regulations proposed to be modified per the permitted
modifications outlined within Sections 400.175(B) and
400.175(C) of this Article and the corresponding requirement
within the underlying zoning district and/or Subdivision and
Land Development Code.
d. Identify the boundaries of the site, including bearings and
distances, and size of the subject property correlated with the
legal description of said property.
e. Identify the existing zoning of the Planned Development
(including the Planned Development designation). If the
proposed development encompasses more than one (1) zoning
district, all district boundary lines shall be clearly indicated.
Identify the existing zoning and land use of all adjacent
properties (regardless of political boundaries) whose property
limits are within an area determined by lines drawn parallel to
and within a distance of three hundred (300) feet of the site of
the proposed Planned Development. Within this area, identify
the names of all adjacent subdivisions, public and private
streets, alleys, curb cuts, driveways, right-of-way widths, utility
easements, cross-access easements, and sidewalks and multipurpose
trails adjacent to or connecting with the subject site.
Section
400.205
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.205
100:607
f. Identify the boundary lines of applicable school districts, fire
protection districts, potable water districts, sanitary sewer
districts and adjacent municipal and County limits.
g. Provide the total gross land area of the proposed Planned
Development in acres. Provide a breakdown of the total gross
area by proposed land uses types. Proposed Planned
Developments which include residential uses shall provide a
breakdown of the number of residential units for each housing
type, density calculations, the average lot size, and the size of
the ten (10) smallest lots.
h. Proposed Planned Developments which include commercial,
high-tech and industrial uses shall provide site coverage
calculations in acreage, square feet and percentage that
identify the area proposed for building coverage, paved areas
and landscape/open space. The combined totals of the site
coverage calculation shall equal one hundred percent (100%)
of the site.
i. Identify the layout of the entire proposed Planned
Development showing proposed land uses, lot configurations,
building footprints, building square footage, building heights,
yard setbacks, existing and proposed streets, existing and
required sidewalks and multi-purpose trails, and open space
and recreational areas. Identify and label all existing
structures on the site to both remain and be removed. Identify
the lot sizes and dimensional configurations of all existing,
proposed, approved or under construction residential lots
(regardless of political boundaries) that border the site of the
proposed Planned Development.
j. Identify all land areas to be dedicated and reserved for public
use and areas to be dedicated as common ground under the
control of a homeowners' association.
k. Provide typical sections and a lot data table for all proposed
residential lot sizes and types within the proposed Planned
Development (including perimeter lots subject to the minimum
lot size requirements of Section 400.175(G) of this Article).
Indicate proposed lots which are susceptible to street creep.
Typically, these lots are: 1) at the end of tangent sections, 2)
across from "T" intersections, and 3) on the outside of radii
regardless of whether they are uphill or downhill from these
areas. Indicate proposed lots which will have rear walk-outs.
l. Identify the layout, right-of-way width, surfacing material, and
names of all existing and proposed public streets, private
streets, alleys, and sidewalks and multi-purpose trails within
the proposed Planned Development. Provide typical sections
and pavement and curbing details in accordance with City
Section
400.205
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.205
100:608
requirements for all proposed public streets, private streets,
alleys, and sidewalks and multi-purpose trails within the
proposed Planned Development.
m. Label all existing utilities (public and private) such as water,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electrical, gas, and indicate their
location and size. Identify existing and proposed fire hydrants
within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed Planned
Development. Identify the proposed layout of the public
sanitary, storm and water systems that would serve the
Planned Development as well as all other utilities (both public
and private), including location and size.
n. Indicate how stormwater detention will be provided per
Section 405.240 of the Subdivision and Land Development
Code.
o. Label all existing easements, high tension power lines and
towers, cell towers, bridges, culverts, drains, etc. In
accordance with Section 400.250 of the Zoning Code, identify
all hazardous pipeline easements and the exact location of the
pipeline(s) within the pipeline easements within five hundred
(500) feet of the site of the proposed Planned Development.
p. Identify all natural features of the site, including steep slopes,
tree masses, lakes, ponds, wetlands, streams, creeks, ditches,
dry river beds, and other natural watercourses and
drainageways. Identify the topography of the site in at least at
five (5) foot intervals. When terrain is irregular and/or slopes
exceed forty percent (40%), contours shall be at two (2) foot
intervals.
q. Identify the existing 100-year floodplain and floodway
boundaries (where applicable). Include a note stating whether
the site is within or outside the 100-year floodplain and
reference the applicable Flood Insurance Rate Map panel
number and date. Where the floodplain is proposed to be
altered (which is prohibited in proposed environmental
protection planned developments), provide the appropriate
approvals from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
r. Identify wetlands subject to U.S. Army Corp of Engineer
regulations. Provide the appropriate documentation from the
U.S. Army Corp of Engineer for removal, alteration or
mitigation (which is prohibited in proposed environmental
protection planned developments).
s. Proposed environmental protection planned developments
shall provide a separate environmentally sensitive area
protection plan that demonstrates compliance with the
requirements of Section 400.175(F) of this Article.
Section
400.205
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.205
100:609
Section 400.210. Procedure For The Review of A Final Plan. [R.O.
2007 §400.210; Ord. No. 4910 §1, 9-26-2005]
t. Provide a separate tree preservation plan in compliance with
Chapter 40293 "Trees and Landscaping" of this Code. Proposed
environmental protection planned developments may
incorporate the required environmentally sensitive area
protection plan with the tree preservation plan.
u. Provide a separate landscape and bufferyard plan in
compliance with Chapter 40294 of this Code (including a
landscaping legend, supporting calculations, fencing details,
retaining wall details and landscaped earthen berm details).
On this separate landscape and bufferyard plan, include trash
enclosure details, the location of grease traps, and identify how
ground-mounted mechanical units will be screened per the
requirements of Section 400.278(C)(1) of the Zoning Code.
v. Provide a separate photometric lighting plan in compliance
with Section 400.277 of the Zoning Code.
w. Provide a separate off-street parking and loading plan in
compliance with Article XII of the Zoning Code (including
vehicular and bicycle parking calculations, stacking space
requirements, accessible95 ramp details, accessible signage
details and bike rack details).
x. Provide a complete set of notations and descriptions of all
relevant site information needed to demonstrate compliance
with all applicable codes, requirements and restrictions.
A. Advertisement Of The Public Hearings. The Planning and Development
Department will prepare legal notices advertising the public hearings
for the review of the final plan application before both the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council. The legal notices shall be placed
at least fifteen (15) days prior to the dates of the public hearings in a
newspaper of general circulation throughout the City. The public
hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission will be scheduled
within thirty-five (35) days of the final plan application deadline during
a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
The public hearing before the City Council will be scheduled for the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council following the
public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission. The City
93.The reference herein to "Chapter 230" was changed to "Chapter 402", since ord. no. 5752
§1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Chapter 230 and enacted Chapter 402 as its replacement.
94.The reference herein to "Article X" was changed to "Chapter 402 of this Code", since ord.
no. 5752 §1, adopted 12-8-11 repealed Article X and enacted Chapter 402 as its
replacement.
95.Editor's Note—After discussion and direction by the City, "handicapped" was changed to
"accessible" in this Subsection (B)(4)(w) by implication of Ord. No. 5883, passed
5-24-2013.
Section
400.205
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.210
100:610
will be responsible for researching and notifying by mail all property
owners whose property limits are within an area determined by lines
drawn parallel to and within a distance of three hundred (300) feet
from the site of the proposed Planned Development. In the event that
the final plan application is tabled at the request of the applicant or
their authorized or designated representative(s), the applicant shall be
responsible for both the cost of readvertising the public hearings and
the re-notification of the adjacent property owners. The applicant is
responsible for posting a sign(s) upon the subject property advertising
the public hearings per the requirements of Section 400.205(B)(1) of
this Article.
B. Review Of The Final Plan Application. Upon receipt of the final plan
application, staff of the City's Planning and Development Department
will determine if it is contains all the necessary information to proceed
with the review. If it is determined that it is complete, staff from the
City's Planning and Development Department will conduct a
comprehensive review of the applicant's first (1st) submittal and
provide a written list of any items that will need to be corrected,
modified or amended in order to meet the requirements of this Article.
The applicant will then be given the opportunity to make the needed
corrections, modifications and amendments on their second (2nd)
submittal. If the applicant fails to address the needed corrections,
modifications and amendments on the second (2nd) submittal to the
satisfaction of the Director of the Planning and Development
Department, staff will recommend to the Planning and Zoning
Commission that this item be tabled. If tabled by the Planning and
Zoning Commission for failure of the applicant to address the needed
corrections, modifications and amendments on the second (2nd)
submittal to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning and
Development, the applicant will be responsible for the cost of
readvertising the public hearing(s) and renotifying the adjacent
property owners.
C. Preparation Of A Staff Report. The Planning and Development
Department will prepare a staff report containing an analysis of the
proposed final plan application. A copy of the final plan application and
the staff report will be distributed to each of the members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission. A copy of the staff report will be
provided to the applicant. The staff report will also be available for
public review in the City's Community Development Department.
D. Review By The Planning And Zoning Commission. The Planning and
Zoning Commission will review the final plan application and conduct a
public hearing on the proposed Planned Development. The public
hearing is open to all citizens. The applicant and/or their authorized or
designated representative(s) must attend the meeting and make a
formal presentation to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Failure of
the applicant and/or their authorized or designated representative(s) to
attend the meeting shall cause the Planning and Zoning Commission to
Section
400.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.210
100:611
Section 400.215. Criteria For Approving A Final Plan. [R.O. 2007
§400.215; Ord. No. 4910 §1, 9-26-2005]
table the request for final plan approval. If tabled by the Planning and
Zoning Commission for failure of the applicant and/or their authorized
or designated representative(s) to attend the meeting, the applicant
will be responsible for the cost of readvertising the public hearing(s)
and renotifying the adjacent property owners. During the public
hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission will entertain comments
from both proponents and opponents of the proposed Planned
Development. After the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall conduct a formal vote on the final plan application
and either: 1) table the request due to lack of sufficient information
to make a formal recommendation to the City Council, 2) recommend
approval to the City Council, 3) recommend approval with conditions to
the City Council, or 4) recommend denial to the City Council.
E. Review By The City Council. During the first (1st) reading, the City
Council will review the staff report and the recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission to approve, approve with conditions,
or deny the final plan application. The applicant and/or their authorized
or designated representative(s) must attend the meeting and make a
formal presentation to the City Council. Failure of the applicant and/or
their authorized or designated representative(s) to attend the meeting
shall cause the City Council to table the first (1st) reading and public
hearing. If tabled by the City Council for failure of the applicant and/or
their authorized or designated representative(s) to attend the meeting,
the applicant will be responsible for the cost of readvertising the public
hearing(s) and renotifying the adjacent property owners. During the
public hearing which is part of first (1st) reading, the City Council will
entertain comments from both proponents and opponents of the
proposed Planned Development. Following the second (2nd) reading,
which usually takes place at the next regularly scheduled meeting,
unless tabled by the City Council, the Council shall approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the final plan application.
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall only recommend approval
or approval with conditions of a final plan to the City Council, and the
Council shall only approve or approve with conditions said final plan if
the proposed Planned Development meets all of the following criteria:
1. The proposed Planned Development meets the qualifying
objectives to the satisfaction of the City Council of one (1) of the
three (3) types of permitted Planned Developments outlined in
Section 400.170 of this Article.
2. The proposed modification to the zoning district regulations and/or
the Subdivision and Land Development Code Regulations are
limited to those specifically outlined in Section 400.175(B) and
Section 400.175(C) of this Article and are deemed necessary for the
proper design of the proposed Planned Development.
Section
400.210
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.215
100:612
Section 400.220. Effect of The Approval/Denial of A Final Plan.
[R.O. 2007 §400.220; Ord. No. 4910 §1, 9-26-2005]
3. The final plan incorporates all of the conditions of approval of the
area plan approved by the City Council.
4. With the exception of minor modifications deemed appropriate per
the allowances of Section 400.200(E) of this Article, the final plan
conforms to the area plan approved by the City Council.
5. The proposed Planned Development is in conformance with the
permitted uses of the underlying zoning district in which the
proposed Planned Development is to be located.
6. The proposed Planned Development meets or exceeds all of the
design standards outlined in Section 400.175 of this Article that
pertains to the type of proposed Planned Development based upon
its qualifying objective. If the proposed Planned Development is to
be constructed in phases, each phase must meet or exceed these
design standards.
7. The density of a proposed residential Planned Development does
not exceed that which would normally be permitted in the
underlying zoning district to which the Planned Development
designation has been attached.
8. The proposed Planned Development is in conformance with the
City's adopted Comprehensive Plan.
9. The proposed Planned Development will be adequately served by
public facilities and services. If certain public facilities and services
are not currently available at the site of the proposed Planned
Development, the developer must have demonstrated that they will
be available at the site prior to the need for these services and
facilities.
10. Ingress and egress to the proposed Planned Development is
designed to minimize traffic congestion on the public streets
outside of the Planned Development and to facilitate the free flow
of traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, within the Planned
Development.
A. Effect Of An Approved Final Plan. The approval of a final plan by the
City Council shall authorize the applicant to proceed with the
development of the Planned Development (or portion thereof if the
approved final plan was for a particular phase) subject to receiving all
other applicable approvals identified in Section 400.180(D) of this
Article. The approval of a final plan shall run with the land and shall
remain valid if there is a subsequent change in the ownership of any or
all of the area encompassing the Planned Development.
Section
400.215
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.220
100:613
Section 400.225. Amendment of An Approved Final Plan. [R.O. 2007
§400.225; Ord. No. 4910 §1, 9-26-2005]
B. Expiration Of An Approved Final Plan. The approved final plan shall
expire and be deemed null and void without force or effect within one
(1) year after the date of the final plan approval unless within such time
the City has issued a building permit for the Planned Development (or
portion thereof if the approved final plan was for a particular phase).
C. Extension Of Time Of An Approved Final Plan. Upon written request by
the applicant, if good cause can be shown, the City Council, in its
discretion, may grant an extension of time of up to one (1) year from the
date of the initial final plan expiration for the date within such time the
City has issued a building permit for the Planned Development (or
portion thereof if the approved final plan was for a particular phase). In
granting said extension, the City Council may attach any additional
conditions deemed necessary above and beyond those required of the
original approved final plan.
D. Effect Of The Denial Of A Final Plan. A final plan application which has
been denied by the City Council shall not be resubmitted for a period of
one (1) year from the date of said denial, except on the grounds of new
evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the Director of
Planning and Development.
A. Minor Modifications Of An Approved Final Plan. The Director of
Planning and Development may review and approve minor
modifications of an approved final plan without requiring the applicant
to seek approval of a revised area plan and the subsequently required
final plan(s). Only minor modifications to the approved final plan which
do not alter the original concept or design characteristic of the
approved Planned Development may be approved by the Director of
Planning and Development. If the Director of Planning and
Development approves the minor modification of an approved final
plan, the City Council shall be notified in writing of said approved minor
modification and a copy of the amended final plan shall be retained on
file in the Department of Community Development. Minor modifications
are limited to the following:
1. A reduction in the number of total dwelling units if the proposed lot
layout and transportation system remain relatively unaffected.
2. A reduction in the gross square footage of non-residential
structures if the proposed lot layout and transportation system
remain relatively unaffected.
3. An increase in the amount and/or location of common ground if the
proposed lot layout and transportation system remain relatively
unaffected.
Section
400.220
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.225
100:614
Section 400.230. Completion, Developer Responsibilities and The
Abandonment of A Planned Development. [R.O. 2007 §400.230; Ord.
No. 4910 §1, 9-26-2005]
4. A minor change in the orientation of buildings, location of off-street
parking, location of detention areas, and the type of proposed
landscaping if the proposed lot layout and transportation system
remain relatively unaffected.
5. A minor realignment of streets or the location of utility lines due to
engineering necessity.
6. Revisions similar in nature to those listed above as determined by
the Director of Planning and Development.
B. Major Modification Of An Approved Final Plan. As determined by the
Director of Planning and Development, a proposed modification to an
approved final plan which would result in a change other than those
listed in Section 400.225(A) shall be deemed a major modification and
require the review and approval of a revised area plan and the
subsequently required final plan(s) per the requirements of this Article.
The only exception to this requirement being proposed modifications to
an approved final plan which meet the modifications of an approved
area plan listed in Section 400.200(E) of this Article, in which case, the
review and approval of a revised final plan will be required by both the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
A. Completion Of A Planned Development. The construction of a Planned
Development that is to be constructed in a single phase shall be
completed within two (2) years of the date of the approved area plan.
The construction of a Planned Development that is to be constructed in
two (2) or more phases shall be completed within five (5) years of the
date of the approved area plan. Upon written request by the applicant,
if good cause can be shown as to why construction has been delayed or
is behind schedule, the City Council, in its discretion, may grant the
extension of time requested by the applicant for the completion of the
Planned Development.
B. Developer And Home Builder Responsibilities. The developer and/or
homebuilder(s) of the Planned Development shall maintain control and
perform required maintenance of all common ground, associated
facilities and recreational amenities (if applicable) until the same are
formally turned over to a homeowners' association. In addition, it shall
be the responsibility of the developer and/or homebuilder(s) to
prominently display and make available the following items in their
sales office(s):
1. For a Planned Development that is to be constructed in a single
phase, a copy of the approved final plan. For a Planned
Development that is to be constructed in two (2) or more phases, a
Section
400.225
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.230
100:615
Section 400.235. Transitional Provisions. [R.O. 2007 §400.235; Ord.
No. 4910 §1, 9-26-2005]
copy of the approved area plan for the entire Planned Development
and a copy of the approved final plan(s) to date.
2. A copy of the record plat(s) for Planned Development that clearly
identify the location of all easements associated with hazardous
pipelines, buried cables and overhead electrical power
transmission lines.
3. A current copy of the City's Official Zoning Map and a copy of the
City's most recently adopted Comprehensive Plan.
4. A description of the responsibilities of the developer and/or home
builder(s) and the homeowners' association regarding all common
ground, associated facilities and recreational amenities.
5. A copy of all trust indentures, covenants, and deed restrictions for
the Planned Development.
C. Abandonment Of A Planned Development. If the approved area plan for
a Planned Development has expired per the requirements of Section
400.200(C) of this Article and the applicant has failed to request and/or
receive an extension of time for the approved area plan per the
requirements of Section 400.200(D) of this Article, the Planned
Development shall be considered abandoned and the "PD" designation
shall be removed from the City's Official Zoning Map and the subject
site shall only retain its underlying zoning district classification. If the
approved final plan(s) for a Planned Development expire per the
requirements of Section 400.220(B) of this Article and the applicant has
failed to request and/or receive an extension of time for the approved
final plan(s) per the requirements of Section 400.220(C) of this Article,
the Planned Development shall be considered abandoned and the "PD"
designation shall be removed from the City's Official Zoning Map and
the subject site shall only retain its underlying zoning district
classification.
A. Previously Approved Area Plans. An area plan approved by the City
Council prior to the effective date of this Article shall be allowed to seek
approval of the final plan(s) per the requirements of the City's
previously existing planned unit development regulations, unless said
area plan has expired under the terms and conditions of the previously
existing planned unit development regulations.
B. Previously Approved Final Plans. The final plan(s) for a planned unit
development approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to
the effective date of this Article shall be allowed to proceed with
development under the full force of the previously existing planned unit
development regulations.
Section
400.230
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.236
100:616
Section 400.236. "PUD" Planned Unit Development. [Ord. No. 6196
§1, 3-24-2016]
A. Purpose. The provisions of this Section are designed to deal with large
scale development and facilitate better site planning and community
planning through modification of certain district regulations as they
apply to such development.
B. It is hereby recognized that, for large scale development, the
regulations of districts in the Zoning Code, either individually or
collectively, might impose unnecessary or undesirable rigidities on the
site plan and thereby prevent achievement of the best possible plan
within the Code. Therefore, this Article has the following intents:
1. To permit flexibility in site design.
2. To achieve more efficient use of land, within the framework and
intent of the Zoning Ordinance, which can result from large scale
or multiple use developments.
3. To encourage and permit provision of open space.
4. To protect and preserve scenic assets and natural features and to
incorporate these into the development.
5. To foster a more stable community by providing a variety and
balance of housing types and living environments.
6. To encourage and permit variety in the location of buildings, roads,
parking lots, and other facilities and activities.
7. To increase the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic by
reducing the number of traffic conflict points within a development.
8. To reduce land cost per dwelling unit in residential developments.
C. This Article is intended to achieve these objectives while promoting and
protecting the public health safety, and welfare of the City, and while
safeguarding the present or future use and development of areas
surrounding a proposed "PUD."
D. The "PUD" designation is to be attached to the "R-1", "R-2" and "R-3"
zoning districts set forth in this Chapter and is not a separate use
district. The "PUD" designation may be attached to a parcel of land at
the time its zoning classification is amended.
E. Permitted Modifications To The Zoning District Regulations. Upon
approval by the City Council, a Planned Unit Development may depart
from strict conformance to certain underlying zoning district
regulations to which the Planned Unit Development designation has
been attached. The departure from strict conformance to these
underlying zoning district regulations shall only be permitted if deemed
necessary for the proper design of the Planned Unit Development.
Section
400.236
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.236
100:617
Proposed modifications to the underlying zoning district regulations are
limited to one (1) or more of the following:
1. Reduction of the minimum lot area requirements.
2. Reduction of the minimum lot width requirements.
3. Reduction of the minimum lot depth requirements.
4. Reduction of the front yard setback requirements.
5. Reduction of the side yard setback requirements.
6. Reduction of the rear yard setback requirements.
7. Reduction of the distance between grouped buildings
requirements.
8. Increase in the maximum lot coverage requirements.
9. Increase in the maximum height requirements.
10. Modification to the landscaping requirements.
11. Modification to the off-street parking and loading requirements.
F. Permitted Modifications To The Subdivision And Land Development
Code Regulations. Upon approval by the City Council, a Planned Unit
Development may depart from strict conformance to certain
regulations of the Subdivision and Land Development Code. The
departure from strict conformance to these Subdivision and Land
Development Code regulations shall only be permitted if deemed
necessary for the proper design of the Planned Unit Development.
Proposed modifications to the Subdivision and Land Development Code
are limited to one (1) or more of the following:
1. Reduction of the minimum right-of-way requirements for minor
residential and cul-de-sac streets.
2. Reduction of the minimum centerline radii for minor residential
and cul-de-sac streets.
3. Reduction of the minimum corner radii at the back of curb for
minor residential and cul-de-sac streets.
4. Reduction of the minimum block length.
5. Increase in the maximum block length.
6. Increase in the maximum length of cul-de-sacs.
7. Modification to the requirements for private alleys.
8. Modification to the requirements for sidewalks.
9. Modification to the requirements for street tree placement.
Section
400.236
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.236
100:618
G. Regulations Which May Not Be Modified. A Planned Unit Development
must meet the use and density limitations of the underlying zoning
district in which the development is to be located. All requirements of
the underlying zoning district and the Subdivision and Land
Development Code remain applicable except as specifically modified
pursuant to the allowance of this Article as approved by the City
Council. Under no circumstances shall the applicable flood hazard
prevention requirements, stormwater detention requirements, grading
requirements, soil erosion and sediment control requirements, central
utility requirements, tree preservation requirements, screening of
outdoor equipment requirements, or performance standards (e.g., air
and water pollution, noise, odor, fire hazard, etc.) be modified in
conjunction with the approval of a Planned Unit Development. In
addition, all other City, County, State, and Federal regulations and
development requirements shall apply to the Planned Unit
Development.
H. Residential Density. Under no circumstances shall the residential
density of a Planned Development exceed that which would normally be
permitted in the underlying residential zoning district to which the
Planned Unit Development designation has been attached.
Processing Procedures for Planned Unit Developments
Step 1
Area Plan
Approval
Pre-Application
Meeting
Application and
Area Plan
Submitted to
Planning and
Development
Staff review Planning and
Zoning
Commission
public hearing
and review
City Council
public hearing
and review
Step 2
Final Plan
Approval
Application and
Final Plan
Submitted to
Planning and
Development
Staff review Planning and
Zoning
Commission
public hearing
and review
Final plan
ordinance
reviewed by City
Council
Record Plat
Submitted
Building permit Project
construction
Section
400.236
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.236.1
100:619
Section 400.236.1. Authority. [Ord. No. 6196 §1, 3-24-2016]
The City Council of O'Fallon shall have the authority to approve the area and
final Planned Unit Development (PUD) plans. Such plans may be considered
by the City Council only after the Planning and Zoning Commission has
reviewed the plans and submitted its recommendations to the City Council.
Section 400.236.2. Minimum Lot Area. [Ord. No. 6196 §1,
3-24-2016]
The minimum area to be developed under the regulations of this Article
shall be five (5) acres, provided, however, that the minimum lot area may
be waived by the City Council upon recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Commission if the parcel in question has certain unique
characteristics such as, but not limited to, significant topographic change,
significant trees, or wooded areas; wetlands, flood plain, or poor soil
conditions on portions of the property; water courses or utility easements
crossing the parcel; unusual shape or proportions; and isolation from other
undeveloped or developable lands. In such case, the applicant shall submit
information to the Planning and Zoning Commission to support the request
for a waiver of the minimum tract size requirement. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall consider the request and act thereon, record
said action in the minutes of the meeting, and inform the applicant of the
action in writing. The request for waiver and the Planning and Zoning
Commission's action shall be made prior to the applicant's submittal of an
application for a Planned Unit Development designation. If the Planning
and Zoning Commission accepts the request for waiver of minimum tract
size, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall indicate its decision and the
reasons therefore in its report to the City Council as required in the Section
herein.
Section 400.236.3. Application Procedure. [Ord. No. 6196 §1,
3-24-2016]
A. The owner(s) of record, or any person(s) acting on behalf of the
owner(s) of record may apply for a "PUD" designation. The application
for a "PUD" designation shall be for review and approval of an area plan
for development of the entire tract. The application may accompany a
zoning amendment application for the lot in question. Following review
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval of the area plan
and designation of the lot as a "PUD" by the City Council, a second
application shall be made for approval of a final plan for the entire tract,
or portion thereof, if development is to occur in phases. A separate
application for final plan approval shall be required for each phase. No
construction or other site improvements may commence and no permit
shall be issued therefore, on a tract with a multiple stage "PUD"
designation, until a final plan for said tract or part thereof has been
approved in accordance with this Section.
Section
400.236.1
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.236.3
100:620
Section 400.236.4. Information Required-Area Plan. [Ord. No. 6196
§1, 3-24-2016]
B. Each application shall be filed with the Planning and Development
Department, who shall transmit the area plan to the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The application must be filed at least thirty (30)
days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which it
is to be first considered.
C. The applicant shall appear before the City Planning and Zoning
Commission, prior to application for a "PUD" designation, to discuss the
proposed development. The City Council members from the ward in
which the development is proposed will also be asked to be in
attendance at this meeting. The applicant shall provide a description of
the development, a sketch plan of the proposed development and an
outline of the City Code requirements that are anticipated to be
modified.
A. Application. The application for area plan approval shall include the
following information:
1. The name of the proposed "PUD."
2. Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner(s) of record,
engineer, surveyor or designer responsible for the planning,
engineering survey and design.
3. Acreage in the area plan.
4. Legal description of the entire "PUD."
5. Signature(s) of applicant(s) and owner(s) certifying the accuracy of
the requested information.
6. Receipt from the Finance Department showing paid application fee.
7. Any additional information deemed necessary by City staff.
B. Area Plan. The application shall be accompanied by an area plan that is
submitted electronically and drawn at appropriate scale. The area plan
submittal shall address and/or contain the following:
1. If the underlying zoning district is proposed to be rezoned/zoned,
provide a completed and signed rezoning application per the
requirements of Article XVI of the Zoning Code.
2. Provide letters from the applicable school district(s), fire protection
district(s), potable water district(s), and sanitary sewer district(s)
that verify that they have the capacity to provide service to the
proposed Planned Unit Development.
Section
400.236.3
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.236.4
100:621
3. Provide a letter from St. Charles County approving the name of the
proposed Planned Unit Development and all proposed street
names.
4. Provide on the plans a comparison table which identifies the exact
zoning district and/or Subdivision and Land Development Code
regulations proposed to be modified per the permitted
modifications of the Zoning Code and the corresponding
requirement within the underlying zoning district and/or
Subdivision and Land Development Code.
5. Provide the total gross land area of the proposed Planned Unit
Development in acres. Provide a breakdown of the total gross area
by proposed land use types. Proposed Planned Unit Developments
which include residential uses shall provide a breakdown of the
number of residential units for each housing type, density
calculations, the average lot size, and size of the ten (10) smallest
lots.
6. Identify all land areas to be dedicated and reserved for public use
and areas to be dedicated as common ground under the control of a
Homeowner's Association.
7. Provide typical sections and a lot data table for all proposed
residential lot sizes and types within the proposed Planned Unit
Development. Indicate proposed lots which are susceptible to
street creep. Typically, these lots are: 1) at the end of tangent
sections, 2) across from "T" intersections, and 3) on the outside of
radii regardless of whether they are uphill or downhill from these
areas. Indicate proposed lots which will have rear walkouts. [Ord.
No. 6421, 1-11-2018]
8. Provide a traffic study if deemed necessary by the Planning and
Development Department.
9. An area plan layout designed by qualified land planner, registered
professional architect, engineer or land surveyor, with their stamp,
signature, and address, that shall contain a complete set of
notations and descriptions that supply the City staff with all
relevant site information including but not limited to: Total site
area; site coverages; owner/developer; zoning, proposed use,
utilities provided, flood plain information; required calculations
(parking, landscape, etc.); and any additional information needed
to demonstrate compliance with all applicable codes,
requirements, and restrictions. Multiple drawings may be required
for clarity.
10. Provide a north arrow and a scale on each page of the submittal.
The scale shall be: One (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet through one
(1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet (no greater or less than
specified). Indicate on the plan.
Section
400.236.4
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.236.4
100:622
11. Provide a site location map that shows site in relation with the
surrounding area.
12. Provide boundary dimensions, including, distances and bearings of
the subject property, correlated with the legal description of said
property.
13. Indicate the name and address of property owner and developer.
14. Show natural features, such as trees, tree masses, streams, dry
river beds, rivers, lakes, ponds, wetlands, floodplains and
floodways, drains, topography (at least at five (5) foot intervals,
when terrain is irregular or drainage critical, contours will be at
two (2) foot intervals) and other similar features.
15. Show existing and proposed 100-year floodplain and floodway
boundaries (where applicable) and include a note stating whether
the site is within or outside the 100-year, floodplain and reference
the applicable FIRM map panel number and date. Where the
floodplain is proposed to be altered, the application must contain
approval from FEMA for the alteration.
16. Delineate potential wetlands subject to United States Corp of
Engineers (COE) regulations.
17. Show existing manmade features, such as buildings, structures,
easements, high tension towers, power lines, excavations, bridges,
culverts and drains. Also indicate any easements on site that these
items may be located within.
18. Identify adjacent properties, their existing uses and zoning, within
one hundred (100) yards.
19. Identify the location of proposed structures, including fences,
signs, etc.
20. Indicate the proposed finished floor and grade line elevations for
multi-family developments.
21. Identify the size of proposed main and accessory buildings.
22. All site coverage, building, paving, and green space, shall be shown
as a percentage of the total area of the site and shall be listed on
the plans.
23. Indicate how storm water detention requirements will be
addressed.
24. Note and show setback requirements on the plan.
25. Note and show buffer yards and method(s) of screening on the
plan, where required.
Section
400.236.4
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.236.4
100:623
26. For multi-family units, all HVAC and mechanical units on site shall
be properly screened as required by City Code. Rooftop units shall
be screened by a parapet wall that extends around the entire
perimeter of the building; the parapet shall have a minimum height
that is at least as tall as the tallest unit mounted on the roof; ground
mounted HVAC and mechanical units shall be screened by fencing,
vegetation, or some other means (approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission) that has a minimum height that is at least as
tall as the tallest unit being screened.
27. Identify any existing structures to remain on site and what their
uses will be.
28. Indicate the height of all buildings and structures.
29. Provide colored building elevations of all four (4) sides of the
proposed building and indicate the types of building materials. If
these are not part of the second submittal this item may not be
placed on the agenda for the Planning and Zoning meeting.
30. Proposed streets, driveways, sidewalks and other vehicular and
pedestrian circulation features within and adjacent to the site,
include dimensions of circulation features.
31. Label parking spaces required, showing all supporting calculations.
In addition, the site plan shall demonstrate, with appropriate labels
and markings, that all parking spaces and loading zones, especially
those designed for handicapped accessibility, are of sufficient width
and depth (including all adjacent lane stripping and ramp access
routes) to meet all zoning and ADA requirements.
32. Label loading/unloading spaces, showing all supporting
calculations. Show the location of service lanes and loading spaces,
and provide dimensions.
33. Show existing utilities, public and private, such as water, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, electrical, gas, etc., and indicate location and
size.
34. Identify proposed utilities, including location and size.
35. Conceptual approval for utilities outside of City service shall be
submitted.
36. Show existing and proposed fire hydrants within three hundred
(300) feet of the property.
37. Provide lighting details, including cut sheets, location, height of
freestanding poles and method of screening light source to keep
from overflow onto adjacent properties and rights-of-way for multifamily
developments.
Section
400.236.4
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.236.4
100:624
38. Chapter 402 of the Zoning Code provides the requirements for
landscaping and screening on a developing site, using these
requirements, construct a detailed landscape plan, with a full
legend or key, that shows the location, number, and types, of plant
materials required based on linear street frontage, zoning district,
parking lot, and buffer yard landscape requirements. Supporting
calculations demonstrating compliance with these requirements
shall be included on the landscape plans.
39. Article III of Chapter 402 of the Municipal Code provides the
formula used to determine the number of trees that must be
maintained on site to comply with the Tree Preservation
Requirements. Using this formula, calculate the correct number of
trees preserved or the number of replacement trees to be planted
in order to meet the City standard, and show these calculations on
the plans. In addition, provide a map showing the location of the
trees to be removed and the trees to remain and include this with
the landscape plan.
40. Proposed alterations to the topography and natural features of the
site.
41. Indicate the locations and type of trash pick-up proposed. Provide a
detail of the proposed trash enclosure. The enclosure shall consist
of a 6-foot high solid wall with a sight proof vinyl gate consistent
with the architectural theme of the primary structure on site for
multi-family developments.
42. Provide one (1) bicycle parking space for every fifteen (15)
automobile parking spaces, with a minimum of four (4) per
building. Bicycle parking shall be located in close proximity to the
building entrance in highly visible, well lighted areas. Bicycle
parking facilities shall be securely anchored to the ground so that
they cannot be easily removed and shall be of sufficient strength to
resist vandalism and theft. A detail of the rack shall be provided
with the plans for multi-family developments.
43. All signage shall be approved through the Planning and
Development Department via a separate permitting process.
44. Details for all proposed improvements shall be submitted with the
final plan.
45. Demonstrate compliance with Article XIII of the Zoning Code,
Performance Standards.
46. Demonstrate conformance with the City's adopted Comprehensive
Plan.
47. A material and color sample board shall be presented by the
applicant and/or their authorized or designated representatives(s)
during the formal presentation to the Planning and Zoning
Section
400.236.4
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.236.4
100:625
Section 400.236.5. Procedure For Area Plan Review. [Ord. No. 6196
§1, 3-24-2016]
Commission. The material and color sample board should show
all exterior materials, finishes, treatments, and colors (keyed to
the colored building elevations). For materials such as roof tile,
decorative tile and trim, photographs or manufacturer's
specification sheet of the material clearly showing the textures,
colors, etc., may be presented in place of the actual material
samples.
48. Any other information deemed necessary by the Planning and
Zoning Commission; or any additional information deemed
necessary by the Director of Planning and Development to
adequately illustrate the proposed development shall be provided.
C. "PUD" Plan Replaces District Plan Requirement. The area plan and final
plan required in this Article shall replace (for a "PUD" project only) the
site plan and preliminary plat required in Article XIV herein.
A. Upon receipt of the area plan from the Planning and Development
Department, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall undertake a
study of the area plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
advise the applicant, in writing, of any recommended changes in the
area plan as are needed to conform to the standards of this Chapter and
other pertinent ordinances.
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, at the next meeting after
which it receives the area plan from the Planning and Development
Department, establish a public hearing on the area plan, said hearing to
be held within thirty-one (31) days of the filing date or at the regular
Planning and Zoning Commission meeting closest to that date. At least
fifteen (15) days' notice of the hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation along with hearing notice for a zoning
amendment for the tract in question, if such amendment is applied for.
The public hearing may be held jointly with a public hearing on any
zoning change for the tract in question.
C. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall prepare a report on the area
plan and shall submit this report to the City Council. This report shall
contain the Planning and Zoning Commission's analysis of the area plan
and its recommendations thereon to the City Council. If a zoning
amendment application is made for the subject lot, the Commission
shall report to the City Council its review and recommendations
concerning said amendment simultaneously with its reports on an area
plan.
D. The City Council shall review the area plan, and the report of the
Planning and Zoning Commission thereon, and shall approve or deny
the area plan. If a zoning amendment application has been made for the
subject tract to permit the development proposed in the area plan, the
Section
400.236.4
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.236.5
100:626
Section 400.236.6. Standards For Area Plan Approval. [Ord. No.
6196 §1, 3-24-2016]
City Council shall take action on such amendment before taking action
on the area plan.
E. If the area plan is approved by the City Council, the applicant shall
review the area plan in its approved form. The applicant and the
owner(s) of record shall then sign a statement that the approved area
plan shall be binding upon the applicant and the owner(s) of record and
upon their heirs, successors, and assigns. The area plan shall not be
officially approved nor may the applicant submit a final plan for the lot
or any part thereof, until said statement has been signed as required
herein. The foregoing approval and signing shall constitute official
approval of the "PUD" designation for the subject tract. Rezoning may
be made contingent upon the "PUD" statement being properly signed.
F. Within five (5) working days of the official approval of an area plan, the
Mayor shall accurately note, and the City Clerk attest, the "PUD"
designation for the lot in question on the Official Zoning Map.
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine and shall provide
evidence of same in its report to the City Council and the City Council
shall determine, based upon its review of the Planning and Zoning
Commission's report and its own findings, that the proposed area plan
meets the intent of this Chapter and meets the following standards.
1. The use of land shall be in conformance with the permitted uses of
the district, in which the proposed development is to be located,
and conforms to the adopted Comprehensive Plan or any part
thereof, or represents land use policy which, in the Planning and
Zoning Commission's opinion, is a logical and acceptable change in
the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
2. The average density of development within the "PUD" shall remain
the same as would be permitted if the area were to be developed
conventionally. Average density is to be calculated as total land
area excluding public right-of-way, land to be used as detention
basins and common ground. Common ground may be used in the
calculations if it is developed with acceptable amenities or is
otherwise developable open space. An undeveloped watershed
corridor will not be counted as common ground in the average
density calculation. However, the development (buildings) so
permitted may be clustered and located irrespective of yard
setback requirements or lot lines in order to create a smaller
network of streets and utility lines and to create additional open
space for the enjoyment of the residents. Improvements required
by the City Code will not be considered an acceptable amenity.
3. The proposed development shall be adequately served by public
facilities and services, such as: highways, streets, police and fire
Section
400.236.5
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.236.6
100:627
protection, drainage courses, water and sanitary sewer facilities
refuse disposal; or that the persons or agencies responsible for
the proposed development shall be able to provide, in a manner
acceptable to the City Council, any such facilities and services.
4. Each phase of the proposed development shall not be dependent
upon completion of subsequent phases of the same development for
the facilities and services identified in Subsection (A)(3) above.
5. The common open space, any other common properties, individual
properties, and all other elements of the "PUD" are so planned that
they will achieve a unified environmental scheme, with open spaces
and all other elements in appropriate locations, suitably related to
each other, the site, and the surrounding land. All common spaces
shall be permanently secured as such to the satisfaction of the City
Council.
6. The location of the proposed uses, layout of the site and its relation
to streets giving access to it, shall be such that traffic to, from, and
within the tract, and concentration of persons in connection
therewith, will not be hazardous or inconvenient to the project or
the neighborhood. In applying this standard, the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider among other
things, convenient routes for pedestrian traffic, particularly of
children; relationship of the proposed project to main
thoroughfares and street intersections; and the general character
and intensity of the existing and potential development of the
neighborhood.
7. Where applicable, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council shall determine that noise, odor, light, or other external
effects from any source whatsoever, which are connected with the
proposed use, will not adversely affect adjacent and neighboring
areas and uses.
8. Yard requirements along the perimeter of the "PUD" shall be at
least equal to those required in district(s) in which the "PUD" is
located.
9. Perimeter buffering requirements. Regardless of political
boundaries, when a Planned Unit Development is proposed
adjacent to an existing residential development or residential
zoning district, there shall be a minimum 20-foot wide permanent
buffer area. These buffer areas shall be: 1) uniform in setback at all
points on the perimeter of the Planned Unit Development, 2) kept
in a natural state (if sufficient tree mass exists) or landscaped and/
or otherwise provided with screening (i.e., sight proof fencing and/
or landscaped earthen berms) to the satisfaction of the City
Council, and 3) be kept free of buildings, structures and impervious
surfaces. These buffer areas may be designated as common ground
or placed within permanent easements on the individual lots. If
Section
400.236.6
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.236.6
100:628
Section 400.236.7. Effect of Area Plan Approval. [Ord. No. 6196 §1,
3-24-2016]
Section 400.236.8. Information Required Final Plan. [Ord. No. 6196
§1, 3-24-2016]
these buffer areas are placed within permanent easements on the
individual lots, the required building setbacks shall be measured
from the inside line of the permanent easements.
A. Approval of the area plan by the City Council shall have the following
effects:
1. Approval shall assure the applicant that the area plan is acceptable
to the City Council for the 3-year period provided construction is
diligently pursued, and authorizes the applicant to file a final site
plan for the entire tract or portion thereof if the "PUD" is developed
in phases.
2. Official approval of the area plan shall confer "PUD" status to the
subject tract and permit modifications of lot area, lot width, yard
requirements, and spacing among buildings and structures within
the lot, except on the perimeter thereof, all as set forth in the
approved area plan.
3. No deviations from the area plan approved by the City Council shall
be permitted except as provided in this Article.
4. Approval of the area plan of a "PUD" shall expire and be of no effect
one (1) year after the date of approval unless a final plan has been
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
A. Every final plan submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be in accordance with the requirements of this Section. The final plan
submittal shall address and/or contain the following:
1. Provide a copy of the trust indentures, covenants, or deed
restrictions in accordance with Section 405.350 of the Subdivision
and Land Development Code that address the maintenance of
common ground, recreational amenities, storm water detention,
private roads and parking lots, and other regulations pertaining to
the buildings and structures within the proposed Planned Unit
Development.
2. Provide letters from the applicable school district(s), fire protection
district(s), potable water district(s), and sanitary sewer district(s)
that verify that they have the capacity to provide service to the
proposed Planned Unit Development.
3. Provide a letter from St. Charles County approving the name of the
proposed Planned Unit Development and all proposed street
names.
Section
400.236.6
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.236.8
100:629
4. Provide on the plans a comparison table which identifies the exact
zoning district and/or Subdivision and Land Development Code
regulations proposed to be modified per the permitted
modifications of the Zoning Code and the corresponding
requirement within the underlying zoning district and/or
Subdivision and Land Development Code.
5. Provide the total gross land area of the proposed Planned Unit
Development in acres. Provide a breakdown of the total gross area
by proposed land use types. Proposed Planned Unit Developments
which include residential uses shall provide a breakdown of the
number of residential units for each housing type, density
calculations, the average lot size, and size of the ten (10) smallest
lots.
6. Identify all land areas to be dedicated and reserved for public use
and areas to be dedicated as common ground under the control of a
Homeowner's Association.
7. Provide typical sections and a lot data table for all proposed
residential lot sizes and types within the proposed Planned Unit
Development. Indicate proposed lots which are susceptible to
street creep. Typically, these lots are: 1) at the end of tangent
sections, 2) across from "T" intersections, and 3) on the outside of
radii regardless of whether they are uphill or downhill from these
areas. Indicate proposed lots which will have rear walk-outs. [Ord.
No. 6421, 1-11-2018]
8. Provide the traffic study (if applicable) that was deemed necessary
by the Planning and Development Department and was included in
the review of the area plan for the site of the proposed Planned
Unit Development and the surrounding area. If a condition of
approval of the area plan was to provide a traffic study for the site
of the proposed Planned Unit Development and the surrounding
area as part of the final plan application, provide said traffic study.
9. A final plan layout designed by qualified land planner, registered
professional architect, engineer or land surveyor, with their stamp,
signature, and address, that shall contain a complete set of
notations and descriptions that supply the City staff with all
relevant site information including but not limited to: Total site
area; site coverages; owner/developer; zoning, proposed use,
utilities provided, flood plain information; required calculations
(parking, landscape, etc.); and any additional information needed
to demonstrate compliance with all applicable codes,
requirements, and restrictions. Multiple drawings may be required
for clarity.
10. Provide a north arrow and a scale on each page of the submittal.
The scale shall be: One (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet through one
Section
400.236.8
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.236.8
100:630
(1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet (no greater or less than
specified). Indicate on the plan.
11. A site location map that shows site in relation with the surrounding
area.
12. Boundary dimensions, including, distances and bearings of the
subject property, correlated with the legal description of said
property.
13. Name and address of property owner and developer.
14. Natural features, such as trees, tree masses, streams, dry river
beds, rivers, lakes, ponds, wetlands, floodplains and floodways,
drains, topography (at least at five (5) foot intervals, when terrain is
irregular or drainage critical, contours will be at two (2) foot
intervals) and other similar features.
15. Show existing and proposed 100-year floodplain and floodway
boundaries (where applicable) and include a note stating whether
the site is within or outside the 100-year floodplain and reference
the applicable FIRM map panel number and date. Where the
floodplain is proposed to be altered, the application must contain
approval from FEMA for the alteration.
16. Delineate potential wetlands subject to United States Corp of
Engineers (COE) regulations. Appropriate documentation of
coordination with the COE shall be provided prior to construction
site plan approval.
17. Existing manmade features, such as buildings, structures,
easements, high tension towers, power lines, excavations, bridges,
culverts and drains. Also indicate any easements on site that these
items may be located within.
18. Identify adjacent properties, their existing uses and zoning, within
one hundred (100) yards.
19. Location of proposed structures, including fences, signs, etc.
20. Proposed finished floor and grade line elevations for multi-family
developments.
21. Size of proposed main and accessory buildings.
22. All site coverages, building, paving, and green space, shall be
shown as a percentage of the total area of the site and shall be
listed on the plans.
23. Indicate how storm water detention requirements will be
addressed.
24. Note and show setback requirements on the plan.
Section
400.236.8
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.236.8
100:631
25. Note and show buffer yards and method(s) of screening on the
plan, where required.
26. For multi-family units, all HVAC and mechanical units on site shall
be properly screened as required by City Code. Rooftop units shall
be screened by a parapet wall that extends around the entire
perimeter of the building; the parapet shall have a minimum height
that is at least as tall as the tallest unit mounted on the roof; ground
mounted HVAC and mechanical units shall be screened by fencing,
vegetation, or some other means (approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission) that has a minimum height that is at least as
tall as the tallest unit being screened.
27. Identify any existing structures to remain on site and what their
uses will be.
28. Height of all buildings and structures.
29. Provide colored building elevations of all four (4) sides of the
proposed building and indicate the types of building materials. If
these are not part of the second submittal this item may not be
placed on the agenda for the Planning and Zoning meeting.
30. Proposed streets, driveways, sidewalks and other vehicular and
pedestrian circulation features within and adjacent to the site,
include dimensions of circulation features.
31. Label parking spaces required, showing all supporting calculations.
In addition, the site plan shall demonstrate, with appropriate labels
and markings, that all parking spaces and loading zones, especially
those designed for handicapped accessibility, are of sufficient width
and depth (including all adjacent lane stripping and ramp access
routes) to meet all zoning and ADA requirements.
32. Label loading/unloading spaces, showing all supporting
calculations. Show the location of service lanes and loading spaces,
and provide dimensions.
33. Existing utilities, public and private, such as water, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, electrical, gas, etc., and indicate location and size.
34. Proposed utilities, including location and size.
35. Conceptual approval for utilities outside of City service shall be
submitted.
36. Existing and proposed fire hydrants within three hundred (300)
feet of the property.
37. Lighting detail, including cut sheets, location, height of
freestanding poles and method of screening light source to keep
from overflow onto adjacent properties and rights-of-way for multifamily
developments.
Section
400.236.8
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.236.8
100:632
38. Chapter 402 of the Zoning Code provides the requirements for
landscaping and screening on a developing site, using these
requirements, construct a detailed landscape plan, with a full
legend or key, that shows the location, number, and types, of plant
materials required based on linear street frontage, zoning district,
parking lot, and buffer yard landscape requirements. Supporting
calculations demonstrating compliance with these requirements
shall be included on the landscape plans.
39. Article III of Chapter 402 of the Municipal Code provides the
formula used to determine the number of trees that must be
maintained on site to comply with the Tree Preservation
Requirements. Using this formula, calculate the correct number of
trees preserved or the number of replacement trees to be planted
in order to meet the City standard, and show these calculations on
the plans. In addition, provide a map showing the location of the
trees to be removed and the trees to remain and include this with
the landscape plan.
40. Proposed alterations to the topography and natural features of the
site.
41. Location and type of trash pick-up proposed. Provide a detail of the
proposed trash enclosure. The enclosure shall consist of a 6-foot
high solid wall with a sight proof vinyl gate consistent with the
architectural theme of the primary structure on site for multifamily
developments.
42. Provide one (1) bicycle parking space for every fifteen (15)
automobile parking spaces, with a minimum of four (4) per
building. Bicycle parking shall be located in close proximity to the
building entrance in highly visible, well lighted areas. Bicycle
parking facilities shall be securely anchored to the ground so that
they cannot be easily removed and shall be of sufficient strength to
resist vandalism and theft. A detail of the rack shall be provided
with the plans for multi-family developments.
43. All signage shall be approved through Planning and Development
Department via a separate permitting process.
44. Details for all proposed improvements shall be submitted with the
final plan.
45. Demonstrate compliance with Article XIII of the Zoning Code,
Performance Standards.
46. Conformance with the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan.
47. A material and color sample board shall be presented by the
applicant and/or their authorized or designated representatives(s)
during the formal presentation to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The material and color sample board should show all
Section
400.236.8
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.236.8
100:633
Section 400.236.9. Procedure For Final Plan Review. [Ord. No. 6196
§1, 3-24-2016]
Section 400.236.10. Standards For Final Plan Approval. [Ord. No.
6196 §1, 3-24-2016]
exterior materials, finishes, treatments, and colors (keyed to the
colored building elevations). For materials such as roof tile,
decorative tile and trim, photographs or manufacturer's
specification sheet of the material clearly showing the textures,
colors, etc., may be presented in place of the actual material
samples.
48. An outline and explanation of any changes that are being proposed
between the approved area plan and the proposed final plan.
49. Any other information deemed necessary by the Planning and
Zoning Commission; or any additional information deemed
necessary by the Director of Planning and Development to
adequately illustrate the proposed development.
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, upon receipt of a final plan,
study same and approve or deny the final plan. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall advise the applicant of its action in writing.
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall establish a public hearing
on the final plan, said hearing to be held within thirty-one (31) days of
the filing date or at the regular Planning and Zoning Commission
meeting closest to that date. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation.
C. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall prepare a report on the final
plan and shall submit this report to the City Council. This report shall
contain the Planning and Zoning Commission's analysis of the final plan
and its recommendations thereon to the City Council.
D. The City Council shall review the final plan, and the report of the
Planning and Zoning Commission thereon, and shall approve or deny
the final plan via ordinance.
E. The procedure of this Section shall be repeated in full for each phase of
the development in the approved area plan.
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission, in granting final plan approval,
shall determine that the following standards have been met:
1. The final plan shall conform to the approved area plan, except that
minor variations in layout may be permitted at the discretion of the
Planning and Zoning Commission and without amendment of the
approved area plan. Minor variations include, among others, a
change in residential floor area, an increase in non-residential floor
area of five percent (5%) of less, and a change in layout, provided
Section
400.236.8
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.236.10
100:634
Section 400.236.11. Effect of Final Plan Approval. [Ord. No. 6196
§1, 3-24-2016]
Section 400.236.12. Preservation and Maintenance of Open Space.
[Ord. No. 6196 §1, 3-24-2016]
All open spaces identified in the approved area plan and which are to
remain in private ownership shall permanently remain as open space and
shall be properly maintained.
Section 400.236.13. Amendment of a "PUD" Project. [Ord. No. 6196
§1, 3-24-2016]
An approved "PUD" project may be amended at either the area plan or final
plan stage by use of the procedure for original approval. An amendment to
a final plan which results in a major change in the area plan shall require an
amendment of the area plan and shall be processed in the same manner as
that in the case of a change in layout, the applicant shall provide
the City Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission each
a revised area plan which incorporates such layouts. The revised
plans shall each be signed by the applicant and owner(s) of record.
Modifications, such as, but not limited to, a change in use, type
of street, increase in density or intensity of development; type of
dwelling unit, or an increase in non-residential floor area of over
five percent (5%), shall be considered major changes and shall
require amendment of the approved area plan. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall determine whether a change is minor or
major, in accordance with this Section.
2. All dedications shall have been effectuated or, in lieu thereof,
proper agreements shall be made for such dedication in the future
with the City Council.
3. If the lot is to be developed in phases, each phase shall not depend
on subsequent phases for adequate access, utilities, or public
facilities.
A. Once a developer has received final plan approval it shall be the
developers responsibility to maintain the following at their sales office:
1. Description of the developers' subdivision trustees responsibilities
for common ground within the subdivision.
2. A copy of their approved final plan indicating the nature of all
adjacent zoning as of date of approval.
3. A copy of all indentures, restrictions, and covenants shall also be
available.
4. Developers shall be required to post notice, at the sales office, that
these items are available for review.
Section
400.236.10
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.236.13
100:635
the original application with public hearings before the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council following due public notice as required by
law.
Section 400.236.14. Expiration of Approvals. [Ord. No. 6196 §1,
3-24-2016]
Section 400.236.15. Extension of Time Limits. [Ord. No. 6196 §1,
3-24-2016]
Time limits set forth in this Article may be extended written agreement
between the applicant and the Planning and Zoning Commission or City
Council whichever is applicable in the case of area plans, and between
the applicant and the Planning and Zoning Commission in the case of final
plans. However, the two (2) and three (3) year periods provided in Section
400.236.7(A)(1) and 400.236.14(B) herein, will not be extended unless so
ordered by the City Council.
Section 400.236.16. Violations. [Ord. No. 6196 §1, 3-24-2016]
The approved area plan and/or final plan shall have the full force of the
Zoning Code. Any violation of either the approved area plan or approved
A. If a tract has been designated as a "PUD" by the City Council, said tract
shall not be developed or used except in accordance with the approved
area plan and final plan unless and until such designation is removed by
formal action of the City Council.
B. A final plan for the entire area designated as a "PUD," excepting all final
plans for subsequent phases thereof up to a period not to exceed two (2)
additional years, shall have received approval of the Planning and
Zoning Commission within one (1) year of the date of City Council
approval of the area plan. Failure to obtain approval of final plans as
herein provided shall authorize the City Council to revoke, at its
discretion, the right to develop under the approved area plan and to
require that a new area plan be filed and reviewed in accordance with
the provisions of this Article.
C. Approval of the final plan of a "PUD" shall expire and be of no effect one
(1) year after the date of approval unless and until all appropriate fees
have been paid and the City shall have issued a building permit for the
development authorized by said approved plan. Expiration of the
approved plan shall authorize the City Council to require filing and
review of a new final plan in accordance with the provision of this
Article.
D. Development under an approved "PUD" shall be completed within two
(2) years of the date of approval of the final plan. If said development is
not so completed, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall not review
or approve plans for any subsequent phases of the "PUD" unless good
cause can be shown for not completing same.
Section
400.236.13
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.236.16
100:636
final plan shall be ground for the Planning or Engineering Departments to
issue a stop-work order and to withhold building permits or certificates of
zoning compliance until the violation is removed, and shall cause the owner
of the development to be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
Section
400.236.16
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.236.16
100:637

ARTICLE VI
Supplementary District Regulations
Section 400.240. Purpose. [R.O. 2007 §400.250; Ord. No. 1161
§19.01, 10-16-1984]
Unless otherwise stated, the regulations hereafter established shall apply
within all districts established by this Chapter. These general regulations
supplement and qualify the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this
Chapter.
Section 400.245. Medical Marijuana. [Ord. No. 6562, 3-28-2019]
A. The purpose of this Section is to regulate the placement and licensing
of facilities for the dispensing, selling, cultivating, manufacturing,
storing, and testing of marijuana and marijuana-infused products, to
the extent permitted by the Missouri Constitution, applicable Statutes
enacted by the General Assembly, and regulations promulgated by the
Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services, and to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents, businesses, and property
owners in the City.
B. No marijuana-related use, activity or facility shall emit an odor or in any
way cause a public nuisance per Article XIII of this chapter. Appropriate
ventilation systems to prevent any odor of marijuana or fumes from
leaving the premises or other changes to the facilities can be required if
a public nuisance violation occurs.
C. No more than a total of ten (10) medical marijuana dispensary facilities
will be allowed within the City limits.
D. Each medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana-infused
products manufacturing facility or medical marijuana dispensary
facility shall be located on properties that meet the following distance
requirements: [Ord. No. 6604, 9-26-2019]
1. No marijuana-related uses shall be operated or maintained within
seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any school, child day-care center
or church.
2. No marijuana-related uses shall be operated or maintained within
one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of another marijuana
facility of identical use except when marijuana sales represents less
than five percent (5%) of the dollar volume of business in a State or
Federally licensed pharmacy. Marijuana-related uses under the
same ownership and on the same property are exempt from this
requirement.
3. The distances described in this Section shall be computed by direct
measurement from any building on land used for the above
purposes to the nearest portion of the building housing the medical
marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana testing facility,
Section
400.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.245
100:639
medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility or
medical marijuana dispensary facility, using a straight line.
E. The waiting area and the area of a medical marijuana dispensary facility
where marijuana or marijuana-infused products are physically
delivered to a qualifying patient or primary caregiver shall be separated
by a solid wall and solid door so that persons in the waiting area are
obstructed from observing the delivery of the marijuana or marijuanainfused
products to the qualifying patient or primary caregiver. No
loitering will be permitted at any facility.
F. No marijuana or marijuana-infused product shall be displayed so as to
be visible through glass, windows, or doors by a person of normal visual
acuity standing at the outside perimeter of a facility.
G. "Paraphernalia," as defined in Section 215.610, excluding (1)f, RSMo.,
as may be amended, may be lawfully sold at a medical marijuana
dispensary facility. Such items may not be publicly displayed and may
be sold, displayed and provided only to patients or primary caregivers
of patients.
H. The sale or consumption of alcohol within a facility is prohibited.
I. No person under the age of righteen (18) shall be allowed in any portion
of a medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana testing
facility or medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility.
The entrance to a facility shall be clearly and legibly posted with notice
indicating that persons under the age of eighteen (18) are precluded
from entering the premises.
J. A medical marijuana dispensary facility shall not dispense more than
four ounces of a usable form of medical marijuana per patient in a
thirty-day period, except as otherwise allowed by law [Art. 2, sec 3(13)].
All marijuana sold or otherwise distributed shall be in a sealed
container. Such packaging shall have a label that indicates the quantity
and advises the purchaser that the marijuana is intended for use solely
by the patient, and that any resale or redistribution to any third person
is a criminal violation.
K. The consumption, inhalation or other personal use of marijuana or
medical marijuana-infused products on or within the premises of a
medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana testing facility,
medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility or medical
marijuana dispensary facility is prohibited, except that a medical
marijuana testing facility may consume marijuana during the testing
process and only as the consumption relates to the testing process.
L. Dispensaries can be on the same property in HTCD as a cultivation
facility, a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility or
a medical marijuana testing facility but are not permitted to be within
the same building as any other marijuana-related use.
Section
400.245
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.245
100:640
M. Security Plans. A medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical
marijuana testing facility, medical marijuana-infused products
manufacturing facility or medical marijuana dispensary facility shall
provide adequate security on the premises, including, but not limited
to, the following:
1. Surveillance. Security surveillance cameras installed to monitor
each entrance to the facility along with the interior and exterior of
the premises to discourage and to facilitate the reporting and
investigation of criminal acts and nuisance activities occurring at
the premises. Security video shall be preserved for at least ninety
(90) days, and be made available to law enforcement officers upon
demand.
2. Inventory. All salable inventory of marijuana must be kept and
stored in a secured, locked manner.
3. Safe. A locking safe or secure vault permanently affixed or built
into the premises to store any currency on site.
4. Alarm System. Professionally monitored robbery alarm and
burglary alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in good
working condition within the facility at all times.
5. Emergency Contact. Each facility shall provide the Chief of Police
with the name, cellular telephone number, electronic mail address,
and facsimile number of an on-site facility employee to whom the
City may provide notice of any operating problems associated with
the facility. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to keep up
to date the contact information of the facility employee.
N. Operating Plans. As a condition of processing of a business license
application, a facility operator shall provide at the time of filing the
business license application a detailed operations plan and, upon
issuance of a license, shall operate the facility in accordance with the
plan. Such plan shall include:
1. Floor Plan. A plan showing the layout of the facility and the
principal uses of the floor area depicted. A medical marijuana
dispensary facility shall have a lobby waiting area at the entrance
to the center to receive clients, and a separate and secure
designated area for dispensing medical marijuana to qualified
patients or designated primary caregivers. The primary entrance of
any stand-alone facility shall be located and maintained clear of
barriers, landscaping and similar obstructions so that it is clearly
visible from public streets, sidewalks or site driveways. All storage
areas shall be shown and labeled.
2. Odor Controls. A facility shall provide a plan for the mitigation and
control of odors and other environmental impacts which may
emanate from a facility. Such plan shall describe the ventilation
system for the premises. Appropriate ventilation systems to
Section
400.245
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.245
100:641
prevent any odor of marijuana or fumes from leaving the premises
of a facility or other changes to a facility may be required to abate
a public nuisance.
O. Signage.
1. A sign for a medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical
marijuana dispensary facility, medical marijuana-infused products
manufacturing facility, or medical marijuana testing facility shall
comply with the requirements of Chapter 410 of this Code,96 or any
ordinance enacted hereafter regulating signs.
2. A sign for a medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical
marijuana dispensary facility, medical marijuana-infused products
manufacturing facility, or medical marijuana testing facility shall be
located on the same premises as the facility.
P. Each facility shall at all times possess a current City business license.
By obtaining a City business license, the facility licensee irrevocably
consents to the immediate closure and cessation of operation of the
facility in addition to all other penalties or remedies available by law for
the failure to possess a current City business license.
Q. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, transmit, give, dispense
or otherwise provide medical marijuana as a home occupation.
R. No medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana dispensary
facility, medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility, or
medical marijuana testing facility shall be operated within the City
without a valid license issued by the Missouri Department of Health and
Senior Services. No marijuana or marijuana-infused products shall be
acquired, certified, cultivated, delivered, manufactured, processed,
sold, stored, tested, or transported within the City, except by persons or
entities licensed for such purposes by the Missouri Department of
Health and Senior Services.
S. Application Review Process.
1. Site Review Permit. This preliminary permit reviews the proposed
marijuana-related use for compliance with the City's zoning and
location standards prior to issuance of a State license. A draft of
proposed security and floor plans should also be provided. Site
review approval shall expire, and be of no effect, one (1) year after
the date of issuance thereof.
2. Business License. Once State licensing has been received, the
business license shall include all relevant State approvals and
approved operating plans and security plans.
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 410, Signage Regulations.
Section
400.245
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.250
100:642
Section 400.250. Pipeline Setbacks. [R.O. 2007 §400.251; Ord. No.
4786 §2, 3-30-2005]
A. A use requiring evacuation assistance is prohibited in a structure
intended for human occupancy that is located within five hundred (500)
feet of a hazardous pipeline. This prohibition does not apply to a
structure that is located at least two hundred (200) feet from a
hazardous pipeline if, by resolution, the City Council determines, after
receiving a recommendation from the Director of Building Safety, that:
1. The structure has a performance-based design that provides an
adequate time period for occupant evacuation to a safe place in the
event of a hazardous pipeline leak or fire association with a
hazardous pipeline, after considering:
a. The requirements of the 2000 Edition of the National Fire
Protection Association 101 Life Safety Code;
b. The site and structure design;
c. The structure's building materials;
d. The structure's distance from the pipeline;
e. The use of radiant energy barriers;
f. Access to the site and the structure by emergency providers;
g. Available on-site resources for emergency responders;
h. The topography and other natural features;
i. The use of the structure;
j. The evacuation capability of the occupants.
2. The structure incorporates a system for the early detection and
notification of a pipeline leak if the Director of Building Safety
determines that an appropriate system is commercially available;
and
3. The performance-based design for occupant evacuation and the
early detection and notification system are certified and sealed by
an engineer registered in the State of Missouri.
B. Except as otherwise set forth in this Section, a person may not build
new construction within any restricted pipeline area or within any
limited improvement area. Notwithstanding anything in this Section to
the contrary, fences, signage, decks, sun porches, screen porches,
patios, swimming pools, sheds, landscaping, detached garages,
mechanical units, trash enclosures, lighting are permitted in a limited
improvement area.
Section
400.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.250
100:643
Section 400.255. Height Exceptions. [R.O. 2007 §400.255; Ord. No.
1161 §19.02, 10-16-1984]
C. A person may not place a structure or excavate within a restricted
pipeline area.
1. This prohibition does not apply to:
a. The hazardous pipeline or an appurtenance to the pipeline;
b. A facility that produces, consumes, processes or stores the
product transported by the hazardous pipeline, including a
power generation facility;
c. A utility line that crosses the restricted pipeline area, including
an appurtenance to the line;
d. A utility service connection;
e. A road;
f. A surface parking lot;
g. A structure or excavation that the Director of Building Safety
determines does not disturb the pipeline or impede its
operation;
h. Grading that the Director of Building Safety determines does
not disturb the pipeline or impede its operation.
2. Before a person may place a road, surface parking lot or utility line
in a restricted pipeline area, the person must deliver to the
Director of Building Safety a certification by an engineer registered
in the State of Missouri stating that the proposed construction
activity and structure are designed to prevent disturbing the
hazardous pipeline or impeding its operation.
D. In calculating minimum lot area under this Chapter, a restricted
pipeline area is excluded.
A. Public And Semi-Public Buildings. In any district, public or semi-public
buildings, such as hospitals, churches, sanitariums or schools, either
public or private, there permitted, may be erected to a height not
exceeding seventy-five (75) feet, provided that such buildings shall have
yards which shall be increased one (1) foot on all sides for each
additional foot that such buildings exceed the specified height limit as
established by the regulations of the district in which such buildings are
situated.
B. Structural Projections. [Ord. No. 6023 §3, 8-28-2014]
1. Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator headhouses, fire towers, grain
elevators, monuments, stacks, stage towers, or scenery lofts, tanks,
water towers, ornamental towers, and spires, church steeples,
Section
400.250
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.255
100:644
Section 400.260. Yard and Setback Exceptions. [R.O. 2007
§400.260; Ord. No. 1161 §19.03, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 4331 §1,
1-29-2002; Ord. No. 5687 §1, 3-24-2011; Ord. No. 5883 §§2—3,
5-24-2013]
radio and television towers, or necessary mechanical
appurtenances, usually required to be placed above the roof level
and not intended for human occupancy, are not subject to the
height limitations contained in the District Regulations, except that
such structural projections shall not exceed the height regulations
of the district in which the structure is situated by more than fifteen
percent (15%), except as indicated below.
2. Structural projections exceeding the above height limitations shall
be considered as conditional uses and shall be processed in
accordance with Article VIII of this Chapter, except in no event
shall a radio aerial or television antenna support extend more than
twenty-five (25) feet above the ridge of a roof in any residential
district.
3. Structural projections shall not interfere with St. Charles County's
emergency microwave communications system. For purposes of
this Subsection, the lack of interference may be shown by
submitting a letter from or written findings of the St. Charles
County Emergency Communications System Manager after review
of the site and building plans.
A. Commercial/Industrial Front Yards. In Districts "C-1, "C-2", "C-3", "I-1"
"I-2" where buildings located in the same block on the same side of a
street have provided front yards of greater depth than herein required,
the Planning and Zoning Commission may require a similar setback for
buildings or structures constructed thereafter.
B. Determination Of Setbacks. In measuring a yard, the minimum
horizontal distance between the proposed right-of-way line and the
main building shall be used. The required setback line shall be
measured from the proposed right-of-way line which shall be
determined by the latest revision of the City of O'Fallon Comprehensive
Plan. If a new or existing street is not defined by the adopted
Comprehensive Plan, the required width of said street in question shall
be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. Structural Projections. Every part of a required yard or court shall be
open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed.
Exceptions:
1. The ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, chimneys, cornices,
buttresses, ornamental features, bay windows and eaves, provided
however, that none of the above projections shall extend into a
Section
400.255
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.260
100:645
minimum yard more than twenty-six (26) inches; and provided
further that projections are not into an easement.
Chimneys are allowed to cantilever into an easement as follows:
a. Chimney shall not extend into a side yard easement when a
water or sewer (sanitary or storm) main is present. If a water
or sewer main is not present, chimneys may extend into the
required side yard over the easement up to twenty-six (26)
inches, provided it does not extend closer that three (3) feet
from the property line.
b. On any building permit application submitted that a chimney is
shown to extend into the side yard easement, the applicant's
engineer or surveyor shall note that water or sewer mains are
not located in said easement.
2. Balconies, canopies, or open porches having an area not exceeding
sixty (60) square feet may project a maximum of six (6) feet into the
required front or rear yard, and existing open porches extending
into the required yard shall not be enclosed.
3. Mechanical units are specifically excluded, whether attached or
detached.
D. Fire Escapes/Balconies. An open fire escape may project into a require
side yard not more than half the width of such yard, but not more than
four (4) feet from the building. Fire escapes, solid floored balconies, and
enclosed outside stairways may project not more than four (4) feet into
a required rear yard.
E. Accessory Buildings And Structures. (See Section 400.275 Accessory
Buildings and Structures).
F. Sight Triangle And Obstruction. On the point of any access onto a public
street or the intersection of any two (2) streets, development shall
conform to the requirements of the sight triangle in which nothing shall
be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of thirty-six (36) inches and
fifteen (15) feet above grade above the grades at the back of the curb of
the intersecting streets, within the triangular area formed by the rightof-
way lines and a line connecting them at points twenty-five (25) feet
from their point of intersection or at equivalent points on private streets
or as otherwise shown on the approved site plan.
Section
400.260
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.260
100:646
G. Commercial/Industrial Rear Yards. No rear yard shall be required in
Districts "C-1" to "I-2" inclusive on any lot used for business or
industrial purposes, the rear line of which adjoins a railway right-of-way
or, which has a rear railway right-of-way or which has a rear railway
track connection.
H. Through Lots. A through lot having one end abutting a limited access
highway, with no access permitted to that lot from said highway, shall
be deemed to front upon the street which gives access to that lot.
I. Residential Rear Yards. Nothing in these regulations shall preclude the
Administrative Officer from granting an exception of the Zoning Code to
allow a rear yard setback reduction to fifteen (15) for the purpose of
constructing a covered patio/deck in the residential zoning districts of
"R-1", "R-1A", "R-2", "R-3", "R-4", and "PUD". For the purposes of this
Section, an "exception" is defined as "A relatively small departure of the
Zoning Code that maintains the general intent and purpose of the
Zoning Code". Such an exception cannot exceed an overall square
footage of two hundred (200) square feet and shall apply only to a
covered patio/deck. For the purposes of this Section, a "covered patio/
deck" is defined as "A one-story structure either attached or detached
from the principal structure. The cover shall only be enclosed by the
principal structure. Structures enclosed with insect screening will only
be allowed when no extension walls are constructed, excepting
guardrails".
1. In the granting of an exception of the residential rear yard setback,
the Administrative Officer shall require the notification of all
abutting lot owners to the residential property being considered for
Section
400.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.260
100:647
Section 400.261. Lot and Street Development Standards. [R.O. 2007
§405.140; Ord. No. 1499 §501.0, 8-17-1987; Ord. No. 5346 §1,
7-10-2008; Ord. No. 5727 §4, 8-25-2011]
the exception. The applicant shall provide such information as
may be requested by the Administrative Officer. The Administrative
Officer shall review the information and can grant an exception
on the basis that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed,
safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.
2. Uncovered decks may encroach into the required rear yard, but
shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the rear property line.
[Ord. No. 6223 §2, 5-26-2016]
A. The following standards are regarded as requirements for desirable
development. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be designed
to provide desirable building sites and logically related to topography,
natural features, streets, and adjacent land uses. Due regard shall be
given to natural features such as large trees; unusual rock formations;
watercourses; and sites which have historical significance, scenic
views, and similar assets, the preservation of which would add
attractiveness and value to the subdivision. The following minimum
standards are set forth as guides to these goals.
1. Where additional widening strips are dedicated on existing streets,
calculations of the area of a lot should not include the dedicated
strips in determining the gross area of the lot. Dedicated widening
strips shall be required for all proposed subdivisions which front
along a county road. The area of all lots must be calculated
exclusive of the street right-of-ways.
2. Improvement of existing streets. Any development fronting on an
existing road or street shall be responsible to bring the road or
street up to City specifications to the center line of the road or
street. The City's Thoroughfare Plan shall be a guide in
determining which roads need improvement. Streets going through
a development shall have the guidelines set forth above applied to
both sides of the street. It is the developer's responsibility to make
infrastructure improvements necessitated by the proposed project
that are reasonably related to the proposed activity. In cases where
there is a proportional impact to the area, the developer shall be
responsible for the proportional costs according to the percent the
proposed activity contributes to the need for improvements to the
infrastructure in the area. The approved traffic study will
determine the infrastructure improvements that will be necessary.
3. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for
their intended use due to factors such as rock formations, soil
conditions, steepness of terrain, flood conditions, or other adverse
natural physical conditions, the Commission may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such lots until engineering
Section
400.260
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.261
100:648
Section 400.262. Lot Dimensions, Shapes and Position. [Ord. No.
5346 §1, 7-10-2008]
studies are presented to the Commission which establish that the
method proposed to meet any such condition is adequate to avoid
significant danger to health, life or property.
A. The size, orientation and dimensions of lots shall be appropriate for the
location and physical character of the proposed subdivision and for the
type of development contemplated in compliance with the applicable
Zoning Code or regulation. Building lines shall be shown on all lots
intended for residential use; and shall not be less than the setback
required by the Zoning Code.
1. Depth. Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A
depth to width proportion of one to one (1:1) up to three to one
(3:1) will normally be considered appropriate, unless topography is
such that other lot dimensions allow for proper development. This
requirement can be varied with Planning and Zoning Commission
approval in "PD" and "MUTDD" zoning districts.
2. Street access. Each proposed lot shall front upon a street improved
to standards and specifications of the City of O'Fallon unless the
lots front on a private roadway.
3. Width. Lots for residential purposes shall have sufficient width at
the building setback lines to permit compliance with side yard or
distance requirements of the applicable Zoning Code or regulations
and still be adequate for a building of practicable width. The
minimum lot width required for a lot fronting on a circular
turnaround or any radial right-of-way shall be measured as a
straight line along a tangent to the setback line at a point midway
between the side lot lines.
4. Double-frontage. Lots with double frontage and reversed frontage
shall be avoided, except where necessary to provide separation of
development from traffic arteries, or as otherwise required by
topography or similar conditions.
5. Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets except when said radial lot lines
detract from desirability of the lot, in which event some deviation
may be allowed.
6. Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall be platted to
permit compliance with the yard and setback requirements for the
applicable Zoning Code. The right-of-way radius on corner lots
shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet, or in the case of a
straight line, the line connecting two (2) points twenty-five (25) feet
distance from the intersection of the projected lot lines.
Section
400.261
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.262
100:649
Section 400.263. Non-Residential Subdivision (Commercial and
Industrial). [R.O. 2007 §405.170; Ord. No. 1499 §504.0, 8-17-1987;
Ord. No. 5346 §1, 7-10-2008]
Section 400.264. Designation of Private Streets. [R.O. 2007
§405.210; Ord. No. 1499 §§508.0—508.5, 8-17-1987; Ord. No. 3145
§§3—5, 9-2-1994; Ord. No. 4680 §1, 6-28-2004; Ord. No. 4875 §5,
8-1-2005; Ord. No. 5346 §1, 7-10-2008]
The construction of new private streets within any residential zoned
development shall be prohibited. Private streets will be allowed in
commercial and industrial zoned areas. For any existing or approved
subdivision having private streets, the developer must construct a sign at
all entrances of the subdivision within fifty (50) feet of the centerline of
the road, this shall state: "Private Streets Maintained by Property Owners".
These signs shall be installed where they are easily visible to anyone
entering the subdivision and maintained in good order by the developer
until the homeowners' association in the subdivision is established and can
maintain the sign. The minimum size for sign shall be twelve (12) inches
high by eighteen (18) inches wide with two (2) inch high letters. There
shall also be a sufficient contrast in the coloring of the sign background as
compared to the message lettering. When private streets are built, they are
to be built to public streets standards.
7. Markings. The corners of all lots shall be marked with iron stakes,
or if the front property line is contiguous to a street, by an
approved recognizable mark on street or curb, as specified by the
Missouri Land Survey Authority.
A. In addition to the standards of this regulation, which are appropriate to
the platting of all subdivisions, the subdivider shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Commission that the street, parcel and block pattern
proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated. The following
standards shall, therefore, be observed.
1. Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and
dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated.
2. Street right-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to
accommodate the type of volume of traffic anticipated.
3. Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas
from the proposed non-residential subdivision, including the
provision of extra depth in parcels adjacent to an existing or
potential residential development and provision for a permanently
landscaped buffer strip where indicated by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
4. The street network shall be designed according to the City's Traffic
Management Policy.
Section
400.262
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.265
100:650
Section 400.265. Area Regulations. [R.O. 2007 §400.265; Ord. No.
1161 §19.04, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 4994 §5, 5-3-2006]
Section 400.270. Access Regulations. [R.O. 2007 §400.270; Ord. No.
1161 §19.05, 10-16-1984]
Section 400.273. Fencing Standards. [R.O. 2007 §400.273; Ord. No.
3859 §2, 4-5-1999; Ord. No. 4501 §1, 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 5544
§§1—3, 1-14-2010; Ord. No. 5727 §5, 8-25-2011]
A. Maximum Lot Coverage Calculation. In computing the amount of lot
coverage, the amount of coverage shall include the total area of all
principal and accessory buildings as measured along the outside wall at
ground level or above as viewed from above and includes all projections
other than open porches, fire escapes, canopies or the first three (3)
feet of a roof over-hang. Roads, driveways, parking lots and swimming
pools shall not be included in determining the maximum lot coverage
requirements. The maximum lot coverage requirements established for
the individual zoning districts shall apply to all property platted either
before or after the effective date of this Section.
B. Business And Dwelling Joint Use. For any building used jointly for
business and dwelling purposes, the number of dwelling units
permitted (by the lot area requirements per dwelling unit) shall be
reduced in the same proportion as the floor area devoted to business
bears to the entire floor area of the building, provided that floor area
below the first floor of such building shall not be included in any
calculation under this provision.
C. Hotel And Apartment Joint Use. For any building providing jointly for
hotel and apartment house uses, the number of dwelling units
permitted in apartments by the lot area requirements per dwelling unit
shall be reduced in the same proportion as the total floor area devoted
to hotel or non-housekeeping rooms bears to the total area devoted to
both uses.
A. Access To Business And Industrial Districts. No land which is located in
a residential district shall be used for a major access route to any land
which is located in any business or industrial district; provided
however, that this Section shall not prohibit pedestrian walks and
driveway connections between residential districts and neighborhood
shops when incorporated as a part of a Planned District Development.
B. Street Access. All lots shall abut a street other than an alley for a width
of at least thirty-five (35) feet.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to regulate the materials,
locations, height and maintenance of fencing and decorative posts in
order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general
welfare of the public.
Section
400.265
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.273
100:651
B. Standards And Requirements.
1. All fences and decorative posts to be constructed within the City
limits that are thirty (30) inches or more in height need to have a
permit issued prior to construction. The property owner or his/her
authorized agent shall obtain a fence permit from the Development
Services Division. The Development Services Division is hereby
authorized to make periodic final checks to assure compliance with
this Section during and after construction or erection thereof.
2. The permit is not valid until a completed application is submitted
and approved and all applicable fees are paid in full.
3. Construction shall be initiated within six (6) months of the date of
permit issuance and be completed within one (1) year or the permit
will expire by limitation. Renewal of any expired permit is subject
to review by the Development Services Division.
4. Fences erected after passage of this Section that do not comply
with all applicable provisions of this Section shall be considered
illegal and shall be dismantled and removed by the property
owner(s) at their expense. Violation of any provision of this Section
shall subject the property owner to a fine of up to five hundred
dollars ($500.00) upon conviction of any such offence, with each
violation constituting a separate offence.
5. Issuance of a permit by the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, is verification
that all of the provisions of this Section have been met, but this
does not guarantee or constitute subdivision approval.
C. Design And Placement.
1. The maximum height for fencing, accompanying structures and
decorative posts is six (6) feet, six (6) inches, except as noted
elsewhere within this Section.
2. Fences/decorative posts must be constructed on or within the
property lines; may not be placed in the State right-of-way without
a State permit; and if they are constructed within the easement on
the subject property, are subject to removal by the property owner,
or other authorized party, without compensation or remuneration.
3. Fences/decorative posts may be located on any side or rear yard
property line that does not abut a street.
4. Installation of the fence may not obstruct any manhole or inlet
covers and must not impede/ disturb the existing drainage
patterns/swales or natural water flows on the subject property or
adjacent properties.
5. Fencing built forward of the required lot setback line is prohibited,
except in cases where more than one (1) side of the lot abuts a
public street. In this case, the fence may project up to ten (10) feet
Section
400.273
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.273
100:652
over the building line only on the side yard that is adjacent to the
street. Fencing within the front yard setback it prohibited.
6. Decorative posts less than thirty (30) inches in height may be
placed in the front yard, provided they are no closer than two (2)
feet to the property line. For purposes of this Section, "decorative
posts" are defined as ornamental poles or stakes with attached
chains, rope or other material that serve only aesthetic purposes.
7. Fencing/decorative posts may not be placed within the designated
twenty-five (25) foot sight triangle or be erected or constructed in
any manner that otherwise impedes vehicular vision.
8. All fences are required to have a minimum three (3) foot wide gate/
opening on any side adjacent to a street.
9. The finished side of the fence must face outward. All visible
supports and other structural components shall face in toward the
subject property.
10. All fencing materials must be contiguous; any fencing that is
installed on a piece of property must be of the same material and
design. A property owner shall be allowed to erect a fence of
differing material or design with approval of the Administrative
Officer.
D. Maintenance And Materials (All Zoning Districts).
1. Acceptable materials for fencing and decorative posts include, but
are not limited to, brick, stone and other masonry, synthetic
materials, natural and treated woods, wrought iron, decorative
aluminum and chain link.
a. PVC and other synthetic materials used for both residential
and commercial fencing applications shall meet the minimum
quality standards set forth in this Section.
b. Chain link shall only be permitted in residential and industrial
zoning; it cannot be used in commercially zoned areas.
2. Prohibited materials for fencing and decorative posts include, but
are not limited to, barbed wire, razor wire, hardware cloth, wire
mesh and electrified fencing.
a. Barbed wire can be used on security fences in industrially
zoned areas, provided the fence has a minimum height of five
(5) feet, six (6) inches and the property owner has applied for
and received a conditional use permit as outlined in Chapter
400, Article VII.
3. The property owner shall repair, paint, remove or otherwise attend
to any fencing that has become unsightly or a menace to public
safety, health or welfare.
Section
400.273
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.273
100:653
4. The Development Services Division is hereby empowered to issue
notices to property owners to comply with all provisions of this
Section. Lot owners will be given fifteen (15) days to comply with
any and all requests. However, a longer response time may be
granted at the discretion of the Development Services Division in
cases when such compliance would cause an undue hardship.
E. Non-Conforming Fencing.
1. All fencing in place prior to the effective date of this Section shall
be considered legal non-conforming structures.
2. As long as a legal non-conforming fence is not replaced or relocated
or the frame or structural supports are not altered in any manner
that extends, enlarges or intensifies the non-conformity, the fence
will allowed to remain. If the fence is altered, then the fence must
be brought into compliance with all applicable provisions of this
Section.
F. Special Fencing Requirements.
1. Commercial bufferyard fencing.
a. Base material. The base material used to construct the fence
must be rigid polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and the extruded
product must adhere to the ASTM (American Society for
Testing Materials) standards. The PVC used must be impact
tested for durability and must be formulated to be stable in
ultraviolet (UV) light. The material must also be "selfextinguishing",
non-flammable with a flash temperature of not
less than nine hundred degrees Fahrenheit (900°F).
b. Brackets and fasteners. Brackets and fasteners can be made of
stainless steel, galvanized steel, brass or any other material
fashioned for outdoor use. This is in order to provide better
weathering and rust protection. This includes all nuts, bolts,
screws and washers, as well as all hinge assemblies and
latching mechanisms.
c. Internal dimensions. The PVC used must be of a weight and
thickness that can support itself. The walls of each component
of the fence must be thick enough to ensure that the piece will
not bend or warp because of heat, cold, strong winds or any
other external force. The wall thickness of each component
should be matched to the size of the component used. The
standard component sizes and thickness are listed below:
Section
400.273
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.273
100:654
Cross Section
(Dimensions)
Wall Thickness
Posts 4" x 4"
5" x 5"
5" x 5"
0.140 inches
0.135 inches (standard)
0.170 inches (heavy)
Rails 1½" x 1½"
1¾" x 3½"
3" x 3½" T-Rail
2" x 6" Hollow
1½" x 5½" Ribbed
2" x 6" Ribbed
3" x 3"
3½" x 3½"
0.120 inches
0.100 inches
0.095 inches
0.125 inches
0.090 inches
0.090 inches
0.110 inches
0.115 inches
Pickets 7/8" x 1½"
7/8" x 1½" Heavy Wall
7/8" x 3"
7/8" x 6" Ribbed
7/8" x 7" Tongue and
Groove
1½" x 1½"
0.060 inches
0.090 inches
0.060 inches
0.060 inches
0.060 inches
0.060 inches
d. Posts. All line posts should be fully reinforced and set the
minimum depth required to support a fence of the stated
height. These details should be stated on the fence diagram. All
posts should be topped with molded PVC caps that are
complimentary to the style of the fence. Posts should be routed
to receive rails.
e. Rails. Bottom rails should contain a stiffener channel for added
strength and stability. A steel or aluminum channel may be
used. Rails should be routed to receive pickets.
f. Pickets. The pickets used in the fence can be either ribbed or
hollow and can be either flat sided or tongue and grove
interlocking.
g. Gates. Should be fully reinforced so that the gate retains its
shape and fit and can be fully opened and closed without
difficulty.
Section
400.273
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.273
100:655
h. Design. The design and color of the fence should be
complimentary to the other structures located on and around
the site. Although chemical pigment may be added to some
PVC compounds to give the fence color, any additives to the
PVC material should not supersede the material standards
previously stated in this document.
i. Configuration. The sizes and shapes of the pickets, rails and
posts should not deviate from the standard sizes previously
listed, unless necessary for a custom fence installation. For any
deviation, a review of the fence schematic and prior approval
will be required.
j. Aesthetic. All fencing materials must be contiguous; any
fencing that is installed on a piece of property must be of the
same material and design as the existing fence. If this is not
possible, for instance, the material used to make the existing
fence is no longer available, all existing fencing must be
removed or altered so that it is the same as the new fence.
Mixing of fence elements is not permitted i.e., connecting the
twenty (20) foot span between two (2) sections of wood fencing
with a chain link fence.
2. Enclosures for pools, spas and hot tubs.
a. All swimming pools, hot tubs, spas and other water features
(such as manmade lakes and ponds) shall be fully enclosed by a
continuous fence with a minimum height of four (4) feet at its
lowest point when measured from finished grade to the top of
the fence. The maximum clearance between the finished grade
and the bottom edge of the fence is two (2) inches.
(1) In lieu of this requirement, a pre-existing forty-two (42)
inch high chain link fence ("pre-existing" is defined as any
fencing constructed prior to April 5, 1999) may also be
used.
b. All fencing used around pools, hot tubs, spas or water features
are required to have gates that open away from the pool
structure and are self-closing and self-latching.
c. For all above ground pools and water features that have a wall
height of forty-eight (48) inches or greater, the pool structure
will be accepted as the barrier. For an above ground pool that
has a wall height of less than forty-eight (48) inches, the use of
additional constructs (such as fencing, railing, etc.) may be
used to attain the required forty-eight (48) inch minimum
barrier height.
d. If the pool comes equipped with a removable ladder, the ladder
alone shall not constitute an acceptable alternative to the
fencing requirements. When the pool structure qualifies as the
Section
400.273
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.273
100:656
Section 400.275. Accessory Buildings and Structures. [R.O. 2007
§400.275; Ord. No. 1161 §19.06, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 4136 §1,
10-18-2000; Ord. No. 5371 §3, 9-11-2008; Ord. No. 5727 §6,
8-25-2011]
barrier, the ladder access area must be enclosed with a fence
at a minimum height of four (4) feet and have a self-closing,
self-latching gate.
e. In addition to the requirements listed, all fencing used around
any pool or water feature must comply with all applicable
provisions of the current building codes as adopted in Title V of
the Municipal Code.
G. Exceptions.
1. Temporary protective fencing that is used to secure an area during
active earth work (excavation, construction, grading) is permitted
without the issuance of a fence permit.
2. Swimming pools, hot tubs, spas and other water features less than
twenty-four (24) inches deep and less than two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of surface area are not required to have fencing or
protective barrier.
3. Hot tubs or spas with an approved safety cover.
4. Fencing that is installed as a structural construct or as a safety
device (i.e., batting cages, backstops on ball fields, fencing on the
top a retaining wall or similar structure, etc.) is permitted without
the issuance of a permit, however, it shall be shown as an
improvement and is subject to review and approval by City staff.
5. The maximum height limit for fencing/decorative posts may be
exceeded either:
a. With the approval of a conditional use permit per Chapter 400,
Article VII, provided the following conditions apply: The
increase in height shall in no way further obstruct vision for
intersecting streets, driveways, sidewalks or other traffic
areas. The fence shall be screened on its external side with
adequate plants so as to maintain an attractive appearance to
said side,
Or
b. Without a conditional use permit, if a fence with a height of
greater than six (6) feet six (6) inches is required in order to
maintain compliance with any current City ordinance.
A. No accessory building or structure shall be used prior to the principal
building or use, except as a construction facility for the principal
building. An accessory building attached to the principal building of a
Section
400.273
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.275
100:657
lot shall be made a structural part thereof and shall comply with the
provisions of this Chapter. Accessory buildings, except garages, must
be located in the rear yard of a lot and must conform to all provisions of
this Chapter. On a corner lot, all accessory buildings (except garages)
and recreational vehicle pads must be located in the rear yard of a lot
on the interior side.
1. Attached accessory buildings. Any accessory building which is
structurally attached to the principal building of a lot shall be
considered part of the principal building and shall comply will all
provisions of this Chapter pertaining thereto.
2. Detached private residential garages, carports, utility sheds,
gazebos, pavilions and similar structures. [Ord. No. 6223 § 3,
5-26-2016]
a. Purpose. The purpose of this Subsection is to ensure that
detached residential garages, carports, utility sheds gazebos,
pavilions and similar structures are not constructed of a size
and height as to be detrimental to the use and enjoyment of
adjacent residential properties.
b. Applicability. The requirements of this Subsection apply to all
residential development except within the Mixed-Use
Traditional Development District and Mobile/Manufactured
Home Park Districts within the jurisdiction of this Chapter.
c. Requirements.
(1) All detached private residential garages, carports, utility
sheds, gazebos, pavilions and similar structures shall be in
accordance with the following:
(a) Shall not be located within any required front or side
yard.
(b) Shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet from any
rear property line.
(c) Shall meet the side yard setback requirements for the
principal structure on the property.
(d) Shall not be located within any required bufferyard
area.
(e) Shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height as
measured from the adjacent finished grade.
(f) Shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet
for a shed or three hundred (300) square feet for a
detached garage or carport and the total of all
accessory structures shall not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the square footage of the primary structure's
Section
400.275
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.275
100:658
Section 400.277. Exterior Lighting Standards. [R.O. 2007 §400.277;
Ord. No. 3706 §1, 6-17-1998; Ord. No. 5753 §3, 12-8-2011]
building footprint excluding any attached garage. (The
existence of a doorway of sufficient size to
accommodate a licensable automobile is conclusive
evidence of a structure's intended use as a garage.)
(2) All detached private residential garages, carports, utility
sheds, gazebos, pavilions and similar structures which are
proposed to exceed the height or size limits outlined above
shall only be allowed through the review and approval of a
conditional use permit unless located on property zoned
"R1-A" or "R1-B" or on a residential lot in excess of thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet. In such cases, all detached
private residential garages, carports, utility sheds,
gazebos, pavilions and similar structures that exceed the
above limitations on size and height shall meet the
setbacks and development standards for a primary
structure in the pertinent zoning district.
3. Architectural guidelines for all custom constructed (stick built)
detached private residential garages, carports and/or utility sheds.
All utility sheds in excess of one hundred fifty (150) square feet,
detached private garages, and carports shall be constructed of
materials and designed architecturally to be in substantial
compliance with the primary structure on the property as
determined by the Building Division.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to regulate the spill-over of light
and glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians and land uses in
the vicinity of a light source in order to promote traffic safety and to
prevent the creation of nuisances.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this Section apply to all private
exterior lighting within the jurisdiction of this Section, except for
lighting within public rights-of-way and/or lighting located on public
property.
C. Depiction On Required Site Plan. Any and all exterior lighting shall be
depicted as to its location, orientation, intensity of illumination, and
configuration on the site plan required for the development of the
subject property (Refer to Article XIV of this Chapter Site Plan Review).
D. Requirements.
1. Orientation of fixture. In no instance shall an exterior lighting
fixture be oriented so that the lighting element (or a transparent
shield) is visible from a property located within a residential zoning
district. The use of shielded luminaries and careful fixture
Section
400.275
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.277
100:659
Section 400.278. Standards For The Screening of Outdoor
Equipment. [R.O. 2007 §400.278; Ord. No. 3856 §1, 4-5-1999; Ord.
No. 4378 §1, 6-18-2002; Ord. No. 5753 §4, 12-8-2011]
placement is encouraged so as to facilitate compliance with this
requirement.
2. Intensity of illumination. In no instance shall the amount of
illumination attributable to exterior lighting, as measured at the
property line, exceed 0.50 foot-candles. In commercial and
industrial zoned districts, lighting shall extend into the public rightof-
way. Lighting shall be designed to project downward to not
impact driver's vision. The minimum lighting from the property line
to the curb/shoulder of the road shall be 0.40 foot-candles and not
more than 0.70 foot-candles shall extend onto the paved surface of
the road. [Ord. No. 6421, 1-11-2018]
3. Location. Exterior light fixtures shall be located within landscaped
islands or in vegetated areas along the perimeter of the parking/
vehicular use area. Light fixtures shall not be placed within the
required bufferyard as defined in Chapter 402.
4. Flashing, flickering and other distracting lighting. Flashing,
flickering and/or other lighting which may distract motorists is
prohibited.
5. Minimum lighting standards. All areas designated on required site
plans for vehicular parking, loading, or circulation and used for any
such purpose after sunset shall provide artificial illumination in
such areas at a minimum intensity of 0.4 foot-candles.
6. Height of fixtures. Lighting shall be permitted at heights
reasonable to meet the minimum lumination requirements while
maintaining complete compliance with the intensity, location and
orientation standards of this Section.
7. Special events lighting. Any temporary use having exterior lighting
which is not in compliance with the requirements of this Section
shall secure a conditional use permit per Article VII of this Chapter.
8. Non-conforming lighting. All lighting fixtures legally existing prior
to June 17, 1998, shall be considered as legal non-conforming uses.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to ensure that the visual impact
of outdoor mechanical units and other appliances are visually screened
from the view of adjacent property and public rights-of-way to promote
a visually pleasing and uncluttering environment.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this Section apply to all nonresidential
development within the jurisdiction of this Section.
C. Requirements.
Section
400.277
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.278
100:660
Section 400.280. Home Occupations. [R.O. 2007 §400.280; Ord. No.
1161 §19.07, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 3041 §1, 7-21-1993; Ord. No.
5542 §1, 1-14-2010; Ord. No. 5727 §7, 8-25-2011]
1. Subject to the review and approval of the Planning Division and/or
the Planning and Zoning Commission, all outside trash, recycling
and grease containers, HVAC units, electric, telephone and gas
meters, satellite dishes and rooftop mechanical apparatus shall be
thoroughly screened with materials and/or landscaping to conceal
the visibility of such items from the views of rights-of-way and/or
adjacent properties. Rooftop mechanical apparatus and all other
objects that protrude from the rooftop of any structure shall,
subject to the review and approval of the Commission, be screened
by use of an architectural feature such as increased parapet wall
height. The Commission may require that the screening shall
extend to a height equal to or higher than the elevation of the
highest rooftop mechanical apparatus or other protruding object if
the Commission, in its discretion, determines that such height will
more adequately hide the rooftop mechanical apparatus or other
protruding object. The Commission may in its discretion require all
rooftop mechanical apparatus or other objects protruding from the
rooftop to be painted to match the color of the rooftop of the
structure upon which the objects are located if, in the opinion of the
Commission, painting would better hide the objects. Trash,
recycling and grease containers shall be screened by a six (6) foot
high solid wall with a composite or vinyl sight-proof gate consistent
with the architectural theme of the primary structure on-site. The
enclosure shall also include a man door/passageway as a
convenient way to enter the enclosure without having to open the
gate(s) and shall be free of debris and storage. This provision shall
not apply to facilities for drop-off of recyclables by members of the
public or similar public donation facilities which are otherwise
allowed or permitted by the City. [Ord. No. 6171 §2, 1-14-2016]
2. In certain instances, the Planning Division and/or the Planning and
Zoning Commission may require submittal of site line studies to
ensure that such apparatus is appropriately screened.
A. Restrictions And Limitations. Home occupations shall be permitted as
an accessory use to a residential use in any zoning district subject to the
requirements of this Section, with the exception of the following uses
which are prohibited:
1. Appliance repair.
2. Automobile, truck, trailer or motor vehicle service/repair/painting
(other than personal).
3. Eating or drinking establishments.
4. Equipment rental.
Section
400.278
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.280
100:661
5. Furniture stripping and similar activities.
6. Mortuaries and embalming.
7. Nursery schools, kindergartens or home day care services having
more than four (4) children at any one time (not including relatives
of the operator).
8. Private clubs, including fraternity and sorority houses.
9. Retail or wholesale sales with customers coming to the residence
(excluding home parties).
10. Stables or kennels.
11. Storage of construction material or contractor equipment.
12. Veterinarian services, animal hospitals, pet grooming or pet
adoption services.
13. Any use listed as a conditional use in a commercial or industrial
zoning district.
B. Home Occupation Requirements.
1. Home occupations shall be operated entirely within an enclosed
structure and shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%)
of the total floor area of the main residential building, and in no
case more than five hundred (500) square feet of floor area, with
use of the dwelling for a home occupation being clearly incidental
and subordinate to the use for residential purposes.
2. No alteration of the exterior of the principal residential building
shall be made which changes the character thereof as a residence,
and there shall be no visible evidence of conduct of the home
occupation.
3. No outdoor storage of materials or equipment used in the home
occupation shall be permitted.
4. Any premises on which a home occupation is conduct shall at all
times conform to all City ordinances and particularly with the
requirements, limitations and restrictions set forth in the following
City Code provisions:
a. Section 215.237 regarding noise levels, especially nose levels
in residentially zoned districts; and
b. Section 220.020 regarding nuisances, especially Subsections
(5), (20), (23), (24), (27), (28) and (34); and
c. Section 220.120 regarding storage units and bulk refuse
containers; and
Section
400.280
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.280
100:662
d. Section 355.110 regarding parking commercial vehicles in
residential areas; and
e. Section 365.080 regarding parking and driving semi-tractors
and trailers in residential areas; and
f. Sections 400.515 through 400.563, being Article XIII of
Chapter 400, regarding performance standards for the use of
property and structures.
5. There shall be no visible evidence of the home occupation except
that the owner may provide a home occupation sign which is in
conformance with the sign standards of the City of O'Fallon.
6. No person shall be engaged in such home occupation other than a
person(s) occupying such dwelling unit as his/her/their residence,
and no more than two (2) non-resident individuals.
7. No equipment shall be utilized that creates a nuisance due to odor,
vibration, noise, smoke, electrical, magnetic or telecommunication
interference or fluctuations in line voltage beyond the property line
of the lot upon which the home occupation is conducted.
8. No home occupation shall cause an increase in the use or
consumption of any one (1) or more utilities or public services such
as water, sewer, trash collection, electric, police, fire or ambulance
service so that the combined use for the residence and home
occupation unreasonably exceeds the average for similarly sized
residences in the neighborhood.
9. Parking generated by the conduct of a home occupation shall be
provided on the property and off-street on an approved surface.
10. No commodities shall be displayed or sold on the outside of the
main residential building.
11. No more than two (2) home occupations shall be permitted per
residence.
12. A home occupation permit shall be issued only to an individual
occupying the dwelling as his/her residence. Home occupation
permits shall not be transferable and shall terminate upon sale or
transfer of the property to a new occupant.
13. Each home occupation must have a current City business license at
all times.
14. The home occupation shall be approved by an administrative
permit application process.
15. No home occupation shall cause an increase in home deliveries
which unreasonably exceeds the average for residences in the
neighborhood.
Section
400.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.280
100:663
Section 400.285. Temporary Uses. [R.O. 2007 §400.285; Ord. No.
1161 §19.08, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 3441 §3, 11-8-1996; Ord. No.
3526 §§2—3, 5-22-1997; Ord. No. 5223 §1, 8-23-2007; Ord. No. 5883
§4, 5-24-2013]
16. Any individual requesting a home occupation permit for the retail
sale or retail storage of firearms, weapons, potentially lethal items
or hazardous materials shall indicate on their permit application
the exact nature of their business. The individual must have
complied with all Federal, State and local regulations dealing with
the handling of firearms, weapons, potentially lethal items or
hazardous materials prior to submitting the request for a home
occupation permit. The City of O'Fallon may request proof of
compliance at time of application and/or any time the permit is in
effect.
17. A home occupation permit approval may be revoked if found to be
in violation of any of the provisions of this Section or if the home
occupation is conducted in such a manner as to constitute a
nuisance or violate any City ordinance.
A. Temporary Use Permit. The Administrative Officer is authorized to issue
a permit for a temporary use within any zoning district provided it
meets the requirements of this Section. The permit shall be issued for a
specified period of time and shall contain health, safety and traffic and
the Code Enforcement Officer may require such assurances or
guarantees of compliance with conditions as is reasonable and
appropriate under the circumstances. All temporary buildings used for
commercial purposes shall require a temporary use permit.
B. Temporary Uses Permitted.
1. Christmas tree sales. Christmas tree sales in any business or
industrial district for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. Display
of Christmas trees need not comply with the applicable yard
setback requirements provided that no display will encroach within
the required yard setback for any district by more than fifty percent
(50%) and no display or equipment shall be located within the
twenty-five (25) foot sight triangle of a street intersection as
defined in this Chapter.
2. Contractor's office. Contractor's office and equipment sheds
(containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations) accessory to a
construction project and to continue only during the duration of
construction for such project. Such use need not comply with yard
and setback requirements of this Chapter.
3. Real estate offices. Real estate offices (containing no sleeping or
cooking accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit)
incidental to a new housing development may continue only until
the sale or lease of all dwelling units in the development. Such
Section
400.280
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.285
100:664
offices need not comply with the yard setback requirements of
these Regulations, provided that a plan showing the proposed sales
office location and parking layout is approved by the Planning
Department.
4. Seasonal sales. Seasonal sale of farm produce grown on the
premises, in an "AG" District. Structures incidental to such sale
need not comply with the applicable front yard requirements
provided that no such structure shall be located within the twentyfive
(25) foot sight triangle of a street intersection as defined in this
Chapter. All such structures shall be removed or moved back of the
street setback line at the end of the season during which they are
used.
5. Carnivals and circuses. A carnival or circus, but only in a "P-R",
"AG", "U-T", "C-2", "C-3", "I-1", or "I-2" District, and then only for a
period that does not exceed three (3) weeks. Such use need not
comply with the applicable yard setback requirements, provided
that no structures or equipment shall encroach within the required
yard setback for the district in which it is located by more than fifty
percent (50%) and no structure or equipment shall be located
within the twenty-five (25) foot sight triangle of a street
intersection as defined in Section 400.260(F) of this Chapter.
6. Disasters. A mobile home may be permitted as a temporary use for
the purpose of providing a residential or non-residential structure
following a disaster, such as a fire, windstorm or flood as
determined by the Mayor of the City of O'Fallon, provided that the
mobile home is located on a three (3) acre site and is located to
minimize its impact on adjacent residential areas. Such mobile
home shall be removed from its location within six (6) months after
its original placement. However, the Mayor may extend the period
six (6) additional months upon showing of good cause by the
Owner.
7. Residential garage sales. Residential garage sales are permitted six
(6) days per calendar year, per residential lot. The nature of goods
to be sold shall be personal property, as defined in Section 400.035.
8. Temporary buildings for commercial purposes. The use of
temporary buildings for commercial purposes shall be allowed
subject to the following requirements:
a. The commercial establishment proposing a temporary building
must have an approved site plan for the permanent facility by
the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to installation of
the temporary building.
b. The site plan must reflect the location of the temporary
building and associated improvements.
Section
400.285
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.285
100:665
c. The standards for site plan review of the permanent building
apply to the review of the temporary building.
d. The temporary structure and area must comply with all Zoning,
Fire, Building Code regulations, and State of Missouri Public
Service Commission regulations.
e. The temporary facility must have sanitary sewer connections
for restrooms.
f. The location of the temporary building must be reviewed and
approved by the Planning, Development and Building
Departments once Planning and Zoning Commission has
approved the temporary building.
g. The temporary building and associated parking, vehicular
movement and area must be completely separated from the
construction area of the permanent facility. This may be
achieved through fencing or other means to block public
access to the construction site.
h. A construction site plan permit and building permit must be
issued for the permanent structure prior to installation.
i. The temporary building will be allowed for a maximum of
twelve (12) months from the date of installation on the site,
unless additional time is approved in writing by the City
Planner and City Administrator or designee.
j. The temporary structure must have a finished appearance. If a
modular unit is used, it must have skirting around all sides.
k. The temporary building must be located on the same site as the
permanent facility or on the property directly abutting the site
of the permanent facility.
l. A monetary guarantee, not less than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), must be escrowed to insure removal of the
temporary building and associated improvements within the
twelve (12) months. Said escrow funds shall be returned within
thirty (30) days of its removal, less any expense incurred by the
City of the removal of the temporary building.
C. Temporary Dwelling Structures. No cabin, garage, cellar, basement, or
other temporary structure whether of a fixed or moveable nature may
be erected, altered, or moved upon and used in whole or in part for any
dwelling purposes whatsoever for any length of time whatsoever.
D. Temporary Storage Units And Bulk Refuse Containers. For short
periods of time, commercial and/or industrial lots within the City may
install portable, weather-resistant receptacles designed for the storage
of surplus household goods, wares and merchandise; building
materials, supplies and equipment; or excess waste material and
Section
400.285
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.285
100:666
debris. The use of these units will only be allowed if the applicant is
granted approval for a temporary use permit and adheres to all of the
following requirements:
1. Structures. Acceptable structures will include, but not be limited
to, roll-off dumpsters (bulk containers transported to and from the
site by trucks or trailers); commercial or industrial shipping
containers; or other ground-mounted units designed for long-term
storage. Also, semi- trailers; carriers; or other items designed for
transport as well as storage (items with affixed wheels).
2. Location. A copy of the approved site plan showing the proposed
location of the units shall be submitted with the temporary use
permit application. The placement of the units shall be restricted to
the locations called out on the site plan attached to the application.
Units may not be placed in any required bufferyard or building
setback.
a. Storage units and bulk containers shall be placed as close to
the building as possible; all units shall be located in the rear of
the building (unless the applicant can prove that the units will
not fit in the rear of the lot) and in a manner that minimizes
their visibility from the public right-of-way.
b. Storage units and bulk containers shall not encroach on drive
aisles or required parking spaces; if a unit must take up
parking spaces, the applicant must verify that there are
enough spaces remaining to meet the minimum parking
requirements.
c. Storage units and bulk containers shall not block access to
utilities or public services (i.e., manholes, meters, fire
hydrants, etc.).
d. Storage units and bulk containers must be located on a hard
(concrete, asphalt) surface. Except in active construction areas
where a hard surface is unavailable or has not been installed.
e. Storage units and bulk containers must be maintained on the
ground; stacking of storage units will not be permitted.
3. Maintenance. All units shall be maintained in such a manner as to
not be a hazard to the general health and safety of persons on site
or to detract from the physical appearance of the other facilities on
site.
a. Storage units and bulk container exteriors shall be kept clean
and shall be painted.
b. Storage units and bulk container exteriors shall be free of rust
and corrosion.
Section
400.285
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.285
100:667
c. Storage units and bulk container exhibiting more than normal
wear and tear shall be removed and repaired.
4. Supplemental regulations. The placement and/or use of any and all
storage units and bulk containers on the subject property shall
comply with all building safety and fire protection district
regulations in addition to the following:
a. All units on site shall be prohibited from hooking up to utilities
or from tapping into the services of the primary facility (i.e.,
using extension cords to provide electricity; garden hoses to
provide water; etc.).
b. All units must be stand alone structures; connection to
peripheral devices will not be permitted (i.e., air compressors,
refrigeration/heating units; generators; etc.).
c. All units will be limited to dry goods and merchandise; storage
of perishable goods or items will not be permitted.
d. Storage of hazardous or dangerous materials (chemicals,
solvents, propane, explosives, etc.) shall only be allowed if the
applicant provides documentation from the appropriate
governing authority (Building Safety, Fire, Police, EPA, COE,
DNR, etc.) that all of the required safety and security
requirements have been met.
e. While on site, all storage containers must be locked and
secured at all times.
5. Signage. Displaying additional signage on the unit, temporary or
permanent, will not be permitted.
6. Number. Units will be allowed on site as follows:
a. On a single tenant lot, no more than two (2) units of any type
(storage; dumpster; etc.) will be allowed on site at one time.
b. On a multi-tenant lot, no more than two (2) units per tenant will
be allowed on site at one time.
c. On a lot where the primary building is under construction, no
limit will be imposed.
7. Duration. All storage units and bulk containers are for temporary
use only and shall only be allowed on site for a specified period of
time:
a. Commercial/industrial. One (1) time per calendar year
(maximum of forty-five (45) days).
b. Developmental. During construction (until an occupancy
permit is issued for the structure).
Section
400.285
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.285
100:668
Section 400.290. Number of Buildings Permitted Per Lot. [R.O.
2007 §400.290; Ord. No. 1161 §19.09, 10-16-1984]
Not more than one (1) principal detached single-family dwelling unit shall
be located on a lot, nor shall a principal detached single-family dwelling unit
be located on the same lot with any other principal building or structure,
except as permitted under Article V (Planned Unit Development) of this
Chapter.
Section 400.295. Condominiums. [R.O. 2007 §400.295; Ord. No.
1161 §19.10, 10-16-1984]
The declaration and all details of covenants, by-laws, and administrative
provisions pertinent to the maintenance of buildings, structures, land, and
other physical facilities for condominiums shall be reviewed and approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to issuance of a Building
Permit.
Section 400.296. Regulations For Group Home Providers. [Ord. No.
5831 §4, 12-13-2012]
8. Removal. Any and all storage units on site shall be removed within
twenty-four (24) hours of the permit expiration date.
a. Failure to remove the unit(s) within the allowed timeframe will
result in a citation from Code Enforcement. A new citation may
be issued for each day the container is left in place without
further warnings or notices being issued.
A. Purpose. It is necessary and desirable to provide suitable sites for
group homes in residential areas provided that, in furtherance of the
goals of deinstitutionalization and dispersal, group homes are not
unduly concentrated in neighborhoods so as to ensure that mentally or
physically disabled persons are afforded the opportunity to be
integrated in the community.
1. In order to promote deinstitutionalization and dispersal of group
homes, no group home may be located within five hundred (500)
feet of another group home, measured by the straight line distance
between the nearest points of the exterior walls (exclusive of
overhangs) of the buildings within which the relevant facilities or
uses are located; or
a. Adjoin any lot upon which another group home already exists;
or
b. Be separated from any lot upon which an existing group home
already exists only by a street or roadway.
2. The exterior appearance of the home and property, occupancy
limitation, signage and other standards applicable to single-family
residences shall apply equally to group homes.
Section
400.285
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.296
100:669
Section 400.298. Requirements For Developers, Owners and
Operators of Multi-Family Housing. [R.O. 2007 §400.298; Ord. No.
3093 §§5—12, 12-22-1993; Ord. No. 3634 §2, 12-29-1997; Ord. No.
5444 §1, 3-31-2009]
3. In order to achieve the deinstitutionalization and dispersal goals
referenced herein, owners and operators of group homes must
register the facility with the Planning and Development
Department on forms provided for that purpose and certify
compliance with all applicable ordinances of the City. Owners and
operators of group homes must also notify the department of any
change of use, transfer or termination of a group home use and
revise the facility registration as appropriate.
A. The developers, owners and operators of multi-family housing within
the City limits of O'Fallon, Missouri, shall henceforth be required to
develop, implement and enforce tenant admission procedures no less
stringent than those Federal Regulations which prescribe the grounds
upon which a public housing authority may deny assistance to an
applicant for rent assistance housing subsidies, including, without
limitation, the following criteria:
1. If the applicant owes rent or other amounts to any public housing
authority in connection with Section 8 or public housing assistance;
2. If the applicant, as a previous participant in a Section 8 or other
public housing assistance program, has not reimburse any public
housing authority for any amounts paid to an owner under a
housing assistance contract for rent or any other amount owed
under their lease;
3. If the applicant has violated any "family obligation", as that phrase
is defined in the Federal Regulations for Section 8 housing;
4. If the applicant has engaged in drug-related criminal activity or
violent criminal activity, as defined in the Federal Regulations for
Section 8 housing; and
5. If the applicant has committed any fraud in connection with any
federal housing program.
6. Promptly evict tenants who openly and covertly use and sell drugs,
assault other tenants, discharge guns within the subdivision and
into neighboring properties, and engage in other dangerous,
threatening, illegal and disruptive conduct; or who have permitted
or encouraged non-residents to enter and/or reside in the
subdivision whereupon such non-residents have then engaged in
the above-mentioned dangerous, threatening, illegal and disruptive
conduct.
B. The City of O'Fallon hereby requires that developers, owners and
operators of multi-family developments henceforth:
Section
400.296
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.298
100:670
1. Shall provide adequate lighting throughout the development to
promote the security and safety of residents of and visitors to the
development.
2. Shall provide a full-time responsible representative with the
appropriate skills, training and experience to operate and/or
maintain a multi-family development.
3. Shall provide recreation facilities, playground(s), community
center(s), landscaping or green spaces and other amenities to help
develop and sustain a sense of community among the tenants of a
multi-family development.
4. The construction of covered parking shall be optional. The roof
shape and materials of the covered parking structure(s) shall
match the roof shape and materials of the multi-family residential
structure(s). [Ord. No. 6350 § 3, 5-25-2017]
5. Gates and controlled access.
a. Developments constructed prior to March 24, 2009, which
were required to install electronic gates or other forms of
controlled access to the property shall be required to maintain
such features in good working order at all times; provided
however, that such gates or similar access controls may be left
open to allow unrestricted access between the hours of 7:00
A.M. and 7:00 P.M.
b. Developments constructed prior to March 24, 2009, which
were required to install electronic gates or other forms of
controlled access to the property may remove or modify those
control features soon as to allow unrestricted access to the
property by petitioning the Planning and Zoning Commission
for such relief. It shall be the obligation of the petitioner to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the best
interests and desires of the occupants of the development
would be served by granting such relief. A petitioner or
occupant of the development aggrieved by the decision of the
Planning and Zoning Commission may, within fifteen (15) days
of the decision for which redress is sought, file with the City
Council a written request for reconsideration and review of any
decision of the Commission under this Subsection. The written
request must set forth in a concise manner the decision being
appealed and all grounds known to the appellant as to wherein
and why the decision is allegedly in error. The request for
reconsideration and appeal must be filed with the City Clerk
within the time specified above. A copy of the request and any
supporting documents or materials filed by the aggrieved party
must be served by the aggrieved party on the applicant (if
different than the aggrieved party) by certified U.S. mail,
return receipt requested, within three (3) days of filing with
Section
400.298
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.298
100:671
Section 400.299. Regulations For Developers, Owners and
Operators of Commercial or Industrial Business Establishments.
[Ord. No. 5726 §3, 8-25-2011]
the City Clerk. Proof of service on the applicant must be filed
with the City Clerk within six (6) days of filing of the request.
The City Council may consider the appeal on the record of the
prior decision by the Commission or may, at its sole discretion,
receive additional evidence in such manner as it deems
appropriate in light of the circumstances.
c. For any development constructed after March 24, 2009,
electronic gates or other form of access control may be
installed and, if installed, must be maintained in good working
order at all times.
C. Any person, firm, corporation or agency found to be violation of the
provisions of this Section shall be subject to a fine of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or to up to ninety (90) days in the St. Charles County
Jail, or to both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of such violation
shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Automobile And Other Motor Vehicles—Repair Services (With Or
Without Fuel Sales, Excluding Drive-Thru Oil Change Facilities). In
addition to and as an integral part of development, the following
provisions shall apply:
1. No vehicles or vehicle parts may be worked on outside of the
building.
2. The impounding or storage of derelict vehicles is prohibited.
3. The sale of automobiles or other motor vehicles shall be prohibited.
4. Outdoor storage of vehicle parts or products is permitted in the
side and rear yards in industrial districts when screened by berms,
dense vegetative plantings, sight-proof fences, or brick walls, or
combinations of these materials at least eight (8) feet in height so
that the parts and products is are not visible to the public from one
thousand (1,000) feet.
Section
400.298
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.299
100:672
ARTICLE VII
Conditional Uses
Section 400.300. Purpose. [R.O. 2007 §400.300; Ord. No. 1161
§20.01, 10-16-1984]
Section 400.305. Authority To Grant Conditional Use Permits. [R.O.
2007 §400.305; Ord. No. 1161 §20.02, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 1336 §1,
6-5-1986; Ord. No. 5067 §1, 9-14-2006; Ord. No. 5443 §2,
3-31-2009]
A. Conditional uses are those types of uses which are considered by the
City to be essentially desirable, necessary, or convenient to the
community, but which by their nature or in their operation have:
1. A tendency to generate excessive traffic;
2. A potential for attracting a large number of persons to the area of
the use, thus creating noise or other pollutants;
3. A detrimental effect upon the value or potential development of
other properties in the neighborhood; or
4. An extraordinary potential for accidents or danger to public health
or safety.
B. Such conditional uses cannot be allowed to locate as a "right" on any
parcel of land within certain districts without consideration of existing
conditions at the proposed location and of properties neighboring upon
the specific site considered, nor without adequate and sufficient
safeguards, when necessary, to lessen the impact of adverse factors.
A. There shall be two (2) types of conditional use permits:
1. Those that can only be authorized by the City Council, and
2. Those that can be approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
B. Subject to the right of appeal to the City Council or request for review
by the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review
applications and act upon requests for conditional use permits with
regard to those land uses listed on Appendix A as "C-A".
Any conditional use permit under consideration by the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be in the form of a resolution. Said resolution
shall include all conditions, safeguards and restrictions upon the
conditional use deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
C. For all other land uses on Appendix A designated by the letter "C", upon
receipt of a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the City Council shall have the authority to grant a
Section
400.300
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.305
100:673
Section 400.307. Amendment To A Conditional Use Permit. [Ord.
No. 5443 §2, 3-31-2009; Ord. No. 5864 §1, 3-28-2013]
conditional use permit. The conditional use permit under consideration
by the City Council shall be in the form of an ordinance. Said ordinance
shall include all conditions, safeguards and restrictions upon the
conditional use deemed necessary by the City Council.
A. Any change in the scope, use or aspect of an operation approved for a
conditional use permit which results in a condition that differs from the
provisions contained in the approved conditional use permit requires
the approval of an amendment. All requests for amendments shall be
made in the same manner as an original application for a conditional
use permit.
B. Requests for amendments which, in the professional judgment and sole
administrative discretion of the Director of the Planning and
Development Department or his/her designee, are insubstantial
change(s) to the approved conditional use may be reviewed by staff for
completeness and approved by the Director. In exercising his or her
professional judgment and administrative discretion the Director shall
consider whether the proposed change is consistent with the goals of
the conditional use permit process in Section 400.300(A), above, and
the permit approval criteria in Section 400.325, below, and take into
account:
1. The nature, intensity, location and orientation of the conditionally
permitted use, as existing and proposed, and the property on which
it is located;
2. Compatibility with the use and zoning of adjacent and nearby
properties and reasonably likely future use of such properties;
3. The impact of the conditionally permitted use and the proposed
change on on-site and off-site traffic, roadways, public safety and
public services;
4. Existing and foreseeable environmental impacts of the
conditionally permitted use and proposed change due to noise,
light and odor, runoff, etc.; and
5. Whether the existing conditionally permitted use has been
operated in conformity with current permit and all other applicable
regulations and ordinances. The following amendments may, at the
discretion of the Director, represent insubstantial changes from the
provisions of the originally approved conditional use permit:
a. Change in hours or days of operation (other than the days or
hours when live entertainment is provided);
b. Renovation, remodeling, reconfiguration or expansion of
structures or parking associated with the conditionally
Section
400.305
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.307
100:674
Section 400.308. Transfer of A Conditional Use Permit. [Ord. No.
5443 §2, 3-31-2009; Ord. No. 5726 §2, 8-25-2011]
permitted use provided that the scale, intensity and orientation
of the conditionally permitted use are unchanged and subject
to any applicable site plan approval;
c. Expansion of an existing drive-through facility (e.g., adding an
ATM machine or additional drive-through service lane);
d. Other similar changes deemed to be insubstantial by the
Director of Planning and Development or his/her designee.
If processing or approval as an insubstantial change
is denied, the applicant may submit the proposed
amendment for consideration as an amendment that
represents a substantial change in accord with
Subsection (C), below.
C. All other amendments shall be processed in the same manner as an
original application for a conditional use permit. The following is a list
of amendments that represent a substantial change from the provisions
of the originally approved conditional use permit:
1. Expansion of the boundary or leasable limits of area to which a
conditional use permit applies;
2. Addition of live entertainment;
3. Other changes deemed to be substantial by the Director of
Planning and Development or his/her designee.
A. Any change in the ownership or operating entity named as the
permittee of the approved conditional use permit will require a transfer
of the conditional use permit in accord with Subsections (C) or (D)
below.
B. All requests for transfers, together with the specified fee, must be filed
on an application available through the Department of Planning and
Development. Additional documentation regarding ownership of the
operation, sale/lease arrangements, and any intended changes of the
permitted use may also be required as part of the application process.
C. Taking into consideration (a) the nature, size, intensity and scale of the
permitted activities; (b) location of the subject property; (c) the
character and proximity of other nearby land uses; and (d) any other
relevant circumstances, if the Director of Planning and Development, in
the exercise of his or her sole and sound administrative discretion,
determines that the proposed transfer represents only a transfer of
ownership without any modification of the intensity or character of the
permitted use and that there is reason to believe the proposed
transferee will adhere to the conditions applicable to the use in
Section
400.307
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.308
100:675
Section 400.310. Application Fees, Sign Posting and Notification
Requirements. [R.O. 2007 §400.310; Ord. No. 1161 §20.03,
10-16-1984; Ord. No. 1336 §2, 6-5-1986; Ord. No. 4932 §3,
12-14-2005; Ord. No. 5067 §§3—4, 9-14-2006; Ord. No. 5443 §2,
3-31-2009]
Section 400.315. Information Required in Application. [R.O. 2007
§400.315; Ord. No. 1161 §20.04, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 1336 §3,
6-5-1986; Ord. No. 5883 §5, 5-24-2013]
An application for a conditional use permit shall contain the applicant's full
name and address, a statement that the applicant is the owner involved or
is acting on the owner's behalf, the address of the property involved, an
accurate survey drawing and site plan of said property showing the existing
question, the Director may authorize transfer of the conditional use
permit.
D. If the proposed transfer involves (a) any use referenced in or regulated
by Section 400.330; (b) changes to intensity, scale, or character of the
permitted use; (c) additional activities or uses not previously conducted
on the subject property; or (d) combination with adjoining uses or
property, or if the Director in his or her sole and sound administrative
discretion determines that the interests of the public warrant greater
scrutiny and consideration of the proposed transfer, the application for
transfer shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
review and consideration in the same manner as an original application
for a conditional use permit.
A. Applications for any conditional use permit permissible under the
provisions of this Chapter shall be submitted to the Planning and
Development Department in accordance with Section 400.315 of this
Article.
B. The conditional use permit application shall be subject to the sign
posting requirement established in Section 400.685(C) of this Zoning
Code and the requirement for notification of adjacent property owners
in Section 400.685(B) of this Zoning Code. In addition, persons entitled
to prior notice under Section 400.685(B) should also be given notice of
the final action of the Commission, which the City staff will endeavor to
send within five (5) days of the Commission's final action. Staff should
also endeavor to send such pre- and post-decision notices to trustees of
any residential subdivision lying within the notification area established
by Section 400.685(B). The cost of such postings and notices shall be
borne by the applicant and be subject to the collection procedures of
Section 400.650 of this Zoning Code.
C. The fees and costs for the conditional use permit application are
identified in the Schedule of Fees, Costs and Expenses within Appendix
B of Title IV, Land Use. The initial application fee shall be paid when the
application is submitted to the Planning and Development Department.
Section
400.308
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.315
100:676
and proposed location of all buildings and structures thereon, the type
thereof, and their uses together with supporting data and exhibits regarding
the required findings set forth in this Chapter.
Section 400.320. Processing Procedures For Conditional Use
Permits. [R.O. 2007 §400.320; Ord. No. 1161 §20.04, 10-16-1984;
Ord. No. 5067 §2, 9-14-2006; Ord. No. 5443 §2, 3-31-2009]
Section 400.325. Action By The Planning and Zoning Commission/
City Council. [R.O. 2007 §400.325; Ord. No. 1161 §20.05,
10-16-1984; Ord. No. 1336 §4, 6-5-1986; Ord. No. 4055 §2,
5-17-2000; Ord. No. 4932 §4, 12-14-2005; Ord. No. 5067 §3,
9-14-2006; Ord. No. 5443 §2, 3-31-2009]
A. The review and determination procedures for an application for a
conditional use permit are as follows:
1. Application submitted to the City's Planning and Development
Department of the City. Report prepared by the Planning and
Development Department.
2. Meeting #1: Consideration by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. For those land uses set forth in Section 400.305(B),
the Planning and Zoning Commission shall act upon the application
for conditional use permit. For all other land uses, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City
Council.
3. Meeting #2: First (1st) reading of the ordinance by the City
Council.
4. Meeting #3: Second (2nd) reading of the ordinance and vote by the
City Council.
This procedure shall be subject to decisions of the Commission or
the Council to table or otherwise delay a particular application.
A. There shall be an opportunity for citizen comments on each application
for conditional use permit before both the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council. Such opportunity for citizen
comments shall be granted in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Commission and the Council. The decision to
recommend approval or denial of the proposed conditional use permit
shall be based on the following criteria:
1. The proposed conditional use complies with all applicable
provisions of these Regulations, including intensity of use
regulations, yard regulations and use limitations.
2. The proposed conditional use at the specified location will
contribute to and promote the welfare or convenience of the public.
Section
400.315
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.325
100:677
3. The proposed conditional use will not cause substantial injury to
the value of other property in the neighborhood in which it is to be
located.
4. The location and size of the conditional use, the nature and
intensity of the operation involved in or conducted in connection
with it, and the location of the site with respect to streets giving
access to it are such that the conditional use will not dominate the
immediate neighborhood so as to prevent development and use of
neighboring property in accordance with the applicable Zoning
District regulations. In determining whether the conditional use
will dominate the immediate neighborhood, consideration shall be
given to:
a. The location, nature and height of buildings, structures, walls,
and fences on the site and
b. The nature and extent of proposed landscaping and screening
on the site.
5. Off-street parking and loading areas will be provided in accordance
with the standards set forth in these Regulations.
6. Adequate utility, drainage, and other such necessary facilities have
been or will be provided.
7. Adequate access roads or entrance and exit drives will be provided
and shall be so designed to prevent traffic hazards and to minimize
traffic congestion in public streets and alleys.
8. In consideration of requests for any Conditional Use Permits the
Planning and Zoning Commission/City Council shall require such
conditions of use as it deems necessary to protect the best interests
of the City and the surrounding property and to achieve the
objectives of this Chapter. These additional requirements shall
include, but not be limited to, those special provisions applying to
Miscellaneous Conditional Uses, specified in Section 400.330.
A violation of a requirement, condition, or safeguard shall be
considered a violation of this Chapter, and grounds for an
Administrative Official of the City to terminate and cancel such
Conditional Use Permit.
9. A time limitation may be required on the conditional use specified
in Appendix "A" of this Chapter. Said Conditional Use Permit shall
be renewable at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning
Commission/City Council.
10. No application which has been denied (either wholly or in part)
shall be resubmitted for a period of twelve (12) months from the
date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or
Section
400.325
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.325
100:678
Section 400.327. Acceptance of Conditions of Approval. [Ord. No.
5443 §2, 3-31-2009]
Once a conditional use permit, amendment to a conditional use permit or
transfer of a conditional use permit has been approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission or City Council, the permittee must submit a letter
accepting all conditions, safeguards and restrictions upon the conditional
use. The permittee shall within thirty (30) days of the adoption of the
resolution or ordinance granting the conditional use permit, amendment
to a conditional use permit or transfer of conditional use permit notify the
Planning and Development Department in writing that the conditional use
permit is accepted and that the conditions, safeguard and restrictions set
forth therein are understood and will be complied with. Failure to submit
the required written acceptance will result in the rescinding of the approval.
Section 400.329. Appeal. [Ord. No. 5443 §2, 3-31-2009]
An aggrieved party may within fifteen (15) days of the decision for which
redress is sought file with the City Council a written request for
reconsideration and appeal of any decision of the Planning and Zoning
Commission or the City under this Article. The written request must set
forth in a concise manner the decision being appealed and all grounds
known to the appellant as to wherein and why the decision is allegedly
in error. The request for reconsideration and appeal must be filed with
the City Clerk within the time specified above. A copy of the request
and all supporting documents or materials filed by the aggrieved party
must served by the aggrieved party on the applicant (if different than the
aggrieved party) by personal service or by certified U.S. mail, return receipt
requested, within three (3) days of filing with the City Clerk. Proof of service
on the applicant must be filed with the City Clerk within six (6) days of
filing of the request. The City Council may consider the appeal on the record
of the prior decision and the City's records or may, at its sole discretion,
receive additional evidence in such manner as it deems appropriate in light
of the circumstances.
Section 400.330. Additional Development Requirements of Certain
Uses. [R.O. 2007 §400.330; Ord. No. 1161 §20.07, 10-16-1984; Ord.
No. 1336 §6, 6-5-1986; Ord. No. 3424 §3, 9-6-1996; Ord. No. 3440-A
§3, 11-8-1996; Ord. No. 3604 §3, 11-17-1997; Ord. No. 3790 §3,
11-18-1998; Ord. No. 4992 §7, 4-14-2006; Ord. No. 5067 §3,
9-14-2006; Ord. No. 5161 §4, 4-12-2007; Ord. No. 5401 §4,
12-26-2008; Ord. No. 5608 §§3—4, 7-22-2010; Ord. No. 5727 §8,
8-25-2011; Ord. No. 5831 §5, 12-13-2012]
proof of change of factors found valid by the Director of Community
Development.
If the facts in the case do not establish that the findings and
standards set forth in this Chapter will apply to the proposed use,
the conditional use shall be denied.
Section
400.325
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.330
100:679
A. A Conditional Use Permit shall not be issued to certain uses in this
Section due to their deleterious effects on public safety, health, welfare,
and the City's property values unless they comply with the following
site development requirements.
1. Mining and quarrying. The removal of soil, including top soil, sand,
gravel, stone and other earth materials shall be subject to the
following conditions:
a. There shall be not more than one (1) entrance way from a
public road to said lot for each six hundred sixty (660) feet of
front lot line. Those City streets proposed as haul routes from
the pit to a State or Federal highway shall be approved by the
Mayor and City Council. A maintenance bond shall be posted
by the party mining such minerals to guarantee maintenance of
the haul route, with the amount to be approved by the Mayor
and City Council and subject to review on a two (2) year
continuing basis if the mining operation is to continue beyond a
two (2) year period.
b. Such removal shall not take place before sunrise or after
sunset.
c. On said lot no digging or excavating shall take place closer
than one hundred (100) feet to any lot line.
d. On said lot all road, driveways, parking lots and loading and
unloading areas within one hundred (100) feet of any lot line
shall be paved, oiled, watered or chemically treated so as to
limit on adjoining lots and public roads the nuisance caused by
windborne dust.
e. Any odors, smoke, fumes, or dust generated on said lot by
digging, excavating or processing operation and borne or able
to be borne by the wind shall be confined within the lines of
said lot as much as is possible so as not to cause a nuisance or
hazard on any adjoining lot or public road.
f. Such removal shall not be conducted as to cause the pollution
by any material of any surface or subsurface water course or
body outside of the lines of the lot on which such use shall be
located.
g. Such removal shall not be conducted as to cause or threaten to
cause the erosion by water of any land outside of said lot or of
any land on said lot so that earth materials are carried outside
of the lines of said lot, and that such removal shall not be
conducted as to alter the drainage pattern of surface or subsurface
waters on adjacent property, and that in the event that
such removal shall cease to be conducted it shall be the
continuing responsibility of the owner or operator thereof to
assure that no erosion or alteration of drainage patterns, as
Section
400.330
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.330
100:680
specified in this paragraph, shall take place after the date of
the cessation of operation.
h. All fixed equipment and machinery shall be located at least one
hundred (100) feet from any lot line and five hundred (500) feet
from any residential Zoning District, but that in the event the
zoning classification of any land within five hundred (500) feet
of such equipment or machinery shall be changed to
residential subsequent to the operation of such equipment or
machinery, the operation of such equipment or machinery may
continue henceforth but in no case less than one hundred (100)
feet from any lot line.
i. There shall be erected a fence of not less than six (6) feet in
height around the periphery of the area being excavated.
Fences shall be adequate to prevent trespass, and shall be
placed on level terrain no closer than fifty (50) feet to the top
edge of any slope.
j. All areas within any single development shall be rehabilitated
progressively as they are worked out or abandoned to a
condition of being entirely lacking in hazards, inconspicuous,
and blended with the general surrounding ground form so as to
appear reasonably natural.
k. Restoration of development area.
(1) The operator or operators shall file with the City a detailed
plan for the restoration of the development area which
shall include the anticipated future use of the restored
land, proposed final topography indicated by the contour
lines of not greater interval than five (5) feet, steps which
shall be taken to conserve topsoil; the type and number
per acre of trees or shrubs to be planted; and the location
of future roads, drives, drainage courses, and/or other
improvements to be made by a definite date.
(2) The restoration plans shall be filed with and approved by
the City before quarrying or removal operations begin. The
plans shall be certified by a soil or geology engineer. In
restoration, no filling operations shall be permitted which
will likely result in contamination of ground or surface
water, or soils, through seepage of gases into surface or
sub-surface water or into the atmosphere. The proposed
plan shall be submitted to and approved by the
Department of Natural Resources.
(3) The operator or operators shall file with the City Council a
bond or other surety payable to the City and conditioned
on the faithful performance of all requirements contained
in the approved restoration plan. The rate per acre of
property to be used of the required bond shall be fixed by
Section
400.330
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.330
100:681
the City Engineer. The bond shall be released upon written
certification of the City Engineer that the restoration is
complete and in compliance with the restoration plan.
2. Theaters, motion pictures (outdoors). In addition to and as an
integral part of development, the following provisions shall apply:
a. Drive-in theaters shall be enclosed for their full periphery with
a solid screen fence at least seven (7) feet in height. Fences
shall be of sound construction, painted or otherwise finished
neatly and inconspicuously.
b. All fenced-in areas shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from
any front street right-of-way with the area between the fence
and the street or property line to be landscaped with trees and
shrubs.
c. All traffic ingress and egress shall be on major streets and all
local traffic movement shall be accommodated within the site
so that entering and exiting vehicles will make normal and
uncomplicated movements into or out of the public
thoroughfares. All points of entrance or exit for motor vehicles
shall be located no closer than two hundred (200) feet from the
intersection of any two (2) streets or highways.
d. The movie screen shall not be visible from the front street or
any major thoroughfare.
3. (Reserved)
4. Wireless telecommunications facilities. See Article
XVIII—Regulations for Wireless Telecommunication Facilities.
5. "Tattoo and/or body piercing establishments" defined as a retail
business providing the service of placing tattoos on a person's skin
known as indelible marking of the skin produced by introducing
minute amounts of pigments into the skin and/or providing the
service of providing any perforation, penetration or puncturing of
human tissue, other than the ear, for a non-medical purpose, by the
use of needles, studs, posts, or any other instruments, thereby
creating an opening into or through the tissue in which either
studs, post, ornaments, jewelry or similar items are or can be
inserted, or on which markings are left. In addition to and as an
integral part of the development, the following provisions shall
apply:
a. No other tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall be
established within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of
any other such facility as measured from property line to
property line.
Section
400.330
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.330
100:682
b. No tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall be located a
minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from any residentially
zoned properties and shall be located a minimum of one
thousand (1,000) feet from as measured from property line to
property line any State licensed day care facility, school,
church, or outdoor recreational facility.
c. Exterior building appearance and signage shall be designed to
ensure that the use does not detract from the ability of
business in the vicinity to attract customers, nor affect the
marketability of properties in the vicinity for sale at their
assessed values.
d. The owner/operator must submit to a Police background check
prior to the issuance of a business license.
e. Shall meet the health license standards, and other applicable
regulations, as set from time to time by the City, County, and
State.
f. These provisions shall not apply to veterinarians and other
persons or businesses placing tattoos on animals. Further,
these provisions shall also not apply to State licensed
physicians and registered professional nurses performing
cosmetic and reconstructive surgery.
6. Sexually-oriented business. In addition to and as an integral part of
development, the following provisions shall apply:
a. Sexually-oriented businesses shall be limited in number to one
(1) such business per one thousand (1,000) feet radius within
the City.
b. A sexually-oriented business shall not be located closer than
one thousand (1,000) feet radius from any educational or
religious institution.
c. A sexually-oriented business shall not be located closer than
one thousand (1,000) feet radius from any residential use.
d. A sexually-oriented business shall not be located closer than
one thousand (1,000) feet radius from any business selling
liquor.
e. The owner/operator of a sexually-oriented business must
submit to a police background check.
f. The Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the City Council
may place reasonable restrictions on hours of operation.
g. Any employee must be age twenty-one (21) years or older. The
owner/operator shall demonstrate to the City all employees are
age twenty-one (21) years or older.
Section
400.330
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.330
100:683
h. Compliance with all State Statutes and City ordinances
governing pornography, obscenity, and matters of that nature.
7. Extended stay facilities. In addition to and as an integral part of
development, the following provisions shall apply:
a. Any extended stay facility may not be developed within seven
hundred fifty (750) feet of any lot upon which another extended
stay facility is located and may not be developed within one
thousand (1,000) feet of any property which is zoned as
residential property.
b. Extended stay facilities shall be developed, constructed and
maintained in accordance with the fire, building, electric,
plumbing and other technical codes which are applicable to
apartment complexes and other types of multiple-family
housing.
c. Extended stay facilities shall be designed with a common
entrance and lobby with a front desk which is operated on a
twenty-four (24) hour basis.
d. Each room shall be a minimum of three hundred twenty-five
(325) square feet and shall have a bedroom that is separated
by a wall and door from the kitchen or cooking facilities and
other facilities within the unit.
e. There shall be no more than two (2) beds (any size) located
within a bedroom. There shall be no other sleeping facilities
(such as convertible sofas or temporary cots) other than the
beds which are located in the bedroom(s).
f. Extended stay facilities shall comply with the following parking
requirements:
(1) One and one-half (1½) parking spaces for one (1) bed
within a particular room or unit and one (1) additional
parking space for each additional bed within a particular
room or unit.
g. Each extended stay facility shall provide an on-duty manager
twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week who
shall be available on site.
h. In order to promote security and safety of the residents, each
extended stay facility shall either provide gated entrances to
be wholly operated by electronic means or an on-duty licensed
security guard on site twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7)
days per week.
i. There shall be no areas for parking or storage of large tractor
trailer vehicles or other large commercial vehicles. There shall
Section
400.330
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.330
100:684
be no outside parking or storage of large commercial vehicles
or equipment.
j. Each extended stay facility shall keep a registration list which
notes the date of arrival of and proper identification of each
occupant of each room or unit within the development. "Proper
identification" shall include the full name, permanent address
and date of birth or Social Security number of each person.
Such list shall be provided to the City's Police Department
upon request.
k. The maximum occupancy limit for any room or unit shall be
based on the following standard: One (1) person per twin or
single bed and two (2) persons per full, queen or king size bed.
No room or unit may be occupied so as to exceed the maximum
occupancy limit.
l. Extended stay facilities shall provide housekeeping services to
every room or unit a minimum of three (3) times per seven (7)
day period.
8. Check cashing and small loan establishments. In addition to and as
an integral part of development, the following provisions shall
apply:
a. Check cashing or small loan establishments shall not be
allowed within a one thousand (1,000) foot radius of another
check cashing or small loan establishment or pawnbroker.
b. A check cashing or small loan establishment shall not be
located closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from any
residential use.
c. The Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the City Council
may place reasonable restriction on hours of operation, but in
no instance shall a check cashing or small loan establishment
be open between the hours of 7:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
d. The Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the City Council
shall place appropriate conditions on any conditional use
permit for a check cashing or small loan establishment which
shall, at a minimum:
(1) Require the holder of the conditional use permit to be and
remain fully licensed, in good standing, with the State of
Missouri for the purpose of providing loans;
(2) Prohibit painting and printing on windows and doors and
in all other respects, require that all signage comply with
City ordinances and be approved by the City;
(3) Prohibit the transfer or assignment of the conditional use
permit; and
Section
400.330
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.330
100:685
(4) Provide for the revocation of the conditional use permit
upon:
(a) Breach or failure to comply with the conditions of this
permit,
(b) Disciplinary action or other action affecting the status
of the holder's State license, and
(c) As otherwise provided by ordinance or other
applicable law.
9. Pawnbrokers. In addition to and as an integral part of development,
the following provisions shall apply:
a. Pawnbrokers shall provide proof that they comply with all
provisions of the regulations described in Chapter 607 of the
Municipal Code.
b. A pawnbroker shall not be allowed within a one thousand
(1,000) foot radius of another pawnbroker or check cashing or
small loan establishment.
c. A pawnbroker shall not be located closer than one thousand
(1,000) feet from any residential use.
d. The Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the City Council
may place reasonable restrictions on hours of operation, but in
no instance shall a pawnbroker be open between the hours of
7:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
e. The Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the City Council
shall place appropriate conditions on any conditional use
permit for a pawnbroker which shall, at a minimum:
(1) Require the holder of the conditional use permit to be and
remain fully licensed, in good standing, with the State of
Missouri for the purpose of providing loans;
(2) Prohibit painting and printing on windows and doors and
in all other respects, require that all signage comply with
City ordinances and be approved by the City;
(3) Prohibit outdoor storage and display of any type of
merchandise;
(4) Prohibit the use and/or installation of security window
bars;
(5) Prohibit the transfer or assignment of the conditional use
permit; and
(6) Provide for the revocation of the conditional use permit
upon:
Section
400.330
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.330
100:686
Section 400.333. Exemptions Relating To Amendments To Appendix
"A" — Listing of Permitted and Conditionally Permitted Land Uses.
[Ord. No. 5179 §1, 5-31-2007; Ord. No. 5443 §2, 3-31-2009]
Section 400.334. Suspension and Revocation. [Ord. No. 5443 §2,
3-31-2009]
(a) Breach or failure to comply with the conditions of this
permit,
(b) Disciplinary action or other action affecting the status
of the holder's State license, and
(c) As otherwise provided by ordinance or other
applicable law.
A. Any legally existing land use located at a site within the City for which
prior to the adoption of an ordinance changing the status of that use,
either:
1. The land use as described in the O'Fallon Zoning Code did not
require a conditional use permit, or
2. The site existed as a non-conforming use prior to the adoption of
the ordinance,
shall be exempt from requiring a conditional use permit if said
land use shall now require a conditional use permit in the zoning
district in which it is located per the new ordinance. The
exemption for these legally existing land uses shall only apply
for the site or portions of property upon which they are actually
located prior to the adoption of the new ordinance.
This exemption shall not apply if the land use is proposed to be
enlarged, altered, changed or extended.
A. Suspension or revocation of any conditional use permit shall be in
addition to any other penalty or penalties prescribed in this Chapter or
available to the City by law. Any conditional use permit approved under
this Article may be suspended or revoked for good cause including, but
not limited to, any of the following reasons:
1. Any failure to comply or any violation of any provision of this
Chapter or the regulations promulgated under the authority of this
Chapter by the permittee;
2. Violation of the terms, conditions, safeguards or restrictions upon
the conditional use permit;
3. Violation of any ordinance of the City regulating the permittee;
Section
400.330
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.334
100:687
4. Violation of any other Federal, State or local law or regulation
pertaining to the permittee or the activities associated with the
particular business, establishment or land use;
5. Failure of the permittee to pay any tax, fee, fine or other
governmental charge required by law;
6. Any misrepresentation or false statement in the application for
such permit;
7. Causing, maintaining or assisting in the cause or maintenance of a
nuisance, whether public or private; or
8. Failure to obtain other necessary governmental permits associated
with such land use, business or activities.
B. In any case in which there is reason to believe a conditional use permit
approved pursuant to this Article may be subject to suspension or
revocation, the following procedure shall govern:
1. The City Council shall decide whether to refer the matter first to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for its recommendation. If the
matter is referred to the Commission, the Commission shall follow
the same procedure for hearing as set forth herein.
2. The City Council or its designee shall set a hearing to consider the
matter. At least ten (10) days prior to such hearing, written notice
shall be mailed to the permittee at the last known address as shown
in the records of the City Clerk advising the permittee of the time
and place of the hearing and of the reason for considering the
suspension or revocation of the conditional use permit.
3. During the pendency of this hearing the permittee shall be
permitted to continue the operation of the business or land use,
provided however, that the pendency of such hearing shall not
preclude prosecution for violation of the ordinances of the City
occurring during such period.
4. A hearing officer may be appointed to preside at the hearing. At the
hearing, the hearing officer shall hear all relevant evidence
justifying the suspension or revocation of the conditional use
permit and all relevant evidence justifying the retention of the
permit.
5. The permittee shall be notified of the results of the hearing in
writing.
6. In the event that a permittee whose conditional use permit has
been revoked pursuant to this Section, or a related entity of a
permittee whose conditional use permit has been revoked pursuant
to this Section, shall thereafter apply for a substantially similar
permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council
Section
400.334
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.334
100:688
may take into account the act(s) and circumstances which lead to
the revocation in considering the new application.
7. Any person aggrieved by the determination of the hearing
aforesaid may appeal such determination in accordance with this
Article. The filing of an appeal shall not stay the outcome of the
administrative determination unless the City Council shall suspend
the effect of the determination upon request of the aggrieved party.
8. Any person aggrieved by the decision on appeal of the City Council
may seek judicial review by filing a petition for same with the
Circuit Court of St. Charles County within fifteen (15) days of the
date of the Council's decision.
Section
400.334
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.334
100:689

ARTICLE VIII
Non-Conforming Uses
Section 400.335. Purpose. [R.O. 2007 §400.335; Ord. No. 1161
§21.01, 10-16-1984]
Within the districts established by this Chapter or by amendments thereto,
there exist buildings and structures and uses of parcels, lots, buildings,
and structures which were lawful before this Chapter was adopted or
amended including legal non-conforming uses, buildings and structures
which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted; it is the intent of this
Chapter to permit these buildings and structures and uses of parcels, lots,
buildings and structures herein referred to as non-conformities, to continue
until they are discontinued, damaged, or removed. These non-conformities
are declared by this Chapter to be incompatible with the buildings and
structures and uses of parcels, lots, buildings, and structures permitted by
this Chapter in certain districts. It is further the intent of this Chapter that
such non-conformities shall not be enlarged, expanded, or extended except
as provided herein nor to be used as grounds for adding other buildings
and structures and uses of parcels, lots, buildings and structures prohibited
elsewhere in the same district.
Section 400.340. Non-Conforming Uses of Lots. [R.O. 2007
§400.340; Ord. No. 1161 §21.02, 10-16-1984]
A. Where, on the date of adoption (October 16, 1984) or amendment of
this Chapter, a lawful use of a parcel or lot (such use not involving any
building or structure or upon which parcel or lot a building or structure
is accessory to such principal use) exists that is no longer permissible
under the provisions of this Chapter, such principal use may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the
following provisions:
1. Enlargement. No such non-conforming use of a parcel or lot shall
be enlarged, expanded or extended to occupy a greater area of land
or floor space than was occupied on the date of adoption or
amendment of this Chapter and no additional accessory use,
building, or structure shall be established thereon.
2. Relocation. No such non-conforming use of a parcel or lot shall be
moved in whole or in part to any other portion of such parcel or lot
not so occupied on October 16, 1984, or to a parcel or lot not in
conformance with this Chapter.
3. Discontinuance. If such non-conforming use of a parcel or lot
ceases for any reason for a period of more than one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days (except where Government action causes
such cessation) the subsequent use of such parcel or lot shall
conform to the regulations and provisions set by this Chapter for
the district in which such parcel or lot is located.
Section
400.335
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.345
100:691
Section 400.345. Non-Conforming Buildings and Structures. [R.O.
2007 §400.345; Ord. No. 1161 §21.03, 10-16-1984]
Section 400.350. Non-Conforming Uses of Buildings and
Structures. [R.O. 2007 §400.350; Ord. No. 1161 §21.04, 10-16-1984]
A. Where, on the date of adoption (October 16, 1984) or amendment of
this Chapter, a lawful building or structure exists that could not be built
under the regulations of this Chapter by reasons of restrictions upon lot
area, lot width, lot coverage, height, open spaces, off-street parking,
loading spaces and setbacks, or other characteristics, such building or
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful
subject to the following provisions:
1. Enlargement. Such building or structure may be enlarged,
expanded, extended, or altered only if the non-conformity is
removed.
2. Destruction. Should any such building or structure be destroyed by
any means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its
replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter.
3. Relocation. Should any such building or structure be moved for any
reason for any distance, it shall thereafter conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is located after it is moved.
A. Where, on the date of adoption (October 16, 1984) or amendment of
this Chapter, a lawful use of a building or structure exists that is no
longer permissible under the regulations of this Chapter, such use may
be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the
following provisions:
1. Enlargement. No existing building or structure devoted to a use not
permitted by this Chapter in the district in which it is located shall
be enlarged, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally
extended or altered except in changing the use of such building or
structure to a use permitted in the district in which such building or
structure is located.
2. Change in use not permitted. An existing non-conforming land use
or structures shall not cause further departures from the Zoning
Code. Although an existing non-conforming use may be continued,
except as hereinafter limited, it may not be changed to another use,
except to a similar use or to a use permitted in the district in which
it is situated and provided it complies with the requirements of that
district.
3. Discontinuance. When a non-conforming use of a building or
structure is discontinued or abandoned for more than one hundred
eighty (180) consecutive days (except where Government action
Section
400.345
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.350
100:692
Section 400.353. Setback Allowances Due To Public Encroachment.
[Ord. No. 1778 §§1—2, 12-7-1989]
Section 400.355. Repairs and Maintenance. [R.O. 2007 §400.355;
Ord. No. 1161 §21.05, 10-16-1984]
Repairs and normal maintenance required to keep buildings in a safe
condition may be made to non-conforming buildings or structures, provided
that no alterations shall be made except those required by law or ordinance,
unless the building or structure is changed to be conforming with this
Chapter.
Section 400.360. Change of Tenancy or Ownership. [R.O. 2007
§400.360; Ord. No. 1161 §21.06, 10-16-1984]
There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of an existing
non-conforming use, building or structure, provided there is no change in
the nature or character, extent or intensity of such non-conforming use,
building or structure.
Section 400.365. Completion of Pending Construction and Building
Permits. [R.O. 2007 §400.365; Ord. No. 1161 §21.07, 10-16-1984]
To avoid undue hardships, nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in plans, construction, or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date
of adoption (October 16, 1984) or amendment of this Chapter and upon
which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Nothing
herein contained shall require any change in the plans or designated use of
a building for which a Building Permit has been heretofore issued, or plans
or final subdivision plats which have been approved by the Council on or
before October 16, 1984.
prevents access to the premises) the building or structure shall not
thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of
the district in which it is located.
A. In recognition of the authority of Missouri Cities of the Third Class to
obtain private property for public purposes by negotiation or
condemnation process, landowners whose improvements are subject to
certain setback requirements shall not be adversely affected as a result
of such public encroachment on their property.
B. The status of improvements on private property shall remain as if the
setback distances were the same as before the public encroachment,
and no variance or exception to set back requirements shall be imposed
on the tract affected by the public encroachment.
Section
400.350
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.370
100:693
Section 400.370. Conditional Uses. [R.O. 2007 §400.370; Ord. No.
1161 §21.08, 10-16-1984]
Any use existing on October 16, 1984, and which is permitted as a
conditional use in a district under the terms of this Chapter shall be deemed
a conforming use in such district, and shall without further action be
considered a conforming use.
Section 400.375. Substandard Non-Conforming Lots of Record.
[R.O. 2007 §400.375; Ord. No. 1161 §21.09, 10-16-1984]
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Chapter,
a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings or structures
may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption
(October 16, 1984) or amendment of this Chapter. Such lot must be in
separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the
same ownership as of the date of adoption of this Chapter. This provision
shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or
width, or both that are generally applicable in the district, provided that
yard dimensions and other requirements, not involving area or width, or
both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such
lot is located. If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions
of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the
time of passage or amendment of this Chapter (October 16, 1984) and if
all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area
as established by this Chapter, the lands involved shall be considered to
be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this Chapter, and no portion of
said parcel or lot shall be used or sold which does not meet lot width and
area requirements established by this Chapter, nor shall any division of the
parcel or lot be made which leaves remaining any parcel or lot with width
or area below the requirements stated in this Chapter.
Section 400.380. Existence of A Non-Conforming Use. [R.O. 2007
§400.380; Ord. No. 1161 §21.10, 10-16-1984]
In cases of doubt, and on specific questions raised, whether a nonconforming
use exists shall be a question of fact and shall be decided by
the City Council after notice, a public hearing, and receipt of a report and
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Section 400.385. Non-Conforming Uses Not Validated. [R.O. 2007
§400.385; Ord. No. 1161 §21.11, 10-16-1984]
A use in violation of a provision of the ordinance which this repeals shall not
be validated as a non-conforming use by this Chapter.
Section
400.370
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.390
100:694
Section 400.390. Joint Use of Buildings, Structures and/or Land.
[R.O. 2007 §400.390; Ord. No. 1161 §21.12, 10-16-1984]
Where a non-conforming use exists, and a conforming use is proposed, the
non-conforming use must cease upon initiation of the conforming use. No
joint use of either buildings, structures, and or land shall be permitted.
Section 400.393. Exemptions Relating To Amendments To Appendix
"A" — Listing of Permitted and Conditionally Permitted Land Uses.
[Ord. No. 5179 §2, 5-31-2007]
Any legally existing land use in a zoning district within the City that,
after the adoption of Ordinance No. 5179, is no longer "Permitted" or
"Conditionally Permitted" within that zoning district shall be exempt from
the requirements of this Article.
Section
400.390
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.393
100:695

ARTICLE IX
Prohibited Uses
Section 400.395. Purpose. [R.O. 2007 §400.395; Ord. No. 1161
§22.01, 10-16-1984]
The intent of this Article is to provide for public safety and health and public
welfare by prohibiting hazardous uses and practices.
Section 400.400. Regulations. [R.O. 2007 §400.400; Ord. No. 1161
§22.02, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 5883 §6, 5-24-2013]
No temporary or uncompleted building, nor any automotive equipment,
trailer, garage, or appurtenances incident to a family dwelling shall be
erected, maintained or used for residence purposes, provided where the
exterior, kitchen, at least one (1) bathroom, and more than fifty percent
(50%) of the interior of a permanent residence have been completed, this
regulation shall not apply. Temporary or outwardly incomplete buildings or
structures, open excavation for a basement or foundation, and buildings or
structures so damaged as to become unfit for use of habitation shall not be
permitted, maintained, or remain in such condition for more than a time
period to be stipulated by the Administrative Officer as per the current
period to be stipulated by the Administrative Officer as per the current
adopted building code. No building material, construction equipment,
machinery or refuse shall be stored, maintained or kept in the open upon
any lot, tract or parcel other than in such districts as permitted in this
Chapter, except during actual construction operations upon said premises
or related premises.
Section
400.395
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.400
100:697

ARTICLE X
(Reserved)97
Section 400.405. through Section 400.430. (Reserved)
97.Editor's Note—Ord. no. 5752 §1, adopted December 8, 2011, repealed article X
"landscaping and screening regulations" of ch. 400, sections 400.405—400.430, in their
entirety. Former sections 400.405—400.430 derived from R.O. 2007 §§400.405—400.430;
ord. no. 1161 §§23.01—23.06, 10-16-84; ord. no. 3871 §1, 5-10-99; ord. no. 4277 §§1—2,
11-15-01; ord. no. 4487 §§4—5, 3-3-03. See chapter 402 "Trees and Landscaping".
Section
400.405
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.405
100:699

ARTICLE XI
Planning and Zoning Commission
Section 400.435. Authority To Make A Municipal Plan. [R.O. 2007
§400.435; Ord. No. 1161 §24.01, 10-16-1984]
The City of O'Fallon, Missouri, shall be authorized to make, adopt, amend,
extend, and carry out a municipal plan as authorized by law.
Section 400.440. City Planning and Zoning Commission Created —
Membership. [R.O. 2007 §400.440; Ord. No. 1161 §24.02,
10-16-1984; Ord. No. 4642 §1, 3-8-2004; Ord. No. 5032 §1,
7-18-2006; Ord. No. 5605 §1, 6-24-2010]
A Commission to be known as "City Planning and Zoning Commission" is
hereby created which shall consist of 1) the Mayor, if the Mayor chooses to
be a member of the Commission, 2) a member of the City Council selected
by the City Council, if the City Council chooses to have a member serve
on the Commission, and 3) eleven (11) citizen members appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council such that two (2) members are
representing each ward and one (1) citizen member shall serve at large.
The eleven (11) citizen members shall be compensated in the amount of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per meeting attended up to two hundred dollars
($200.00) per month.
Section 400.445. Officers, Terms and Vacancies. [R.O. 2007
§400.445; Ord. No. 1161 §24.03, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 5032 §2,
7-18-2006; Ord. No. 5605 §1, 6-24-2010]
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect its Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson from among the citizen members. The term of Chairperson and
Vice Chairperson shall be for one (1) year with eligibility for re-election.
The term of each of the citizen members shall be for four (4) years, except
that the terms of the citizen members first (1st) appointed shall be for
varying periods so that succeeding terms will be staggered. The terms of all
members and the terms of office for the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson
shall expire on April thirtieth (30th) of the appropriate year and when a
successor is appointed and qualified. Any vacancy in a membership shall be
filled for the unexpired term by appointment as aforesaid. The City Council
may remove any citizen member for cause stated in writing and after public
hearing.
Section 400.450. Meetings, Rules, Records To Be Kept. [R.O. 2007
§400.450; Ord. No. 1161 §24.04, 10-16-1984]
The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold regular meetings and
special meetings as they provide by rule. The Commission shall adopt rules
for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions,
transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public
record. Any member of the Planning and Zoning Commission who within
Section
400.435
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.450
100:701
any twelve (12) month period has three (3) unexcused absences or a total
of five (5) absences, shall be subject to immediate removal by the Mayor for
neglect of duty unless there are extenuating circumstances. Any member
being more than thirty (30) minutes late to a meeting shall be charged with
one-half (½) of an unexcused absence.
Section 400.455. Funds — Appropriations of. [R.O. 2007 §400.455;
Ord. No. 1161 §24.05, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 5032 §3, 7-18-2006]
The City Council may provide the funds, equipment and accommodations
necessary for the work of the Commission, but the expenditures of the
Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated
for that purpose by the City Council and no expenditures, nor agreements
for expenditures shall be valid or legal in excess of such amount. Provided,
however, that such Commission shall have the authority and the power to
accept and receive donations of cash or property, gifts, bequests and grants
and, with the approval of the City Council, may use such non-appropriated
assets as the Commission shall deem beneficial and advantageous to the
City of O'Fallon.
Section 400.460. Duties of Commission. [R.O. 2007 §400.460; Ord.
No. 1161 §24.06, 10-16-1984]
It shall be the function and duty of the Commission to make and adopt
plans for the physical development of the municipality, including any area
outside of its boundaries but within its statutory authority which, in the
Commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the municipality,
including site plans as provided in Article XIV of this Chapter.
Section 400.465. Recommendations of The Commission. [R.O. 2007
§400.465; Ord. No. 1161 §24.07, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 5032 §3,
7-18-2006]
A. The Commission, from time to time, shall recommend to the
appropriate public officials programs for public structures and
improvements and for the financing thereof. It shall be the function and
duty of the Commission to further consult and advise with public
officials and agencies, civic organizations, public utility companies,
educational, professional and other organizations and with citizens with
relation to the promulgation and carrying out of the plan. The
Commission shall have the power to delegate authority to any of the
above named groups to conduct studies and make surveys for said
Commission if it deems expedient.
B. The Commission shall, from time to time, review applications, issue
reports, and make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council on
amendments to the Zoning Map, as provided in Article XVI, planned
unit developments, as provided in Article V, and all other powers and
duties ascribed to them by this Chapter.
Section
400.450
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.465
100:702
ARTICLE XII
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
Section 400.470. Purpose. [R.O. 2007 §400.470; Ord. No. 4742 §1,
11-18-2004]
The purpose of this Article is to assure that off-street parking and loading
spaces are provided in such number and manner of construction to
accommodate all persons normally using or visiting a use, building or other
structure at any one time.
Section 400.475. Applicability. [R.O. 2007 §400.475; Ord. No. 4742
§1, 11-18-2004]
Section 400.480. Off-Street Automobile Parking Space
Requirements. [R.O. 2007 §400.480; Ord. No. 4742 §1, 11-18-2004;
Ord. No. 5009 §§1—2, 8, 5-16-2006; Ord. No. 6291 §1, 1-12-2017;
Ord. No. 6350 § 4, 5-25-2017; Ord. No. 6562, 3-28-2019]
The Table 400.480 lists the minimum off-street parking spaces required for
motorized vehicles by land use category:
TABLE 400.480 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
LAND USE NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED
Dwelling and Lodging
Children's homes One (1) space for each six (6) beds
Dormitories One (1) space for each two (2) beds, plus one
(1) space for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area
Fraternity and sorority
homes
One (1) space for each two (2) members or
residents
Group homes One (1) space per three (3) residents, plus one
(1) space for each employee
A. New Development. No structure or land shall be used or occupied and
no structure or part thereof shall be erected or constructed unless
permanently maintained off-street parking is provided in accordance
with this Article.
B. Previously Existing Regulations. All structures and uses existing at the
time of adoption of this Article shall be required to maintain the preexisting
number of parking spaces if fewer spaces than are required by
this Article are provided.
C. Expansions, Alterations And Change In Use. Whenever the use of a
structure is changed or enlarged or increased in number of employees,
seating capacity or otherwise creating an increase in the required offstreet
parking, additional parking shall be provided in accordance with
this Article on the basis of the change or increase.
Section
400.470
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.480
100:703
TABLE 400.480 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
LAND USE NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED
Mobile homes Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit
Multi-family (3+ dwelling
units)
One and one-half (1.5) spaces for each
efficiency and one (1) bedroom unit, plus one
(1) additional space for each additional
bedroom (covered parking is optional)
Residential subdivision
recreational amenity areas
One (1) space per ten (10) dwelling units
within the residential subdivision
Rooming, boarding,
lodging and tourist homes
One (1) space for each guest room, but not
less than three (3) total spaces
Senior citizen communities See Section 400.162(E)(3) of the Zoning Code
Single-family homes Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit
Two-family homes Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit
Institutional Uses
Correctional facilities One (1) space per five (5) beds, plus one (1)
space per two (2) employees
Hospitals One (1) space per four (4) beds, plus one (1)
space per staff doctor, plus one (1) space per
three (3) employees, plus adequate area for
emergency vehicles
Nursing and convalescent
homes
One (1) space per three (3) beds, plus one (1)
space per two (2) employees
Places of Assembly
Auditoriums One (1) space per three (3) seats or six (6)
feet of bench length
Churches One (1) space per three (3) seats or six (6)
feet of bench length in the main auditorium
Colleges One (1) space per three (3) daytime students,
plus one (1) space per two (2) faculty and staff
members
Elementary schools Two (2) spaces per classroom or one (1) space
per five (5) seats or eight (8) feet of bench
length in auditorium, whichever is greater,
plus one (1) space per two (2) faculty and staff
members
High schools One (1) space per three (3) students, plus one
(1) space per each faculty and staff member
Section
400.480
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.480
100:704
TABLE 400.480 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
LAND USE NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED
Junior high schools Two (2) spaces per classroom or one (1) space
per five (5) seats or eight (8) feet of bench
length in auditorium, whichever is greater,
plus one (1) space per two (2) faculty and staff
members
Kindergartens Two (2) spaces per faculty and staff members
Middle schools Two (2) spaces per classroom or one (1) space
per five (5) seats or eight (8) feet of bench
length in auditorium, whichever is greater,
plus one (1) space per two (2) faculty and staff
members
Public libraries One (1) space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area, plus
one (1) space per two (2) employees
Trade and vocational
schools
One (1) space per three (3) daytime students,
plus one (1) space per each faculty and staff
member
Commercial Recreation
Bowling alleys Five (5) spaces per alley, plus one (1) space
per two (2) employees
Fitness and health centers One (1) space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Golf courses and country
clubs
One (1) space per four (4) members (based on
the maximum anticipated membership) or the
requirements to serve both indoor and
outdoor restaurant and/or bar facilities,
whichever is greater
Miniature golf, driving
ranges, batting cages,
paintball, etc.
One (1) space for every three (3) persons that
the facility is designed to accommodate when
used to the maximum capacity
Pool and billiard halls One (1) space per 100 sq. ft. of floor area
Skating rinks One (1) space per 100 sq. ft. of floor area, plus
one (1) space per two (2) employees
Stadiums, arenas and
outdoor theatres
One (1) space per four (4) seats or eight (8)
feet of bench length, plus one (1) space per
two (2) employees and/or volunteers
Commercial Uses
Auction houses One (1) space per two (2) employees, plus one
(1) space per three (3) seats or six (6) feet of
bench length, plus one (1) space per 75 sq. ft.
within main sales area
Auto repair garages One (1) space per 500 sq. ft. of floor area,
minimum of five (5) spaces
Section
400.480
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.480
100:705
TABLE 400.480 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
LAND USE NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED
Auto service and fueling
stations
One (1) space per service bay, plus one (1)
space for each two (2) gas pumps, plus one (1)
space per 250 sq. ft. of retail sales
Auto wrecking and salvage
yards
One (1) space per employee, plus one (1)
space per 10,000 sq. ft. of storage area
Ballrooms and dance halls One (1) space per 100 sq. ft. of dance floor
area
Banks and savings and
loans
One (1) space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area, plus
one (1) space per two (2) employees, plus one
(1) space per 50 sq. ft. of drive-in floor area
Banquet hall and party
center
One (1) space per 100 sq. ft. of floor area
Barber and beauty shops One (1) space per 150 sq. ft. of floor area,
minimum of five (5) spaces
Bars, taverns and
nightclubs
One (1) space per two (2) seats, plus one (1)
space per 75 sq. ft. of floor area, including
outdoor patio space
Car washes—automatic Ten (10) stacking spaces minimum
Car washes—self-service Four (4) stacking spaces per washing stall,
plus two (2) drying spaces per washing stall
Convenience store with
fuel
One (1) space per 250 sq. ft. of floor area, plus
one (1) space for each two (2) gas pumps
Convenience store without
fuel
One (1) space per 250 sq. ft. of floor area
Dance and music studios One (1) space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Day care and pre-schools One (1) space per six (6) pupils, plus one (1)
space per employee, based upon the maximum
number of pupils for which the facility is
licensed by the State of Missouri
Dental offices and clinics One (1) space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Drive-thru oil change
facilities
One (1) space per employee, plus four (4)
stacking spaces per service bay
Dry cleaners One (1) space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Funeral homes and
mortuaries
One (1) space per 50 sq. ft. of assembly room
and parlor area, with a minimum of thirty (30)
spaces
Furniture stores One (1) space per 500 sq. ft. of floor area
Hotels, motels and inns One (1) space per guest room, plus one (1)
space per two (2) employees
Laundromats One (1) space per two (2) washing machines
Section
400.480
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.480
100:706
TABLE 400.480 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
LAND USE NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED
Live entertainment
business
Spaces required as per Chapter 635
Machinery sales One (1) space per 500 sq. ft. of floor area,
minimum of five (5) spaces
Maintenance shops One (1) space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area
Medical marijuana
dispensary facility
One (1) space per 300 square feet of retail
plus one (1) space per 400 square feet of
office
Medical offices and clinics One (1) space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Nurseries One (1) space per employee, plus two (2)
spaces for company vehicles, plus one (1)
space per 600 sq. ft. of floor area
Offices One (1) space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
Personal care services One (1) space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Private clubs and
commercial lodges
The combined spaces to meet the
requirements of each of the uses being
proposed, such as a hotel, motel, inn,
restaurant, auditorium, etc.
Repair shops (nonvehicular)
One (1) space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area
Research laboratories One (1) space per two (2) employees
Restaurants (carry-out and
delivery)
One (1) space per 250 sq. ft. of floor area
Restaurants (dine-in and
drive-thru)
Twenty (20) spaces, plus one (1) space per
100 sq. ft. of floor area, including outdoor
patio space
Retail stores The number required of spaces for the
identified use in this Table. If the specific use
is not listed in this Table, then that use shall
be based on a similarly listed use as
determined by the Director of Planning and
Development
Speculative shopping
centers and speculative
multi-tenant buildings
Five and one-half (5.5) spaces per 1,000
square feet of floor area
Theatres (indoor) One (1) space per four (4) seats
Vehicle sales and
service—indoor
One (1) space per 400 sq. ft. of display area,
plus one (1) space per employee, plus one (1)
space per 500 sq. ft. of service floor area
Section
400.480
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.480
100:707
TABLE 400.480 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
LAND USE NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED
Vehicle sales and
service—outdoor
One (1) space per 3,000 sq. ft. of display lot,
plus one (1) space per employee, plus one (1)
space per 500 sq. ft. of service floor area
Veterinary clinics One (1) space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Industrial Uses
Freight terminals One (1) space per employee, plus one (1)
space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Manufacturing facilities One (1) space per employee, plus one (1)
space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Medical marijuana
cultivation facility
One (1) space per 5,000 square feet of grow
and process area plus one (1) space per 400
square feet of office
Petroleum storage
facilities
One (1) space per 2,000 sq. ft. of site area
Sand and gravel facilities One (1) space per 2,000 sq. ft. of site area
Warehouse and storage
facilities—indoor
One (1) space for every employee on the
maximum work shift, plus one (1) for each
vehicle utilized in the operation of the
business, plus two (2) guest spaces. Any other
uses within a warehouse building (office,
retail, manufacturing, etc.) would also require
parking based upon those separate
calculations.
Section 400.485. Accessible Parking Space Requirements. [R.O.
2007 §400.485; Ord. No. 4742 §1, 11-18-2004; Ord. No. 5727 §9,
8-25-2011; Ord. No. 5883 §7, 5-24-2013]
The minimum required number of accessible parking spaces as determined
by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) shall be counted toward
fulfilling the overall parking requirements listed in Table 400.480.
Automobile and van accessible parking spaces shall be required in
accordance with Table 400.485(A) and Table 400.485(B) and Section
400.510(16) below:
TABLE 400.485(A) ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
TOTAL PARKING SPACES
PROVIDED
MINIMUM NUMBER OF
ACCESSIBLE SPACES
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
Section
400.480
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.485
100:708
TABLE 400.485(A) ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
TOTAL PARKING SPACES
PROVIDED
MINIMUM NUMBER OF
ACCESSIBLE SPACES
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
More than 1,000 20, plus one (1) for each 100 over
1,000
TABLE 400.485(B) ACCESSIBLE VAN PARKING SPACE
REQUIREMENTS*
REQUIRED NUMBER OF
ACCESSIBLE PARKING
SPACES
REQUIRED VAN ACCESSIBLE
SPACES
1 to 8 1
9 to 16 2
17 to 24 3
25 to 32 4
33+ 1 additional space for every 8 spaces
* Beginning August 28, 2011, when any political subdivision or owner of
private property restripes a parking lot or constructs a new parking lot,
one (1) of every four (4) accessible spaces, but not less than one (1), shall
be served by an access aisle a minimum of ninety-six (96) inches wide
and shall be designated "lift van accessible only" with signs that meet the
requirements of the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended,
and any rules or regulations established pursuant thereto.
Section 400.490. Bicycle Parking Requirements. [R.O. 2007
§400.490; Ord. No. 4742 §1, 11-18-2004]
Bicycle parking facilities shall be required for all commercial, office,
institutional, educational and recreational uses throughout the City as
deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Bicycle
parking shall be provided at a rate of one (1) rack space per fifteen (15)
required automobile parking spaces, with a minimum of four (4) rack spaces
per individual building. Bicycle parking racks should be located in close
proximity to the main building entrance(s) out of the parking lot in highly
visible well lighted areas where the bikes and racks will not interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Bicycle parking racks should be securely
anchored to the ground so that they cannot be moved or easily vandalized.
Section
400.485
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.495
100:709
Section 400.495. General Provisions. [R.O. 2007 §400.495; Ord. No.
4742 §1, 11-18-2004; Ord. No. 5009 §8, 5-16-2006; Ord. No. 5883 §8,
5-24-2013]
A. The following rules apply when computing off-street parking
requirements:
1. Multiple-use buildings. The number of parking spaces required for
land or buildings used for two (2) or more purposes shall be the
sum of the requirements for the various uses computed in
accordance with this Article. Parking facilities for one (1) use shall
not be considered as providing the required parking facilities for
any other use, unless part of an approved shared parking plan in
accordance with the requirements of Section 400.505 below.
2. Unlisted uses. For uses not specifically listed in Table 400.480 and
variations of uses listed in Table 400.480, the Director of Planning
and Development shall apply the parking requirements specified
for the most similar use listed in Table 400.480 or the specific
requirement for that use as identified in the American Planning
Association's Planning Advisory Service Report #510/511 "Parking
Standards" (2002).
3. Floor area. All square footage based parking requirements shall be
computed on the basis of gross floor area.
4. Accessible parking spaces. The required number of accessible
parking spaces listed in Tables 400.485(A) and 400.485(B) shall be
counted toward fulfilling the overall parking requirements listed in
Table 400.480.
5. Car-side to-go pickup spaces. Restaurants that offer car-side to-go
pickup service may not count the off-street parking spaces reserved
for this service toward fulfilling the restaurant parking
requirements listed in Table 400.480.
6. Fractional spaces. When measurements of the number of required
parking spaces results in a fractional number, any fraction shall be
rounded up to the next higher whole number.
7. Occupancy-based standards. For the purpose of computing parking
requirements based on employees, residents, students or members,
unless otherwise expressly stated, calculations shall be based on
the total number, not just the number working on any single shift,
etc.
8. Beds. Bassinets shall not be counted as beds in determining the
number of parking spaces based upon the number of beds.
9. Use of off-street parking spaces. Off-street parking facilities
provided for the uses hereinafter listed shall be solely for the
parking of motor vehicles in operating condition for patrons,
Section
400.495
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.495
100:710
Section 400.500. Alternative Parking Space Requirement Study.
[R.O. 2007 §400.500; Ord. No. 4742 §1, 11-18-2004; Ord. No. 5009
§3, 5-16-2006]
occupants or employees of such uses and shall not be used for
the storage of commercial vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles,
campers, mobile homes or trailers.
B. Required Parking For Commercial Establishments Offering Live
Entertainment. Any commercial establishment offering live
entertainment shall be required to provide off-street parking per the
requirements of Chapter 635 of the Municipal Code.
C. Required Parking For Restaurants, Bars, Taverns And Nightclubs. Any
building that was approved with identified tenant(s) whose off-street
parking required fewer parking spaces than required for a restaurant,
bar, tavern or nightclub may not be used at a future date for a
restaurant, bar, tavern or nightclub unless a new site plan has been
reviewed and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
D. Required Parking For Speculative Shopping Centers And Speculative
Multi-Tenant Buildings. As first time tenants locate within new
speculative shopping centers and speculative multi-tenant buildings,
off-street parking shall be calculated and monitored by City staff using
the requirements listed in Table 400.480 for the specific tenant uses to
assure that as the shopping centers and multi-tenant buildings reach
full occupancy, remaining tenant space will only be leased to users for
whom adequate off-street parking is still available. As new tenants
locate within established shopping centers and multi-tenant buildings,
off-street parking shall be calculated and monitored by City staff using
the requirements listed in Table 400.480 for the specific tenant uses to
assure that adequate parking is available at the shopping center or
multi-tenant building for the proposed new tenant.
A. The City recognizes that many of the specific land uses listed in Table
400.480 have widely varying parking demand characteristics and that
there may be land uses not listed in Table 400.480. Therefore,
petitioners may prepare an alternative parking space requirement
study as part of their site plan, area plan or final plan application for
review and consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission for 1)
proposed land uses not included in Table 400.480 or 2) for proposed
development projects for which the land uses listed in Table 400.480
are believed to require a different amount of off-street parking than the
standards required per this Table.
A request for approval of an alternative parking space requirement
study shall be accompanied by the following information and will be
reviewed as described below:
1. Alternative parking space requirement study. Petitioners proposing
to develop or expand off-street parking facilities using off-street
Section
400.495
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.500
100:711
Section 400.505. Shared Parking Plan. [R.O. 2007 §400.505; Ord.
No. 4742 §1, 11-18-2004; Ord. No. 5009 §9, 5-16-2006]
automobile parking space requirements other than those listed
in Table 400.480 may submit an alternative parking space
requirement study that provides justification for the proposed
number of off-street parking spaces. The alternative parking space
requirement study must include estimates of parking demand
based on recommendations of the American Planning Association
(APA), Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) or other acceptable
estimates collected from uses or combination of uses that are the
same as or comparable with the proposed use. Comparability will
be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity and
location. Previously published studies may be utilized to back up
alternative parking space requirement requests. The source of all
data used to develop the alternative parking space requirement
study must be accurately documented.
2. Review by the City's traffic consultant. The City's traffic consultant
shall be engaged (at the petitioner's expense) to review the
alternative parking space requirement study. The traffic
consultant's report will be forwarded as part of the petitioner's
application to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
3. Approval. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve the
petitioner's alternate parking space requirement study if it is
determined that the number of proposed off-street parking spaces
will satisfy the demand for parking generated by the proposed
development, when viewed in light of all relevant factors.
4. Denial. If the proposed alternative parking space requirement
study is denied by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
petitioner shall follow the requirements for the number off-street
parking spaces listed in Table 400.480 or the number off-street
parking spaces for "unlisted uses" as determined by the Director of
Planning and Development per the requirements of Section
400.495(A)(2) of this Article.
A. It is the City's stated intention to encourage efficient use of land and
resources by allowing users to share off-street parking facilities
whenever feasible. Developments or uses with different operating
hours or peak business periods may share off-street parking spaces if a
shared parking plan is approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and if the plan complies with the following standards:
1. Shared parking plan. Those wishing to use shared parking as a
means of satisfying off-street parking requirements of this Article
must submit a shared parking plan that clearly demonstrates the
feasibility of shared parking. The study must address, at minimum,
the size and type of the proposed development, the composition of
existing and anticipated tenants, the anticipated percentage of the
Section
400.500
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.505
100:712
required parking for all uses that will be sharing off-street parking
spaces that will be utilized on an hourly basis for a twenty-four
(24) hour period during both weekdays and weekends and the
anticipated rate of parking turnover. To demonstrate the above, the
shared parking plan shall utilize commonly accepted model Parking
Occupancy Rates Table(s) that identify the anticipated percentage
of parking utilized by individual land uses on an hourly basis and
the Institute of Transportation Engineers "Shared Parking Planning
Guidelines" (1995).
2. Zoning classification. Shared parking areas serving uses located in
non-residential zoning districts must be located in non-residential
zoning districts. Shared parking areas serving uses located in
residential zoning districts may be located in residential or nonresidential
zoning districts. Shared parking areas shall require the
same or a more intensive zoning classification than that required
for the most intensive of the uses served by the shared parking.
3. Location and design. Shared parking spaces must be located within
six hundred (600) feet of the primary entrance of all buildings they
are intended to serve, the location of which is not on the opposite
side of an arterial street. Parking spaces must be clearly available
to each use and not appear in any way to be serving a particular
use, either through signage dedicating the spaces or through
design techniques that would tend to orient use of the spaces to a
particular business or building.
4. Review by the City's traffic consultant. The City's traffic consultant
shall be engaged (at the developer's expense) to review the shared
parking plan. The traffic consultant's report will be forwarded as
part of the developer's application to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
5. Approval. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve the
developer's shared parking plan if it is determined that the number
of the off-street parking spaces proposed will satisfy the demand
for parking generated by the proposed development, when viewed
in light of all relevant factors.
6. Shared parking agreements. The shared parking plan shall be
enforced through shared parking agreements among all owners of
record. The written agreement shall include provisions for
maintenance, snow removal, ownership, liability and duration of
the agreement. The written agreement must be approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Attorney.
7. Revocation of permits. Failure to comply with the shared parking
provisions of the shared parking plan shall constitute a violation of
the Zoning Code and shall specifically be cause for revocation of a
certificate of zoning compliance and/or building permit.
Section
400.505
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.505
100:713
Section 400.510. Parking Lot Plan Design Requirements. [R.O.
2007 §400.510; Ord. No. 4742 §1, 11-18-2004; Ord. No. 5009 §§4—7,
10, 5-16-2006; Ord. No. 5883 §9, 5-24-2013]
8. Denial. If the proposed shared parking plan is denied by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, the developer must provide the
number off-street parking spaces listed in Table 400.480 for each of
the individual land uses.
9. Shared parking for churches. The off-street automobile parking
space requirements per this Article for churches may be reduced
by fifty percent (50%) without the need for an approved shared
parking plan when:
a. The church is located in a non-residential zoning district;
b. The church is within six hundred (600) feet of usable public or
private off-street parking areas, the location of which is not on
the opposite side of an arterial street; and
c. When a shared parking agreement has been entered into
between the church and the owner(s) of the adjacent off-street
parking that will be utilized by the church.
A. All parking lots and vehicular use areas shall be required to conform to
the following design requirements:
1. Location. Except for churches that have approved shared parking
agreements and land uses that are part of an approved shared
parking plan, all required off-street parking facilities shall be
located on the same lot as the principal building or use. Parking
shall only be permitted in appropriately marked parking spaces and
shall not obstruct drive aisles.
2. Surface material. Areas used for standing and maneuvering of
vehicles shall have concrete or asphaltic concrete maintained
adequately for all-weather use, and so drained as to avoid flow of
water across sidewalks, pedestrian walkways and multi-purpose
trails. Minimum thickness for automobile parking areas and drive
aisles not utilized for truck maneuvering shall be a minimum of
three (3) inches of asphaltic concrete over eight (8) inches of
compacted rock or a minimum of five (5) inches of Portland cement
concrete. Loading and unloading spaces and drive aisles utilized
for truck maneuvering shall be a minimum of four (4) inches of
asphaltic concrete over eight (8) inches of compacted rock or a
minimum of six (6) inches of Portland cement concrete. Trash
containers shall be placed on pads constructed of a minimum of six
(6) inches of Portland cement concrete. Surface materials shall be
placed on compact subgrade per City requirements.
Section
400.505
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.510
100:714
3. Curbing. All parking areas shall be curbed with an integral six (6)
inches of Portland cement concrete vertical curbing, unless
otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
4. Wheel stops. Pre-cast concrete wheel stops permanently anchored
to the parking lot surface placed two (2) feet back from the rear of
parking space stalls shall be installed when deemed necessary by
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
5. Access to parking areas. With the exception of single- and twofamily
homes, all off-street parking spaces that make it necessary
to back out directly into a public road are prohibited. Also, no
driveway or parking areas of an industrial, commercial, mobile
home or multiple-family use that will lie adjacent to a single- or
two-family use or zoning district shall be located closer than ten
(10) feet to the common property line.
6. Setback. Unless otherwise provided, all required parking spaces
may be located in a required front yard, side yard or rear yard
provided that a ten (10) foot setback is maintained from any
property line under separate ownership. Where the proposed
parking area will be located within the side yard adjacent to a
similarly zoned property, the ten (10) foot setback requirement
shall not apply. However, in no instance shall a parking lot be
located in a required transition strip.
7. Access adjacent to street corners. No entrance or exit for any offstreet
parking area with over four (4) parking spaces, nor any
loading berth, shall have its centerline of the entrance located
within seventy-five (75) feet of the intersection of any two (2) minor
or cul-de-sac street right-of-way lines. Street intersections other
than local roads shall have the minimum setback distance adjusted
accordingly for adequate access management.
8. Cross access. Parking lots shall be designed to provide internal
vehicular and pedestrian cross access to existing adjacent
commercial sites and stub-outs to adjacent commercially-zoned
undeveloped sites when deemed necessary by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
9. Drainage. All off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to
prevent additional drainage to abutting properties and shall be
constructed of concrete or asphalt materials approved by the City's
Planning and Development Department.
10. Lighting. Any lighting fixtures used to illuminate any off-street
parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from
any adjoining residential lot, institutional premises or adjacent
street per the requirements of the City's exterior lighting standards
contained within Section 400.277 of the Zoning Code.
Section
400.510
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.510
100:715
11. Traffic control devices. All off-street vehicular use areas shall be
marked or posted with the traffic control devices deemed necessary
by the developer and their engineer/consultant for the protection of
drivers, pedestrians and bicyclists. Off-street traffic control devices
should conform to the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Markings and postings may include, but not be limited to,
directional arrows, crosswalks, one-way signs, no parking signs
and fire lane signs.
12. Screening. Any off-street parking area providing space for five (5)
or more vehicles shall be effectively screened on any side which
adjoins or faces a lot with residential zoning by an un-pierced wall
or screen or compact evergreen planting not less than four (4) feet
in height. Plantings shall be maintained in good condition and not
encroach on adjoining property.
13. Landscaping requirements. Except for vehicle storage lots,
multiple-level parking structures, and parking lots having a paved
area no wider than a double-loaded aisle no more than sixty-five
(65) feet in width, all parking areas in all zoning districts shall
include the following landscaping as minimum requirements:
a. Not less than six percent (6%) of the interior of a parking lot
shall be landscaped. The interior of a parking lot shall be
calculated by multiplying the number of parking spaces by two
hundred seventy (270) square feet. Planting which is required
along the perimeter of a parking lot shall not be considered as
part of the interior landscaping requirement.
b. The landscaping and planting areas shall be reasonably
dispersed throughout the parking lots.
c. The interior dimensions of any planting area or planting
median shall be sufficient to protect the landscaping materials
planted therein and to insure proper growth. Any protected
planting strip where trees are to be planted shall be a
minimum of seven (7) feet wide back of curb to back of curb
and shall be protected from vehicle overhang.
d. The primary landscaping materials used in parking lots shall
be trees which provide shade or are capable of providing shade
at maturity. Shrubbery, hedges and other planting material
may be used to complement the tree landscaping. Effective use
of earth berms and existing topography is also encouraged as a
component of the landscaping plan.
e. In those instances where plant material exists on parking lot
site prior to its development, such landscape material may be
used if approved as meeting the requirements in paragraph (d)
listed above.
Section
400.510
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.510
100:716
f. No landscaping, tree, shrub, fence, wall or similar item shall be
placed in zones of ingress or egress at street corners or in the
intersection of a public right-of-way that will create an
obstruction to visibility or is a traffic hazard.
14. Parking space dimensions. Parking aisle widths and parking space
size shall be required as shown below in Table 400.510(14):
TABLE 400.510(14) PARKING AISLE WIDTH AND SPACE
REQUIREMENTS
MINIMUM AISLE
WIDTH IN FEET
PARKING SPACE SIZE
ANGLE OF IN FEET
PARKING ONE-WAY TWO-WAY WIDTH LENGTH
90° 25 25 9 19
60° 19 25 9 19
45° 16 25 9 19
Parallel 13 25 9 19
15. Compact vehicle parking. Up to twenty percent (20%) of the
required parking spaces may be designated for use by compact
vehicles with minimum dimensions of eight (8) feet in width if in
perpendicular rows or seven (7) feet if on an angle and sixteen (16)
feet in length if approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Compact vehicle parking areas shall be grouped (rather than being
scattered to solve layout difficulties), and each parking space or
aisle shall be individually identified with a sign or surface lettering.
16. Accessible parking. Parking spaces designated for disabled persons
shall be designed according to the following standards:
a. Size requirements. Automobile accessible parking spaces shall
not be less than nine (9) feet wide with a five (5) foot wide
access aisle immediately adjacent thereto. Two (2) automobile
accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle.
Van accessible parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine (9)
feet wide with an adjacent access aisle a minimum of eight (8)
feet wide. Two (2) van accessible parking spaces may share a
common access aisle. The adjacent access aisles shall be
clearly demarcated by lines painted on or otherwise applied to
the parking lot surface.
b. Location requirements. Accessible parking spaces shall be
located on the shortest possible accessible circulation route to
the main entrance of the building. Where buildings have
multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking,
accessible spaces shall be dispersed and located near the
accessible entrances. In parking structures and lots that do not
serve a particular building, accessible parking spaces shall be
Section
400.510
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.510
100:717
located on the shortest possible route to an accessible
pedestrian entrance to the parking facility.
c. Signage requirements. Each accessible parking space shall be
marked by a freestanding or wall-mounted sign centered at the
interior end of the parking space. Said sign shall bear the
international symbol of accessibility in white on a blue
background, and may also include any appropriate wording
such as "Accessible Parking" to indicate that the space is
reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a
distinguishing license plate or card. The sign shall also state,
or an additional sign shall be posted below or adjacent to the
sign stating, the following: "$50 to $300 Fine" pursuant to
House Bill 555 enacted by the State of Missouri. Van accessible
parking spaces shall be identified with an attached "Lift Van
Accessible" sign. Said signage shall be placed at a minimum
height of sixty (60) inches from the finished grade to the
bottom of the "Fine Sign".
d. Accessible curb ramps. Accessible curb ramps shall be
required immediately adjacent to accessible parking spaces
and at the terminus of sidewalks, pedestrian walkways and
multi-purpose trails. Accessible curb ramps and their side
flares shall not protrude into vehicular traffic lanes, into
parking spaces or into accessible parking space aisles.
Accessible curb ramps shall require truncated domes or other
forms of detectable warning devices.
17. Vehicle stacking space requirement. Parking lots shall provide offstreet
vehicle stacking spaces designed according to the following
requirements:
a. Off-street vehicle stacking spaces shall be a minimum of
twenty (20) feet in length and ten (10) feet in width along
straight portions. Off-street vehicle stacking spaces shall be a
minimum of twelve (12) feet in width along curved segments.
b. Off-street vehicle stacking spaces shall not impede on- or offsite
traffic movements or movements into or out of off-street
parking spaces. Off-street vehicle stacking spaces shall be
delineated from traffic aisles and parking areas with striping,
curbing, landscaping, raised medians or alternative paving
materials.
c. A minimum twelve (12) foot wide by-pass lane shall be required
when deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
d. The Planning and Zoning Commission may modify any of the
vehicle stacking space requirements of this Section if it is
determined that the modification will not adversely effect the
Section
400.510
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.510
100:718
general health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City
and adjacent communities.
e. Off-street vehicle stacking spaces shall be required as shown
below in Table 400.510(17)(e).
TABLE 400.510(17)(e) MINIMUM OFF-STREET
VEHICLE STACKING SPACES
BUSINESS TYPE SPACES MEASURED FROM
Drive-thru restaurant 6—121 Pick-up window2
Bank teller lane 5 Teller window
Automated teller
machine
5 Machine
Gasoline pump island 3 Pump island
Car wash (self-service) 4 Entrance to wash bay3
Car wash (automatic) 10 Entrance to wash bay
Oil changing facility 4 Entrance to service stall
Drive-thru pharmacy 4 Pick-up/drop-off window
Drive-thru
convenience store
4 Pick-up window
Controlled entrance
mini-storage
5 Key code box/attendant
booth
Day care drop-off/pickup
5 Passenger loading area
1 The required number of off-street vehicle stacking spaces
for drive-thru restaurants will depend on the type of
restaurant and the expected frequency of drive-thru usage
as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2 The Planning and Zoning Commission may require
additional off-street vehicle stacking spaces beyond the
pick-up window for restaurants that require vehicles to pull
forward as their order is being prepared.
3 Plus two (2) drying spaces measured from beyond the
washing stall.
18. Pedestrian, wheelchair and bicycle access. Parking lots shall be
designed to provide direct pedestrian, wheelchair and bicycle
access to the walkway(s) adjacent to the building entrance(s) in
accordance with the following requirements:98
98.Editor's Note—After discussion and direction by the City, "handicapped" was changed to
"accessible" in Subsection (18)(a) and (b) by implication of Ord. No. 5883, passed
5-24-2013.
Section
400.510
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.510
100:719
Section 400.512. Off-Street Loading Requirements. [R.O. 2007
§400.512; Ord. No. 4742 §1, 11-18-2004]
a. Minimum four (4) foot wide sidewalks shall wrap around both
sides of all curb cuts that provide access to the site and striped
crosswalk shall be provided through the parking lot to the
walkway(s) adjacent to the building entrance(s). Accessible
curb ramps designed per the requirements of Section
400.510(16)(d) of this Article shall be installed where the
striped crosswalks installed through the parking lot adjoins the
walkway(s) adjacent to the building entrance(s) and where the
striped crosswalks through the parking lot adjoin the sidewalks
installed around the curb cuts.
b. If a parking lot is adjacent to an existing or proposed multipurpose
trail, a direct connection shall be provided from said
multi-purpose trail to the walkway(s) adjacent to the building
entrance(s) via a striped crosswalk through the parking lot.
Accessible curb ramps designed per the requirements of
Section 400.510(16)(d) of this Article shall be installed where
the striped crosswalks installed through the parking lot adjoins
the walkway(s) adjacent to the building entrance(s) and where
the striped crosswalks through the parking lot adjoins the
multi-purpose trail.
c. At no time shall the sidewalks and/or multi-purpose trail
connections leading to the walkway(s) adjacent to the building
entrance(s) be blocked with displays or outside storage that
would impede pedestrian, wheelchair or bicycle access. In
addition, at no time shall the walkway(s) adjacent to the
building entrance(s) be blocked with displays or outside
storage that would impede pedestrian, wheelchair or bicycle
access.
A. In any zoning district in which a building is constructed, reconstructed
or expanded, there shall be provided on the same lot off-street loading
and unloading spaces for uses which customarily receive or distribute
material or merchandise by vehicle in accordance with the following
provisions:
1. Plans. Plans and specifications showing required loading and
unloading spaces, including the means of ingress and egress, and
interior circulation shall be submitted for review at the time of
application for development approval.
2. Number of loading spaces required. Uses having over five thousand
(5,000) square feet of gross floor area shall provide at least one (1)
off-street loading and unloading space. For every additional twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor space, one (1)
additional loading and unloading space shall be provided. In the
case of mixed-use developments, the total requirements for off-
Section
400.510
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.512
100:720
street loading and unloading facilities shall be the sum of the
various uses computed separately or as approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
3. Design standards. Each off-street loading and unloading space shall
not be less than the following:
a. In any residential zoning district, a loading and unloading
space shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width and twentyfive
(25) feet in length and, if a roofed space, not less than
fourteen (14) feet in height.
b. In any commercial, industrial or mixed-use district, the loading
and unloading space shall not be less than twelve (12) feet in
width and thirty-five (35) feet in length and, if a roofed space,
not less than fourteen (14) feet in height.
c. Subject to the limitations of Section 400.512(3)(d), a loading
and unloading space may occupy part of any required side or
rear yard; except the side yard along a side street in the case of
a corner lot. In no event shall any part of a required front yard
be occupied by such loading space. These requirements shall
not apply to industrial zoning districts.
d. Any loading and unloading space shall not be closer than fifty
(50) feet to any other lot located in any residential district
unless wholly within a completely enclosed building. However,
in no case shall a loading and unloading space or driveway be
located within a required landscaped transition area.
e. All off-street loading and unloading facilities that make it
necessary to back out directly into a public street shall be
prohibited. All maneuvering of trucks, autos and other vehicles
shall take place on the site and not within a public right-of-way.
Section
400.512
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.512
100:721

ARTICLE XIII
Performance Standards
Section 400.515. General Provisions. [R.O. 2007 §400.515; Ord. No.
1161 §26.01, 10-16-1984]
No parcel, lot, building, or structure in any district shall be used or occupied
in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious, or
otherwise objectionable element or condition so as to adversely affect the
surrounding area or adjoining premises provided that any use permitted
by this Chapter may be undertaken and maintained if acceptable measures
and safeguards are employed to limit dangerous and objectionable elements
to acceptable limits as established by the following performance
requirements.
Section 400.520. Fire Hazard. [R.O. 2007 §400.520; Ord. No. 1161
§26.02, 10-16-1984]
Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive materials
shall be protected by adequate fire-fighting and fire suppression equipment
and by such safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such
material. Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent activities to a
distance which is compatible with the potential danger involved.
Section 400.523. Metal Siding. [R.O. 2007 §400.523; Ord. No. 4419
§1, 10-25-2002]
A. The use of metal siding, including, but not limited to, aluminum and
steel, in the construction of the exterior of any building or structure in
the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, is hereby prohibited except as set forth
as follows:
1. In areas zoned "I-2", no more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the
surface area of the front elevation (the elevation facing a public
street or road) may consist of metal siding. The remaining area
must be of an alternate material, including, but not limited to,
brick, split faced block, exterior finish insulation system (EFIS),
stucco, stone as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
All other elevations may, but are not required to be, of entirely
metal siding. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in all areas zoned
"I-2": [Ord. No. 5931 §1, 9-12-2013]
a. Located along Interstate 70; or
b. Adjacent to any area zoned "R-1", "R-lA", "R-lB", "R-2", "R-3" or
"R-4", no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the surface
area of the front elevation (the elevation facing a public or
private street or road) may consist of metal siding. The
remaining area must be of an alternate material, including, but
not limited to, brick, split faced block, exterior finish insulation
Section
400.515
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.523
100:723
system (EFIS), stucco, stone as approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Metal siding may have exposed fasteners.
2. In areas zoned "I-1", no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the
surface area of the front elevation (the elevation facing a public
street or road) may consist of metal siding. The remaining area
must be of an alternate material, including, but not limited to,
brick, split faced block, exterior finish insulation system (EFIS),
stucco, stone as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Metal siding used in areas zoned "I-1" may not have exposed
fasteners. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in platted industrial
parks in existence as of October 24, 2002, metal siding may be used
consistent with the construction of existing buildings or structures
in the industrial park, provided that the requirements of Subsection
(A)(1) hereof shall be the minimum requirements. [Ord. No. 5931
§1, 9-12-2013]
3. In areas zoned "C-O", "C-1", "C-2", "C-3", "SC-1", "HTCD" or
"MUTDD", metal siding may not be used in the construction of the
exterior of any building or structure. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, trim and acceptable materials may include metal,
provided that not more than fifteen percent (15%) of the surface
area of any elevation is constructed of such material. [Ord. No.
5931 §1, 9-12-2013]
4. In areas zoned "R-1", "R-1A", "R-1B", "R-2", "R-3", "R-4", "R-5" or
"P-R", metal siding may not be used in the construction of the
exterior of any building or structure.
5. In areas zoned "AG", metal siding may be used in the construction
of the exterior of any building or structure.
B. As used herein, the term metal siding does not include standing seam
metal roofs, metal windows, metal soffit or facia or metal gutters and
downspouts.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the following:
1. Any building or structure for which site plan approval has been
granted or for which a building permit has been issued as of the
date of passage of this Section;
2. Any building or structure otherwise exempt from these
requirements pursuant to existing law; or
3. Any accessory structures to a single- or two-family residence.
Section
400.523
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.525
100:724
Section 400.525. Radioactivity, Electrical or Radio-Electrical
Disturbance. [R.O. 2007 §400.525; Ord. No. 1161 §26.03,
10-16-1984]
No activity shall emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or unreasonable
electrical or radio-electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation
at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such
disturbance.
Section 400.530. Vibration. [R.O. 2007 §400.530; Ord. No. 1161
§26.04, 10-16-1984]
No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments on
any adjoining lot or property.
Section 400.535. Smoke. [R.O. 2007 §400.535; Ord. No. 1161
§26.05, 10-16-1984]
Smoke shall not be emitted with a density greater than on the Ringlemann
Chart as issued by the U.S. Bureau of Mines except for blow-off periods of
ten (10) minutes duration of one (1) per hour when a density of not more
than No. 2 is permitted.
Section 400.540. Odor. [R.O. 2007 §400.540; Ord. No. 1161 §26.06,
10-16-1984]
No malodorous gas or matter shall be permitted which is offensive so as to
produce a public nuisance or hazard on any adjoining lot or property.
Section 400.545. Air Pollution. [R.O. 2007 §400.545; Ord. No. 1161
§26.07, 10-16-1984]
No pollution of air by fly-ash, dust, vapors, or other substances shall be
permitted which is harmful to health, animals, vegetation, or other property,
or which causes soiling of exposed property.
Section 400.550. Glare. [R.O. 2007 §400.550; Ord. No. 1161 §26.08,
10-16-1984]
No direct or reflected glare shall be permitted which is visible from any
property or from any public street, road, or highway.
Section 400.555. Noise. [R.O. 2007 §400.555; Ord. No. 1161 §26.09,
10-16-1984]
Noise which is objectionable due to volume, frequency, or beat shall be
muffled or otherwise controlled so that there is no production of sound
discernible at lot lines in excess of the average intensity of street and traffic
noise at the lot lines. Air raid sirens and related apparatus used solely for
public purposes are exempt from this requirement. The L-10 noise level
(that level which is exceeded ten percent (10%) of the time) shall not exceed
Section
400.525
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.555
100:725
the following measurements at any point past the property line of the lot on
which the noise is generated:
Octave Band Decibels
0—75 CPS (cycles per second) 55 dB
75—1,200 CPS 40 dB
1,200—4,800 CPS 25 dB
4,800 CPS and above 22 dB
Section 400.560. Water Pollution. [R.O. 2007 §400.560; Ord. No.
1161 §26.10, 10-16-1984]
Pollution of streams and other bodies of water shall be subject to such
requirements and regulations established by the State of Missouri,
Department of Natural Resources (Water Quality Standard - 10 CSR 20 -
7.031) and the City of O'Fallon.
Section 400.563. Enforcement. [R.O. 2007 §400.563; Ord. No. 3190
§2, 1-17-1995]
It shall be the responsibility of the Planning and Zoning Commission to
review the site plans for a development to assure all Performance Standards
will be addressed. If questions should arise about the compliance with the
standard, they will be forwarded to the City Council for its review.
Section
400.555
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.563
100:726
ARTICLE XIV
Site Plan Review
Section 400.565. Purpose. [R.O. 2007 §400.565; Ord. No. 1161
§27.01, 10-16-1984]
Section 400.570. Buildings, Structures and Uses Requiring Site
Plan Approval. [R.O. 2007 §400.570; Ord. No. 1161 §27.02,
10-16-1984; Ord. No. 3930 §1, 8-9-1999]
Section 400.575. Application and Fee. [R.O. 2007 §400.575; Ord.
No. 1161 §27.03, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 6171 §3, 1-14-2016]
A. It is recognized by this Chapter that there is a value to the public in
establishing safe and convenient traffic movement to higher density
sites, both within the site and in relation to access streets; that there is
value in encouraging a harmonious relationship of buildings and uses
both within a site and in relation to adjacent uses; further that there are
benefits to the public in conserving natural resources. Toward this end,
this Chapter requires Site Plan review and approval by the Commission
for certain buildings and structures that can be expected to have a
significant impact on natural resources, traffic patterns, adjacent land
usage, and the character of future urban development.
B. The Site Plan is intended to demonstrate to the Planning and Zoning
Commission the character and objectives of the proposed development
in adequate detail for the Commission to evaluate the effect the
proposed development would have on the community, and determine
what provisions, if any, should be included as part of the plan and be
binding on the use and development of the property.
A. All development within the City of O'Fallon shall be required to receive
Site Plan approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to
the issuance of a building permit with the following exceptions:
1. Single-family homes;
2. Mobile homes; or
3. Multi-family structures containing four (4) or less dwelling units.
A. Any persons may file a request for a Site Plan review by the Commission
by filing with the Planning Division the completed application upon the
forms provided and payment of the review fee. As an integral part of
said application, the applicant shall file the Site Plan electronically.
B. Upon receipt of such Site Plan, other necessary data, and payment of
the required fee, the plan shall be forwarded to the Commission prior to
its next regularly scheduled meeting and the Commission shall
undertake a study of same and shall approve or deny the Site Plan.
Written notice will be sent to the applicant stating the time and place of
review of the Site Plan by the Commission.
Section
400.565
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.580
100:727
Section 400.580. Required Data For Site Plan. [R.O. 2007 §400.580;
Ord. No. 1161 §27.04, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 1653 §1, 12-1-1988;
Ord. No. 1710 §1, 6-2-1989; Ord. No. 1728 §1, 8-3-1989; Ord. No.
3931 §1, 8-9-1999; Ord. No. 5727 §10, 8-25-2011; Ord. No. 6171 §4,
1-14-2016]
A. Every Site Plan submitted to the Commission shall be in accordance
with the requirements of this Section. This checklist is a guide to the
generally required information on a Site Plan, but may not be inclusive
of all the information that may be required to meet City Code. Please
refer to Title IV: Land Use Chapter of the O'Fallon Municipal Code for
more specific and detailed requirements.
1. Provide a twenty four inch by thirty-six inch (24" x 36") Site Plan in
a PDF format designed by a qualified land planner, registered
professional architect, engineer or land surveyor, with their stamp,
signature, and address, that shall contain a complete set of
notations and descriptions that supply the City staff with all
relevant site information including but not limited to: Total site
area; site coverages; owner/developer; zoning, proposed use,
utilities provided, flood plain information; required calculations
(parking, landscape, etc.); and any additional information needed
to demonstrate compliance with all applicable codes,
requirements, and restrictions. Multiple drawings may be required
for clarity.
2. Provide a north arrow and a scale on each page of the submittal.
The scale shall be: One (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet through one
(1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet (no greater or less than
specified). Indicate on the plan.
3. Provide a site location map that shows site in relation with the
surrounding area.
4. Provide boundary dimensions, including, distances and bearings of
the subject property, correlated with the legal description of said
property.
5. Provide the name and address of property owner and developer.
6. Show natural features, such as trees, tree masses, streams, dry
river beds, rivers, lakes, ponds, wetlands, floodplains and
floodways, drains, topography (at least at five (5) foot intervals,
when terrain is irregular or drainage critical, contours will be at
two (2) foot intervals) and other similar features.
7. Show existing and proposed 100-year floodplain and floodway
boundaries (where applicable) and include a note stating whether
the site is within or outside the 100-year, floodplain and reference
the applicable FIRM map panel number and date. Where the
floodplain is proposed to be altered, the application must contain
approval from FEMA for the alteration.
Section
400.580
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.580
100:728
8. Delineate wetlands subject to United States Corp of Engineers
(COE) regulations. Appropriate documentation of coordination with
the COE shall be provided.
9. Show existing manmade features, such as buildings, structures,
easements, high tension towers, power lines, excavations, bridges,
culverts and drains. Also indicate any easements on site that these
items may be located within.
10. Identify adjacent properties, their existing uses and zoning, within
one hundred (100) yards.
11. Show the location of proposed structures, including fences, signs,
etc.
12. Show the proposed finished floor and grade line elevations.
13. Identify the size of proposed main and accessory buildings.
14. All site coverages, building, paving, and green space, shall be
shown as a percentage of the total area of the site and shall be
listed on the plans.
15. Indicate how storm water detention requirements will be
addressed.
16. Note and show setback requirements on the plan.
17. Note and show bufferyards and method(s) of screening on the plan,
where required.
18. Per Section 400.278, all HVAC and mechanical units on site shall be
properly screened as required by City Code. Rooftop units shall be
screened by a parapet wall that extends around the entire
perimeter of the building; the parapet shall have a minimum height
that is at least as tall as the tallest unit mounted on the roof; ground
mounted HVAC and mechanical units shall be screened by fencing,
vegetation, or some other means (approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission) that has a minimum height that is at least as
tall as the tallest unit being screened.
19. Identify any existing structures to remain on site and what their
uses will be.
20. Identify the height of all buildings and structures.
21. Provide colored building elevations of all four (4) sides of the
proposed building and indicate the types of building materials. If
these are not part of the second submittal this item may not be
placed on the agenda for the Planning and Zoning meeting.
22. Identify proposed streets, driveways, sidewalks and other vehicular
and pedestrian circulation features within and adjacent to the site,
include dimensions of circulation features.
Section
400.580
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.580
100:729
23. Label parking spaces required, showing all supporting calculations.
In addition, the site plan shall demonstrate, with appropriate labels
and markings, that all parking spaces and loading zones, especially
those designed for handicapped accessibility, are of sufficient width
and depth (including all adjacent lane stripping and ramp access
routes) to meet all zoning and ADA requirements.
24. Label loading/unloading spaces, showing all supporting
calculations. Show the location of service lanes and loading spaces,
and provide dimensions.
25. Identify all existing and proposed utilities, public and private, such
as water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electrical, gas, etc., and
indicate location and size. Conceptual approval for utilities outside
of City service shall be submitted.
26. Identify existing and proposed fire hydrants within three hundred
(300) feet of the property.
27. Provide lighting detail, including cut sheets, location, height of
freestanding poles and method of screening light source to keep
from overflow onto adjacent properties and rights-of-way.
28. Chapter 402 of the Zoning Code provides the requirements for
landscaping and screening on a developing site, using these
requirements, construct a detailed landscape plan, with a full
legend or key, that shows the location, number, and types, of plant
materials required based on linear street frontage, zoning district,
parking lot, and bufferyard landscape requirements. Supporting
calculations demonstrating compliance with these requirements
shall be included on the landscape plans.
29. Article III of Chapter 402 of the Municipal Code provides the
formula used to determine the number of trees that must be
maintained on site to comply with the Tree Preservation
Requirements. Using this formula, calculate the correct number of
trees preserved or the number of replacement trees to be planted
in order to meet the City standard, and show these calculations on
the plans. In addition, provide a map showing the location of the
trees to be removed and the trees to remain and include this with
the landscape plan.
30. Identify proposed alterations to the topography and natural
features of the site.
31. Identify the location and type of trash pick-up proposed. Provide a
detail of the proposed trash enclosure. The enclosure shall consist
of a 6-foot high solid wall with a sight proof vinyl gate consistent
with the architectural theme of the primary structure on site. The
enclosure shall also include a man door as a convenient way to
enter the enclosure without having to open the double gates.
Section
400.580
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.580
100:730
Section 400.585. Standards For Site Plan Review. [R.O. 2007
§400.585; Ord. No. 1161 §27.05, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 3190 §2,
1-17-1995]
32. Per Section 400.490, provide one (1) bicycle parking space for
every fifteen (15) automobile parking spaces, with a minimum of
four (4) per building. Bicycle parking shall be located in close
proximity to the building entrance in highly visible, well lighted
areas. Bicycle parking facilities shall be securely anchored to the
ground so that they cannot be easily removed and shall be of
sufficient strength to resist vandalism and theft. A detail of the rack
shall be provided with the plans.
33. All signage shall be approved through planning and development
via a separate permitting process.
34. Details for all proposed improvements shall be submitted with the
Site Plan.
35. Provide a traffic study if deemed necessary by the Traffic
Management Policy.
36. Demonstrate compliance with Article XIII of the Zoning Code,
Performance Standards.
37. Demonstrate conformance with the City's adopted Comprehensive
Plan.
38. A material and color sample board shall be presented by the
applicant and/or their authorized or designated representatives(s)
during the formal presentation of the Site Plan to the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The material and color sample board should
show all exterior materials, finishes, treatments, and colors (keyed
to the colored building elevations). For materials such as roof tile,
decorative tile and trim, photographs or manufacturer's
specification sheet of the material clearly showing the textures,
colors, etc., may be presented in place of the actual material
samples.
39. Any other information deemed necessary by the Planning and
Zoning Commission; or any additional information deemed
necessary by the Director of Planning and Development to
adequately illustrate the proposed development shall be provided.
A. In reviewing the Site Plan, the Commission shall ascertain whether it is
consistent with all regulations of the Zoning Code. Further, in
consideration of each Site Plan, the Commission shall endeavor to
assure the following:
1. That the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the
site and in relation to access streets shall be safe and convenient.
Section
400.580
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.585
100:731
Section 400.590. Approval of Site Plan. [R.O. 2007 §400.590; Ord.
No. 1161 §27.06, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 6171 §5, 1-14-2016]
Upon Commission approval of a Site Plan, an approval letter, certifying the
Site Plan conforms to the provisions of the Zoning Code as determined
and approved by the Commission, shall be forwarded to the applicant(s).
The approval letter shall also be forwarded to the Building Division, Public
Works Department and City Clerk as applicable. If the Site Plan is denied by
the Commission, explanation and notification of denial shall be given to the
applicant(s).
Section 400.592. Effect of Denial of A Site Plan. [R.O. 2007
§400.592; Ord. No. 4055 §3, 5-17-2000; Ord. No. 6171 §6, 1-14-2016
No application which has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be
resubmitted for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of said order
of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors
found valid by the Director of Planning and Development.
Section 400.595. Expiration of Site Plan Approval. [R.O. 2007
§400.595; Ord. No. 1161 §27.07, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 6031 §1,
9-11-2014; Ord. No. 6171 §7, 1-14-2016]
The site plan approval shall expire, and be of no effect, one (1) year after
the date of issuance thereof, unless within such time construction plans or
building permits for any proposed work authorized under the said Site Plan
approval has been issued.
Section 400.600. Revision of Site Plan. [R.O. 2007 §400.600; Ord.
No. 1161 §27.08, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 6171 §8, 1-14-2016]
A Site Plan may be amended or revised by the Commission so far as the
Commission approved Site Plan is concerned. Such amendment shall be
made upon application and in accordance with the procedure provided
under Section 400.575 of this Chapter.
Section 400.605. (Reserved)99
2. That provisions are made so that the proposed development will
not be harmful to the existing and future uses in the immediate
area and the vicinity.
3. All site plans will be reviewed for adherence to the Performance
Standards as set forth in Article XIII of this Chapter.
99.Editor’s Note: Former Section 400.605, Site Plan Bond, enacted 10-16-1984 by §27.09 of
Ord. No. 1161, was repealed 1-14-2016 by §9 of Ord. No. 6171.
Section
400.585
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.610
100:732
Section 400.610. Violations. [R.O. 2007 §400.610; Ord. No. 1161
§27.10, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 6171 §10 , 1-14-2016]
The filing of a Site Plan shall constitute an agreement by the owner and
applicant, their heirs, successors, and assigns that if the Site Plan is
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission; permits issued for the
improvement of such property and activities subsequent thereto shall be in
conformance with the approved Site Plan for the property in question. The
approved Site Plan shall have the full force and effect of the Zoning Code.
Any violations shall be grounds for the Administrative Officer to issue stop
work orders, withhold further permits, and take all actions necessary for
the assessment of all penalties and fines as outlined in Article XV.
Section
400.610
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.610
100:733

ARTICLE XV
Administration and Enforcement
Section 400.615. Purpose. [R.O. 2007 §400.615; Ord. No. 1161
§28.01, 10-16-1984]
It is the purpose of this Article to provide the procedures for the
administration of this Chapter, issuance of permits, inspection of properties,
collection of fees, and enforcement against violators of the provisions of this
Chapter and amendment thereto.
Section 400.620. Administration. [R.O. 2007 §400.620; Ord. No.
1161 §28.02, 10-16-1984]
Section 400.625. Duties of The Code Enforcement Officer. [R.O.
2007 §400.625; Ord. No. 1161 §28.03, 10-16-1984]
A. Except where herein otherwise stated, the provisions of this Chapter
shall be administered by the Code Enforcement Officer, or by deputies
of his/her department as the Council may designate to enforce
provisions of this Chapter.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his/her authorized representative) is
hereby empowered in performance of its functions to enter upon any
land in the City for the purpose of making inspections, examinations,
and surveys, or to place and maintain thereon markers, notices, or signs
required to effect provisions of this Chapter. The above authorized
person shall be required to present proper credentials upon demand
when entering upon any land or structure for the purpose of this
Section.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power to grant
Certificates of Zoning Compliance and to make inspections of buildings
or premises necessary to carry out his/her duties in the enforcement of
this Chapter.
B. It shall be improper for the Code Enforcement Officer to approve plans
or issue any permits or certificates for any excavation or construction
until he/she has inspected such plans in detail and found them to
conform with this Chapter, nor shall the Code Enforcement Officer vary
or change any terms of this Chapter.
C. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any of the provisions of
this Chapter are being violated, he/she shall notify in writing the person
responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation
and stating the action necessary to correct it. He/she shall order
discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal
of illegal buildings, structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal
work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this
Chapter to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions.
Section
400.615
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.630
100:735
Section 400.630. Certificates of Zoning Compliance. [R.O. 2007
§400.630; Ord. No. 1161 §28.04, 10-16-1984]
Section 400.635. Voiding of Certificate of Zoning Compliance. [R.O.
2007 §400.635; Ord. No. 1161 §28.05, 10-16-1984]
Any Certificate of Zoning Compliance granted under this Chapter shall
become null and void unless construction and/or use is commenced within
one hundred eighty (180) days and completed within three hundred sixty
(360) days of the date of issuance.
Section 400.640. Building Permits. [R.O. 2007 §400.640; Ord. No.
1161 §28.06, 10-16-1984]
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall require that all applications for
Certificates of Zoning Compliance shall be accompanied by plans and
specifications including a plot plan for the site in duplicate drawn to
scale. The Code Enforcement Officer shall retain the original copy for
his/her files.
B. The Certificate of Zoning Compliance signifies that, in the opinion of the
Code Enforcement Officer, the intended use, building, or structure
complies with all provisions of this Chapter. No Building Permit shall be
issued unless a Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued. It
shall be unlawful to change a type of use of land, to change the type of
use or occupancy of any building or structure, or to extend any use on
any lot on which there is a non-conforming use or structure, until a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued. Where a Building
Permit is required, application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance
shall accompany or precede the application for a Building Permit. In all
other cases in which a Building Permit is not required, the application
for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be made prior to the date
when a new or enlarged use of a building or lot or part thereof is
intended to begin.
C. Applications for Certificates of Zoning Compliance shall be made to the
Code Enforcement Officer.
D. Applications for Building Permits shall be made to the Building Official.
A. It shall be unlawful to commence or to proceed with the erection,
construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration, enlargement,
extension, razing, or moving of any building or structure or any portion
thereof without first having applied in writing to the Building Official
for a Building Permit to do so and a Building Permit has been granted
therefore. Primary responsibility for securing the necessary permits
shall be the property owner's. However, if the property owner should
contract part or all of the proposed work, it shall become the
responsibility of the person or firm hired to ensure that all required
permits and approvals have been secured prior to any work being
initiated.
Section
400.630
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.640
100:736
Section 400.645. Voiding of Building Permit. [R.O. 2007 §400.645;
Ord. No. 1161 §28.07, 10-16-1984]
A permit may be revoked by the Building Official at any time prior to the
completion of the building or structure for which the same was issued,
when it shall appear to him/her that there is departure from the plans,
specifications, or conditions as required under terms of the permit, that
the same was procured by false representation, or that any provisions of
this Chapter are being violated. Written notice of such revocation shall be
served upon the owner, his/her agent, or contractor, or upon any person
employed on the building or structure for which such permit was issued,
via a stop-work order, which shall be posted in a prominent location, and
thereafter no such construction shall proceed.
Section 400.650. Schedule of Fees, Costs and Expenses. [R.O. 2007
§400.650; Ord. No. 1161 §28.08, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 4931 §1,
12-14-2005]
B. Blank forms shall be provided by the Building Official for the use of
those applying for permits as provided in this Chapter. Any permits
issued by the Building Official shall be on standard forms for such
purpose and furnished by the City Council. There shall be a separate
permit for each building or structure to be constructed, altered, or
erected except for accessory buildings which may be included in the
permit for the principal building when construction is simultaneous.
C. Any Building Permit under which no construction work has commenced
within six (6) months after the date of issuance of said permit shall
expire by limitation. Any Building Permit issued shall become invalid if
the authorized work is not completed within nine (9) months after
issuance of permit. This applies to all new construction and any
improvements on existing structures. After the period of nine (9)
months has passed and the initial permit has been voided, the applicant
must reapply and fees will again be collected. Approved display homes
shall be excluded from this time requirement. The Building Official shall
have the authority to grant a time extension for permits if, in his/her
opinion, extenuating circumstances have led to justifiable delays.
A. The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, costs and expenses
for all matters pertaining to the Zoning Code. The schedule of fees,
costs and expenses shall be established as Appendix B of Title IV: Land
Use. The schedule of fees, costs and expenses shall be filed with the
City Clerk and posted in the office of the Community Development
Department. The schedule of fees, costs and expenses shall only be
amended by the City Council and shall not require a recommendation
from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
1. No final action shall be taken on any permit, site plan, planned unit
development final plan, variance request or appeal of an
Section
400.640
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.650
100:737
Section 400.655. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 6290 §1,
1-12-2017]
administrative decision that requires a straight application fee until
said fee has been paid in full.
2. Zoning district classification amendments, planned development
area plans, planned development final plans, mixed-use traditional
development district area plans, mixed-use traditional development
district final plans and conditional use permits which require that
the applicant pay: [Ord. No. 6171 §11, 1-14-2016]
a. An initial application fee;
b. The cost for the legal notice advertising the public hearings;
and
c. The cost for the notification of adjacent property owners must
pay the initial application fee before final action shall be taken.
If the application is tabled or withdrawn by either the
Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council at the
request of the applicant or for failure of the applicant and/or
their authorized or designated representative(s) to attend the
meeting, the applicant will be responsible for the cost of readvertising
the public hearing(s) and the re-notification of the
adjacent property owners. The applicant will subsequently be
billed for the cost of the legal notice(s) advertising the public
hearings and the cost for the notification of adjacent property
owners. Failure to pay for these costs within thirty (30) days
of being billed by the City will result in the issuance of a
summons by the Code Enforcement Division.
A. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of Sections 89.010 to 89.140, RSMo., or of any
ordinance or other regulation made under authority conferred hereby,
or in case of any violation of Sections 89.300 to 89.490, RSMo., or of
any ordinance or other regulation made under authority conferred
thereby, the proper local authorities of the municipality, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or
abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such building,
structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or
use in or about such premises. Such regulations shall be enforced by an
officer empowered to cause any building, structure, place or premises
to be inspected and examined and to order in writing the remedying of
any condition found to exist therein or thereat in violation of any
provision of the regulations made pursuant to the authority of Sections
89.010 to 89.140 and Sections 89.300 to 89.490, RSMo.
Section
400.650
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.655
100:738
Section 400.660. Compliance With Permits and Certificates. [R.O.
2007 §400.660; Ord. No. 1161 §28.10, 10-16-1984]
Building Permits or Certificates of Zoning Compliance issued on the basis
of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement,
and construction set forth in approved plans and applications, and no other
use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at
variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter,
and punishable as provided by Section 400.645, herein.
B. The owner or general agent of a building or premises where a violation
of any provision of said regulations has been committed or shall exist,
or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where
such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the owner, general
agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which
such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent,
architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes
part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or
premises in which any such violation shall exist shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation punishable as follows:
1. The maximum fine and court costs that can be imposed for such
violation shall be:
a. For the first violation within any 12-month period of time: two
hundred dollars ($200.00).
b. For the second violation within any 12-month period of time:
two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00).
c. For the third violation within any 12-month period of time:
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
d. For the fourth and any subsequent violation within any
12-month period of time: four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00).
2. Court costs shall be assessed against such person unless the court
finds that the defendant is indigent.
C. Any such person who having been served with an order to remove any
such violation shall fail to comply with such order within ten (10) days
after such service or shall continue to violate any provision of the
regulations made under authority of Sections 89.010 to 89.140, RSMo.,
in the respect named in such order shall also be subject to a civil
penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
Section
400.655
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.660
100:739

ARTICLE XVI
Amendment Procedure
Section 400.665. Zoning District Amendments and Text
Amendments. [R.O. 2007 §400.665; Ord. No. 1161 §29.01,
10-16-1984; Ord. No. 4931 §2, 12-14-2005; Ord. No. 5593 §1,
5-27-2010]
A. Text Amendments. A proposed amendment to the written text of the
City's Zoning Code, Subdivision and Land Development Code, signage
regulations or flood hazard prevention requirements shall be submitted
for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council. Said proposed text amendment shall only be submitted by the
Director of Planning and Development, the Mayor, any member of the
City Council, any member of the Planning and Zoning Commission or
other appointed official of the City. A text amendment proposed by any
citizen, organization or other governmental body must be sponsored by
the Mayor or a member of the City Council. Said proposed text
amendment shall not require the filing of an application per the
requirements of Section 400.670 of this Article, but shall be prepared in
a format that identifies the proposed new text to be added or amended
and/or the proposed text to be deleted. Said proposed text amendment
shall be subject to a public hearing before both the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council. The legal notice advertising the public
hearings shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section
400.685(A) of this Article.
B. Zoning District Classification Amendments (Zonings And Rezonings).
An application for an amendment, revision or change in the zoning
district classification on the City's Official Zoning Map may be filed in
the Community Development Department for consideration by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. Said application
may be filed by the owner(s) or their authorized or designated
representative(s) of the property proposed to be zoned/rezoned. For
City-initiated zonings/rezonings, said application may be filed by the
Director of Planning and Development, the Mayor, any member of the
City Council, any member of the Planning and Zoning Commission or
other appointed official of the City. All proposed zoning district
classification amendments shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for review and recommendation to the City Council. All
proposed zoning district classification amendments, including Cityinitiated
zonings/rezonings, shall be subject to the public hearing
notification and sign posting requirements established in Section
400.685 of this Article.
C. The Zoning Of Newly Annexed Territories. All new territories that are
not zoned to one (1) or more of the City's existing zoning district
classifications concurrent with their annexation into the City shall
retain their County zoning district classification until such time as the
Section
400.665
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.665
100:741
Section 400.670. Information Required in Amendment Procedure.
[R.O. 2007 §400.670; Ord. No. 1161 §29.02, 10-16-1984; Ord. No.
1710 §1, 6-2-1989; Ord. No. 4932 §5, 12-14-2005]
new territory is zoned to one (1) or more of the City's existing zoning
district classifications per the requirements of this Article.
D. Protest Of A Zoning District Classification Or Zoning Regulation
Amendment. In case a timely protest against a proposed zoning district
classification amendment or zoning regulation amendment is
presented, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of thirty
percent (30%) or more, either of the areas of the land (exclusive of
streets and alleys) included in such change or within an area
determined by lines drawn parallel to and one hundred eighty-five (185)
feet distant from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed,
said amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote
of two-thirds (2/3) of all of the members of the City Council. Protest
petitions must be filed with the City Clerk not later than 4:00 P.M. on
the seventh (7th) day following the date advertised for the start of the
public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission in the
notice required by Section 400.685 below.
E. Fees. The owner(s) or their authorized or designated representative(s)
of a property proposed to be zoned/rezoned per the requirements of
this Article shall pay the fees, costs and expenses established in
Appendix B "Schedule of Fees, Costs and Expenses", no part of which
shall be refundable to the petitioner(s).
F. Effect Of The Denial Of A Zoning/Rezoning. No application which has
been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period
of twelve (12) months from the date of said order of denial, except on
grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the
Director of Planning and Development.
A. The petitioner shall submit a detailed description of the property to the
Planning Department. When the petition involves a change in the
Zoning Map, the petitioner shall submit the following information.
1. A legal description of the property.
2. A scaled map of the property, correlated with the legal description,
and clearly showing the property's location.
3. The name and address of the petitioner.
4. The petitioner's interest in the property, and if the petitioner is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner(s).
5. Date of filing with the City Clerk.
6. Signature(s) of petitioner(s) and owner(s) certifying the accuracy of
the required information.
Section
400.665
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.670
100:742
Section 400.675. Processing Procedures For Zoning Amendments.
[R.O. 2007 §400.675; Ord. No. 1161 Art. 29, 10-16-1984]
Section 400.680. Findings of Fact Required. [R.O. 2007 §400.680;
Ord. No. 1161 §29.03, 10-16-1984]
7. The present and proposed zoning.
8. Reserved.
A. The review and determination procedures on an application for a
zoning amendment shall be as follows:
1. Application Submitted to Planning Department.
2. Planning and Zoning Commission:
Public Hearing No. 1
Recommendation for approval or disapproval
3. City Council:
Public Hearing No. 2
First Regular meeting—approval or disapproval
Second Regular meeting—zoning change if
approved or denied
A. In reviewing any petition for a Zoning Amendment, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall identify and evaluate all factors relevant to
the petition, and shall report its findings in full, along with its
recommendations for disposition of the petition, to the Council. The
facts to be considered by the Commission shall include but not be
limited to, the following:
1. Whether or not the requested zoning change is justified by a
change in conditions since the original ordinance was adopted or
be an error in the original ordinance.
2. The precedents, and the possible affects of such precedents, which
might likely result from approval or denial of the petition.
3. The ability of the City or other Government agencies to provide any
services, facilities, and/or programs that might be required if the
petition were approved.
4. Effect of approval of the petition on the condition and/or value of
property in the City or in adjacent civil divisions.
5. Effect of approval of the petition on adopted development policies
of the City and other Government units.
Section
400.670
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.680
100:743
Section 400.685. Public Hearing Notification and Sign Posting
Requirements. [R.O. 2007 §400.685; Ord. No. 1161 §29.04,
10-16-1984; Ord. No. 1527 §1, 11-5-1987; Ord. No. 4055 §4,
5-17-2000; Ord. No. 4932 §6, 12-14-2005: Ord. No. 5033 §3,
7-18-2006; Ord. No. 5400 §1, 12-11-2008; Ord. No. 5864 §2,
3-28-2013]
6. The zoning and land use recommended by the Comprehensive
Development Plan.
B. All findings of fact shall be made a part of the public records of the
meetings of the Commission and the Council. A petition shall not be
approved unless these and other identified facts be affirmatively
resolved in terms of the general health, safety, welfare, comfort, and
convenience of the citizens of the City.
A. Legal Notice Advertising The Public Hearing(s). Proposed Zoning
District Classification Amendments (Zonings/Rezonings), Revised
Planned Unit Development Area Plan applications, Planned
Development Area Plan applications, Planned Development Final Plan
applications, Mixed-Use Traditional Development District Area Plan
applications, Mixed-Use Traditional Development District Final Plan
applications, Conditional Use Permit applications and amendments to
the written text of the City's Zoning Code, Subdivision and Land
Development Code, Signage Regulations and Flood Hazard Prevention
Requirements will be subject to public hearings before both the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. Preliminary Plat
applications will be subject to a public hearing before the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The Planning and Development Department will
prepare the legal notice advertising the public hearing(s). The legal
notice shall be placed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the
public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission in a
newspaper of general circulation throughout the City. The legal notice
shall contain the date, time, place and nature of the public hearing(s).
The public hearing before the City Council (not applicable for
preliminary plat applications) will be scheduled for the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the City Council following the initial public
hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission.
B. Notification Of Adjacent Property Owners. The City will be responsible
for researching and notifying by mail all property owners of the public
hearing(s) whose property limits are within an area determined by lines
drawn parallel to and within a distance of three hundred (300) feet from
the site of proposed Zoning District Classification Amendments
(Zonings/Rezonings), Revised Planned Unit Development Area Plan
applications, Planned Development Area Plan applications, Planned
Development Final Plan applications, Mixed-Use Traditional
Development District Area Plan applications, Mixed-Use Traditional
Development District Final Plan applications, Conditional Use Permit
applications and Preliminary Plat applications. Notices shall be
Section
400.680
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.685
100:744
postmarked at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing before
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. Sign Posting Requirements. Upon filing an application requesting a
Zoning District Classification Amendment (Zonings/Rezonings),
approval of a Revised Planned Unit Development Area Plan, approval of
a Planned Development Area Plan, approval of a Planned Development
Final Plan, approval of a Mixed-Use Traditional Development District
Area Plan, approval of a Mixed-Use Traditional Development District
Final Plan, approval of a Conditional Use Permit or approval of a
Preliminary Plat, the Planning and Development Department shall,
within seven (7) days of the application filing deadline (5:00 P.M. the
following Friday), post a sign(s) at least six (6) square feet in size upon
the subject property advertising the public hearings before the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council (Note: Preliminary
Plats only require a Public Hearing before the Planning and Zoning
Commission).
1. (Reserved)
2. Required number of signs. One (1) sign will be placed along each
street that abuts the subject site. However, the Director of Planning
and Development shall have the discretion of waiving the
requirements for sign placement along multiple street frontages if
he/she determines that sign placement along the most heavily
traveled street frontage(s) will suffice. If the subject site has more
than three hundred (300) feet of frontage along any street, the
Director of Planning and Development shall have the discretion of
requiring the placement of additional signs. If the subject site does
not abut a street, the sign(s) will be placed on each side of any
contiguous land owned by the petitioner or owner(s) of the subject
site which does abut a street. If no such contiguous property is
owned by the applicant or owner(s) of the subject site, the sign(s)
will be placed in such location(s) as deemed appropriate by the
Director of Planning and Development to best inform the general
public of the public hearing(s). If the Director of Planning and
Development determines that there is no location where a sign
could be placed that would be visible to the general public, the
Director shall have the discretion of waiving the sign posting
requirements.
3. Sign placement. The required sign(s) will be posted in a
conspicuous location unobstructed to view from the street, and will
be placed no closer than ten (10) feet from any right-of-way line
and/or property line and no further than fifteen (15) feet back from
the right-of-way line and/or property line. The required sign(s) will
not be erected in the street right-of-way or in a manner that would
obstruct the vision of motorists or pedestrians per the sight
triangle requirements of Section 400.260(F) of the Zoning Code.
4. (Reserved)
Section
400.685
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.685
100:745
5. Sign removal. The required sign(s) will remain posted until final
action is taken on the proposed Zoning District Classification
Amendment, Revised Planned Unit Development Area Plan,
Planned Development Area Plan, Planned Development Final Plan,
Mixed-Use Traditional Development District Area Plan, Mixed-Use
Traditional Development District Final Plan, Preliminary Plat or
Conditional Use Permit. The Planning and Development
Department will remove all signs within seven (7) days of such final
action.
6. Failure to post signs. Failure to post sign(s) per the requirements of
this Section shall result in the postponement of the originally
scheduled public hearings and the applicant shall be responsible
for both the cost of readvertising the public hearings and the
renotification of the adjacent property owners.
Section
400.685
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.685
100:746
ARTICLE XVII
Board of Adjustment
Section 400.690. Establishment. [R.O. 2007 §400.690; Ord. No.
1162 §3, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 5727 §11, 8-25-2011]
Section 400.695. Membership. [R.O. 2007 §400.695; Ord. No. 1161
§30.02, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 1162 §§1—2, 10-16-1984; Ord. No.
5021 §1, 7-3-2006]
The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) regular members who shall
be residents of the City. The membership of the first Board of Adjustment
appointed shall serve respectively, one for one (1) year, one for two (2)
years, one for three (3) years, one for four (4) years and one for five
(5) years. Thereafter members shall be appointed for terms of five (5)
years each. Three (3) alternate members may be appointed to serve in the
absence of or the disqualification of the regular members. The alternate
members shall only vote when a regular member is unable to vote on any
matter before the Board, or when one (1) or more regular members are
absent from a meeting. All regular members and alternate members shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. All regular
members and alternate members shall be removable for cause by the City
Council upon written charges and after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term of any regular member or alternate member
whose term becomes vacant. The regular members and alternate members
of the Board of Adjustment shall elect its own Chairman who shall serve for
one (1) year, except that said Chairman may not be elected from among the
alternate members.
Section 400.700. Meeting and Voting. [R.O. 2007 §400.700; Ord.
No. 1161 §30.03, 10-16-1984]
The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions
of this Code. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call
of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board of Adjustment may
determine. Such Chairman, or, in his/her absence, the acting Chairman,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings
of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public. The Board of
Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all
of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board of Adjustment,
A. A Board of Adjustment is hereby established in accordance with
Chapter 89, RSMo., regarding the Zoning of Cities.
B. The Board of Adjustment as established herein is hereby designated
and appointed to serve as and perform all the duties and
responsibilities of the Board of Appeals as established in "Title V,
Building and Construction" as adopted by the City of O'Fallon.
Section
400.690
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.700
100:747
and shall be public record. All testimony, objections thereto, and rulings
thereon shall be taken down by a reporter employed by the Board of
Adjustment for that purpose.
Section 400.705. Powers and Duties. [R.O. 2007 §400.705; Ord. No.
1161 §30.04, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 1162 §5, 10-16-1984; Ord. No.
1337 §3, 6-5-1986; Ord. No. 5594 §§1—2, 5-27-2010]
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties.
1. Variances. To authorize in specific cases a variance from the
specific terms of these Regulations which will not be contrary to
the public interest and where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of these Regulations will, in an
individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, provided the spirit
of these Regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare
secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance shall not
permit any use not permitted by the zoning regulations in such
district.
a. The applicant must show that this property was acquired in
good faith and where by reason of exceptional narrowness,
shallowness or shape of this specific piece of property at the
time of the effective date (October 16, 1984) of the district
zoning regulations, or where by reason of exceptional
circumstances that the strict application of the terms of the
zoning regulations actually prohibit the practical use of his/her
property in the manner similar to that of other property in the
zoning district where it is located.
b. A request for a variance may be granted, upon a finding of the
Board of Adjustment that all of the following conditions have
been met. The Board of Adjustment shall make a determination
on each condition, and the finding shall be entered in the
record.
(1) The variance requested arises from such condition which
is unique to the property in question and which is not
ordinarily found in the same zone or district; and is not
created by an action or actions of the property owner or
applicant.
(2) The granting of the permit for the variance will not
adversely affect the rights of the adjacent property owners
or residents.
(3) The strict application of the provisions of the zoning
regulations of which the variance is requested will
constitute unnecessary hardship upon the property owner
represented in the application.
Section
400.700
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.705
100:748
(4) The variance desired will not adversely affect the public
health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity or
general welfare.
(5) The granting of the variance desired will not be opposed to
the general spirit and intent of the zoning regulations.
c. In granting a variance, the Board of Adjustment may impose
such conditions, safeguards and restrictions upon the premises
benefitted by the variance as may be necessary to reduce or
minimize any potentially injurious effect of such variance upon
other property in the neighborhood, and to carry out the
general purpose and intent of these Regulations.
2. Other matters. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made
by an administrative official in the enforcement of the provisions of
Chapter 400 of this Code and to hear and decide all matters
specifically referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under
this Code.
3. Conditions of determination. In exercising the foregoing powers
such Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of
this Chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirements, decision or determination as ought to be
made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Officer from
whom the appeal is taken. In considering all appeals under this
Chapter, the Board of Adjustment shall before making any findings
in a specific case, first determine that the proposed change will not
constitute a change in the District Map and will not impair an
adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or increase
the congestion in public streets, or increase the public danger of
fire and safety or materially diminish or impair established
property values within the surrounding area, or in any other
respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals and
welfare of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri. Every change granted or
denied by the Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by a
written finding of fact specifying the reason for granting or denying
the variation and said written report shall be filed in the office of
the Board within ten (10) days after the date of the action of the
Board of Adjustment.
4. A concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Adjustment
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in
favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to
pass under this Chapter, or to effect any variation in this Code.
5. (Reserved)
Section
400.705
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.710
100:749
Section 400.710. Application To Board of Adjustment. [R.O. 2007
§400.710; Ord. No. 1161 §30.05, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 1337 §§4, 6,
8, 6-5-1986; Ord. No. 5021 §2, 7-3-2006; Ord. No. 5594 §3,
5-27-2010; Ord. No. 5831 §6, 12-13-2012]
A. Appeals Of Administrative Decisions.
1. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any aggrieved
person as defined in Section 400.035 of this Code, by any
neighborhood organization as defined in Section 32.105, RSMo.,
representing such person, or by any officer, department, board or
bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Administrative
Officer.
2. An appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days of the date that the
decision appealed from was made by filing with the officer from
whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Adjustment a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. Such appeal shall
be in writing on forms provided by the Board of Adjustment; no
appeal shall be accepted unless it is accompanied by the
appropriate filing fee.
3. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit
to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after
the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause
immediate peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall
not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on
application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken
and on due cause shown.
B. Variances. A written application for variance, on forms provided by the
Board of Adjustment and the appropriate filing fee are required for
requesting a variance from the Board of Adjustment. In addition, each
applicant shall submit the following information or documentation at
the same time as the application is submitted:
1. The applicant shall submit a statement, in writing, justifying the
variance required; indicating specifically the enforcement
provisions of the zoning regulations from which the variance is
requested and outlining in detail the manner in which it is believed
that this application will meet each of the five (5) conditions as set
out in Section 400.705.
2. The applicant shall submit a sketch, in duplicate, drawn to scale
and showing the lot or lots included in the application; the
structures existing thereon; and the structures contemplated
necessitating the variance requested. All appropriate dimensions
Section
400.710
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.710
100:750
Section 400.715. Performance. [R.O. 2007 §400.715; Ord. No. 1161
§30.06, 10-16-1984]
Section 400.720. Appeal of Board of Adjustment Decision. [R.O.
2007 §400.720; Ord. No. 1161 §30.07, 10-16-1984]
and any other information which would be helpful to the Board of
Adjustment in consideration of the application shall be included.
3. Any other information or documentation requested by the Board of
Adjustment.
C. Public Meeting Notification. The Planning and Development
Department will be responsible for researching and notifying by mail all
property owners of the public meeting(s) whose boundary limits are
abutting (excluding right-of-way) to the property where the variance(s)
is being requested. Notices shall be postmarked at least seven (7) days
prior to the Board of Adjustment meeting. In addition, the Planning and
Development Department shall erect a sign, at least six (6) square feet
in size, on the property advertising a public notice at least seven (7)
days prior to the Board of Adjustment meeting.
A. In making any decision varying or modifying any provisions of the
zoning regulations or in granting an exception to the district
regulations, the Board of Adjustment shall impose such restrictions,
terms, time limitations, landscaping, screening, and other appropriate
safeguards as needed to protect adjoining property.
B. The Board of Adjustment may require a performance bond to guarantee
the installation of improvements such as parking lot surfacing,
landscaping, etc. The amount of the bond shall be based on a general
estimate of cost for the improvements as determined by the Board of
Adjustment, and shall be enforceable by or payable to the City Council
in this sum equal to the cost of constructing the required
improvements.
C. In lieu of the performance bond requirement, the Board of Adjustment
may specify a time limit for the completion of such required
improvements and in the event the improvements are not completed
within the specified time, the Board of Adjustment may declare the
granting of the application null and void after reconsideration.
A. Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of
the Board of Adjustment, any neighborhood organization as defined in
Section 32.105, RSMo., representing such person or persons or any
officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality, or any Officer,
department or Board of the municipality, may present to the Circuit
Court of the County a petition, duly verified setting forth that such
decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the
illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the Court within thirty (30)
Section
400.710
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.720
100:751
Section 400.722. Effect of Denial of An Application By The Board of
Adjustment. [R.O. 2007 §400.722; Ord. No. 4055 §5, 5-17-2000]
No application which has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be
resubmitted for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of said order
of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors
found valid by the Director of Community Development.
days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board of
Adjustment.
B. Upon the presentation of such petition, the Court may allow a writ of
certiorari directed to the Board of Adjustment to review such decision
of the Board of Adjustment and shall prescribe therein the time within
which a return thereto must be made and served upon the relator's
attorney, which shall not be less than ten (10) days and may be
extended by the Court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay
proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the Court may, on
application, on notice to the Board of Adjustment and on due cause
shown, grant a restraining order.
C. The Board shall not be required to return the original papers acted
upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies
thereof or of such portion thereof as may be called for by such writ. The
return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and
material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be
verified.
D. If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the Court that testimony is
necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take
additional evidence or appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may
direct and report the same to the Court with the findings of fact and
conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings
upon which the determination of the Court shall be made. The Court
may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision
brought up for review.
E. Costs shall not be allowed against the Board of Adjustment unless it
shall appear to the Court that it acted with gross negligence, or in bad
faith, or with malice in making the decision appealed from.
Section
400.720
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.722
100:752
ARTICLE XVIII
Regulations For Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
Section 400.800. Purpose. [R.O. 2007 §400.800; Ord. No. 4992 §1,
4-14-2006]
In recognition of the requirements of the Federal Telecommunications Act
of 1996, this Article is designed and intended to balance the interests of the
residents of O'Fallon, the wireless telecommunication service providers and
the wireless telecommunication service customers in the siting of wireless
telecommunication facilities within the City of O'Fallon while ensuring that
this objective is achieved in a manner that preserves the aesthetic character
of the City and is accomplished without posing a hazard to the health, safety
and public welfare of the residents of the City and adjacent communities.
Section 400.810. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §400.810; Ord. No. 4992
§1, 4-14-2006]
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this Article:
APPLICATION — A request submitted by an applicant to the City to
construct a new wireless support structure, for the substantial modification
of a wireless support structure, or for collocation of a wireless facility or
replacement of a wireless facility on an existing support structure.[Ord.
No. 6047 §1, 12-11-2014]
COLLOCATION — The act of installing an additional wireless
telecommunication antenna on an existing wireless telecommunication
support structure that has one (1) or more existing wireless
telecommunication antennas.
CONCEALED TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY — A wireless
telecommunication facility whereby the wireless telecommunication
antennas are completely concealed within or appear as a common
architectural feature of a building or structure. "Concealed
telecommunication facilities" include, but are not limited to, clock towers,
bell towers, church steeples, chimneys and rooftop religious symbols
whereby the wireless telecommunication antennas are completely internal
and completely concealed from view to a casual observer. This term shall
not include any utility pole.[Ord. No. 6047 §1, 12-11-2014]
DISGUISED ANTENNA TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY — A wireless
telecommunication facility whereby the wireless telecommunication
antennas are externally attached to an existing structure. "Disguised
antenna telecommunication facilities" include, but are not limited to, water
towers, clock towers, chimneys, smokestacks, building parapets, building
facades, building rooftops, bell towers, church steeples, billboards, sign
structures and observation towers whereby the wireless telecommunication
antennas are external to the structure, but are camouflaged, screened,
painted or otherwise obscured so as not to be easily identifiable to a casual
Section
400.800
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.810
100:753
observer. This term shall not include any utility pole.[Ord. No. 6047 §1,
12-11-2014]
FALL LINE — One (1) foot of setback for each foot of height of a wireless
telecommunication support structure plus ten (10) feet.
GUYED TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER — A wireless telecommunication
support structure that is not self-supporting and is instead supported by guy
wires and ground anchors and is used to support one (1) or more externallyvisible
wireless telecommunication antennas.
LATTICE TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER — A self-supporting wireless
telecommunication support structure constructed of vertical metal struts
and cross braces forming a triangular or square structure which often
tapers from the foundation to the top and is used to support one (1) or more
externally-visible wireless telecommunication antennas.
MONOPOLE TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER — A self-supporting, poletype
wireless telecommunication support structure used to support one
(1) or more externally-visible wireless telecommunication antennas. Note:
A monopole telecommunication tower whereby the wireless
telecommunication antennas are completely internal and completely
concealed from view is considered a stealth telecommunication tower.
MOUNTED ANTENNA TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY — A wireless
telecommunication facility whereby the wireless telecommunication
antennas are externally attached to an existing structure. Mounted antenna
telecommunication facilities include, but are not limited to, water towers,
clock towers, chimneys, smokestacks, building parapets, building facades,
building rooftops, bell towers, church steeples, billboards, sign structures
and observation towers whereby the wireless telecommunication antennas
are external to the structure, but are camouflaged, screened, painted or
otherwise obscured so as not to be easily identifiable to a casual observer.
REPLACEMENT — Removal of one (1) or more components of an existing
wireless telecommunications support structure and installation or
construction of new components of the same size, width, height and
proportions to those of the removed components such that the replacement
of the components does not increase the size, width, height and proportions
of the wireless telecommunications support structure.[Ord. No. 6047 §1,
12-11-2014]
STEALTH TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER — A self-supporting wireless
telecommunication support structure that has the false appearance of a
manmade or natural feature whereby the wireless telecommunication
antennas are completely internal and completely concealed from view.
Stealth telecommunication towers include, but are not limited to, poles,
artificial trees, flagpoles and light poles.
SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION — The collocation of antennas on an
existing wireless telecommunication support structure or replacement
which, as applied to the structure as it was originally constructed:[Ord. No.
6047 §1, 12-11-2014]
Section
400.810
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.810
100:754
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA — The physical device
through which electromagnetic wireless telecommunication signals
authorized by the Federal Communications Commission are transmitted
or received. Antennas used by amateur radio operators and satellite dish
receiving antennas permitted under Section 500.410 of the Municipal Code
are excluded from this definition.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT SHELTER OR CABINET
— The structure or cabinet in which the electronic receiving and relay
equipment and all related equipment such as cabling, back-up generators,
batteries, etc., for wireless telecommunication service is housed.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY — Any structure, facility or
location established for the purpose of providing wireless transmission
of voice, data, images or other information including, but not limited to,
cellular telephone service, personal telecommunications service and paging
service. A wireless telecommunication facility may include, but is not
limited to, the wireless telecommunication support structure, the wireless
telecommunication antenna, the wireless telecommunication equipment
Increases the existing vertical height of the structure by:
a. More than ten percent (10%); or
The height of one (1) additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet,
whichever is greater; or
b.
1.
Increases the existing vertical height of the structure or appurtenances
so that such height exceeds the maximum height for such structure
within the particular zoning district; or
2.
3. Increases the width of the structure; or
Involves adding exterior appurtenances to the body of wireless
telecommunications support structure when such exterior
appurtenances are prohibited in the zoning district; or
4.
Involves adding an appurtenance to the body of a wireless
telecommunications support structure that protrudes horizontally from
the edge of the wireless telecommunication support structure more
than twenty (20) feet or more than the width of the wireless support
structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater (except
where necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to
connect the antenna to the tower via cable); or
5.
Involves the installation of more than the standard number of new
outdoor equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed
four (4) new equipment cabinets; or
6.
Increases the square footage of the existing equipment compound by
more than one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet.
7.
Section
400.810
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.810
100:755
shelter or cabinet and all related equipment such as cabling, back-up
generators, batteries, etc.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE — The transmission and
reception of audio, video, data and other information by radio frequency,
electromagnetic waves, light or other non-wired electronic or
electromagnetic systems.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A structure
primarily designed to support wireless telecommunication antennas,
including, but not limited to, stealth telecommunication towers, monopole
telecommunication towers, lattice telecommunication towers, and guyed
telecommunication towers. This term shall not include any utility pole.
Note: Speculative wireless telecommunication support structures whereby
there is not at least one (1) wireless telecommunication service provider
identified for the proposed structure at the time of application shall be
prohibited.[Ord. No. 6047 §1, 12-11-2014]
Section 400.820. Review Process For Wireless Telecommunication
Facilities. [R.O. 2007 §400.820; Ord. No. 4992 §1, 4-14-2006; Ord.
No. 6047 §2, 12-11-2014]
A. Proposed Wireless Telecommunication Facilities Requiring A
Conditional Use Permit And Site Plan Review Approval.
1. Applicants for a wireless telecommunication facility that include a
proposed new or enlarged wireless telecommunication support
structure shall require a conditional use permit and site plan
review approval. A proposed wireless telecommunication facility
that includes a new wireless telecommunication support structure
that is within a one-mile radius of any existing wireless
telecommunication support structure(s) (regardless of political
jurisdiction) shall only be conditionally permitted if the applicant
states in its application that it conducted an analysis of available
collocation opportunities on existing wireless telecommunication
support structures within such radius and considered those if any
were available.
2. If substantial modifications are proposed for any existing wireless
telecommunication support structure which required a conditional
use permit to be constructed, such modifications shall require a
conditional use permit (or amended conditional use permit) and
site plan review approval.
B. Proposed Wireless Telecommunication Facilities Requiring Site Plan
Review Approval.
1. The following applications shall require site plan review and
approval:
a. A disguised telecommunication facility; and
b. A mounted antenna telecommunication facility; and
Section
400.810
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.820
100:756
Section 400.830. Wireless Telecommunication Facilities in
Residential Zoning Districts. [R.O. 2007 §400.830; Ord. No. 4992 §1,
4-14-2006; Ord. No. 6047 §3, 12-11-2014]
c. Substantial modifications to any concealed telecommunication
facility or disguised antenna telecommunication facility.
2. Because the above-mentioned types of proposed wireless
telecommunication facilities do not require the construction of a
new wireless telecommunication support structure, they shall not
require a conditional use permit.
C. Collocations And Replacements Not Deemed Substantial Modifications
Shall Require Administrative Site Plan Approval. Collocations and
replacements which do not constitute substantial modifications, as
defined and limited in this Article, shall require administrative site plan
approval and shall not require approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or a conditional use permit.
A. Conditionally Permitted Wireless Telecommunication Facilities.
1. Within the City's residential zoning districts ("R-1," "R-1A," "R-1B,"
"R-2," "R-3," "R-4," "R-5" and "TGD"), stealth telecommunication
towers shall be conditionally permitted at any non-residential site
that has a residential zoning district classification (such as
religious institutions, schools, fire stations, libraries, utility
substations, cemeteries, parks, golf courses, etc.). Stealth
telecommunication towers shall not exceed seventy-five (75) feet in
height, and all wireless telecommunication antennas must be
internal and completely concealed from view. Stealth
telecommunication towers must conform to the established
building setbacks for the zoning district in which they are situated
and shall be set back a minimum distance equal to the fall line from
the property line of any residentially zoned property or property
used for residential purposes or property used for public assembly,
such as churches, schools or fraternal organizations, etc.
2. Within the City's residential zoning districts ("R-1," "R-1A," "R-1B,"
"R-2," "R-3," "R-4," "R-5" and "TGD") and the residential areas
within the City's Mixed-Use Traditional Development District
(MUTDD), stealth telecommunication towers shall be conditionally
permitted within the common ground of a residential subdivision
with approval of the subdivision's homeowners' association. The
residential subdivision's homeowners' association must be under
the complete control of the residents of the subdivision.
(Homeowners' associations under full or partial control of
developers and/or home builders are not eligible). Stealth
telecommunication towers shall not exceed seventy-five (75) feet in
height, and all wireless telecommunication antennas must be
internal and completely concealed from view. Stealth
telecommunication towers within the common ground of a
Section
400.820
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.830
100:757
Section 400.840. Wireless Telecommunication Facilities in
Commercial, High-Tech, Mixed-Use, Agricultural and Parks and
Recreation Zoning Districts. [R.O. 2007 §400.840; Ord. No. 4992 §1,
4-14-2006; Ord. No. 6047 §4, 12-11-2014]
residential subdivision shall be set back a minimum distance equal
to the fall line from any residential structure and from such uses as
pools, picnic pavilions, sport courts, sport fields, playgrounds, etc.,
or property used for public assembly, such as churches, schools or
fraternal organizations, etc.
B. Permitted Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. Within the City's
residential zoning districts ("R-1," "R-1A," "R-1B," "R-2," "R-3," "R-4,"
"R-5" and "TGD"), the following types of proposed wireless
telecommunication facilities shall require site plan review approval and
shall meet the following requirements:
1. Concealed telecommunication facilities. Concealed
telecommunication facilities shall be permitted on any nonresidential
structure that is within a residential zoning district
(such as religious institutions, schools, fire stations, libraries,
utility substations, etc.). All wireless telecommunication antennas,
electronic receiving and relay equipment and related equipment,
such as cabling, back-up generators, batteries, etc., must be
completely internal and completely concealed from view to a casual
observer.
2. Disguised antenna telecommunication facilities. Disguised antenna
telecommunication facilities shall be permitted on any nonresidential
structure that is within a residential zoning district
(such as a water towers, billboards, religious institutions, schools,
fire stations, libraries, utility substations, etc.). Wireless
telecommunication antennas shall not extend greater than five (5)
feet beyond the edge of the structure to which they are attached.
The wireless telecommunication antennas shall be camouflaged,
screened, painted to match the existing structure or otherwise
obscured so as not to be easily identifiable to a casual observer.
A. Conditionally Permitted Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. Within
the City's commercial zoning districts ("C-O," "C-1," "C-2," "C-3" and
"SC-1"), the High-Tech Corridor District (HTCD), the Agricultural
Zoning District (AG), the Parks-Recreation Zoning District (P-R) and
non-residential sites within the City's Mixed-Use Traditional
Development District (MUTDD), stealth telecommunication towers and
monopole telecommunication towers shall be conditionally permitted
and shall meet the following requirements:
1. Stealth telecommunication towers. Stealth telecommunication
towers shall not exceed one hundred twenty-five (125) feet in
height, and all wireless telecommunication antennas must be
internal and completely concealed from view. Stealth
Section
400.830
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.840
100:758
telecommunication towers must conform to the established
building setbacks for the zoning district in which they are situated
and shall be set back a minimum distance equal to the fall line from
the property line of any residentially zoned property or property
used for residential purposes or property used for public assembly,
such as churches, schools or fraternal organizations, etc.
2. Monopole telecommunication towers. Monopole
telecommunication towers with externally visible wireless
telecommunication antennas shall not exceed one hundred twentyfive
(125) feet in height. Monopole telecommunication towers must
conform to the established building setbacks for the zoning district
in which they are situated and shall be set back a minimum
distance equal to the fall line from the property line of any
residentially zoned property or property used for residential
purposes or property used for public assembly, such as churches,
schools or fraternal organizations, etc.
B. Permitted Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. Within the City's
commercial zoning districts ("C-O," "C-1," "C-2," "C-3" and "SC-1"), the
High-Tech Corridor District (HTCD), the Agricultural Zoning District
(AG), the Parks-Recreation Zoning District (P-R) and the non-residential
sites within the City's Mixed-Use Traditional Development District
(MUTDD), the following types of proposed wireless telecommunication
facilities shall require site plan review approval and shall meet the
following requirements:
1. Concealed telecommunication facilities. Concealed
telecommunication facilities shall be permitted on any nonresidential
structure that is within the City's commercial zoning
districts ("C-O," "C-1," "C-2," "C-3" and "SC-1"), the High-Tech
Corridor District (HTCD), the Agricultural Zoning District (AG), the
Parks-Recreation Zoning District (P-R) and the non-residential sites
within the City's Mixed-Use Traditional Development District
(MUTDD). All wireless telecommunication antennas, electronic
receiving and relay equipment and related equipment, such as
cabling, back-up generators, batteries, etc., must be completely
internal and completely concealed from view to a casual observer.
2. Disguised antenna telecommunication facilities. Disguised antenna
telecommunication facilities shall be permitted on any nonresidential
structure that is within the City's commercial zoning
districts ("C-O," "C-1," "C-2," "C-3" and "SC-1"), the High-Tech
Corridor District (HTCD), the Agricultural Zoning District (AG), the
Parks-Recreation Zoning District (P-R) and the non-residential sites
within the City's Mixed-Use Traditional Development District
(MUTDD). Wireless telecommunication antennas shall not extend
greater than five (5) feet beyond the edge of the structure to which
they are attached. The wireless telecommunication antennas shall
be camouflaged, screened, painted to match the existing structure
Section
400.840
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.840
100:759
Section 400.850. Wireless Telecommunication Facilities in
Industrial Zoning Districts. [R.O. 2007 §400.850; Ord. No. 4992 §1,
4-14-2006; Ord. No. 6047 §5, 12-11-2014]
or otherwise obscured so as not to be easily identifiable to a casual
observer.
A. Conditional Permitted Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. Within
the City's industrial zoning districts ("I-1" and "I-2"), stealth
telecommunication towers, monopole telecommunication towers, guyed
telecommunication towers and lattice telecommunication towers shall
be conditionally permitted and shall meet the following requirements:
1. Stealth telecommunication towers. Stealth telecommunication
towers shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet in height, and
all wireless telecommunication antennas must be internal and
completely concealed from view. Stealth telecommunication towers
must conform to the established building setbacks for the zoning
district in which they are situated and shall be set back a minimum
distance equal to the fall line from the property line of any
residentially zoned property or property used for residential
purposes or property used for public assembly, such as churches,
schools or fraternal organizations, etc.
2. Monopole telecommunication towers. Monopole
telecommunication towers with externally visible wireless
telecommunication antennas shall not exceed one hundred fifty
(150) feet in height. Monopole telecommunication towers must
conform to the established building setbacks for the zoning district
in which they are situated and shall be set back a minimum
distance equal to the fall line from the property line of any
residentially zoned property or property used for residential
purposes or property used for public assembly, such as churches,
schools or fraternal organizations, etc.
3. Guyed telecommunication towers and lattice telecommunication
towers. Guyed telecommunication towers and lattice
telecommunication towers with externally visible wireless
telecommunication antennas shall not exceed one hundred fifty
(150) feet in height. Guyed telecommunication towers (including
the guy wires and ground anchors) and lattice telecommunication
towers must conform to the established building setbacks for the
zoning district in which they are situated and shall be set back a
minimum distance equal to the fall line from the property line of
any residentially zoned property or property used for residential
purposes or property used for public assembly, such as churches,
schools or fraternal organizations, etc.
B. Permitted Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. Within the City's
industrial zoning districts ("I-1" and "I-2"), the following types of
Section
400.840
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.850
100:760
Section 400.855. Collocations and Replacements Not Deemed
Substantial Modifications. [Ord. No. 6047 §6, 12-11-2014]
Collocations and replacements that are not deemed to be substantial
modifications shall be permitted in all zoning districts as long as such
collocations and replacements comply with the regulations pertaining to
such wireless telecommunication facilities or support structures within that
particular zoning district.
Section 400.860. Regulations Pertaining To Wireless
Telecommunication Facilities. [R.O. 2007 §400.860; Ord. No. 4992
§1, 4-14-2006; Ord. No. 6047 §7, 12-11-2014]
proposed wireless telecommunication facilities shall require site plan
review approval and shall meet the following requirements:
1. Concealed telecommunication facilities. Concealed
telecommunication facilities shall be permitted on any nonresidential
structure that is within the City's industrial zoning
districts ("I-1" and "I-2"). All wireless telecommunication antennas,
electronic receiving and relay equipment and related equipment,
such as cabling, back-up generators, batteries, etc., must be
completely internal and completely concealed from view to a casual
observer.
2. Disquised antenna telecommunication facilities. Disguised antenna
telecommunication facilities shall be permitted on any nonresidential
structure that is within the City's industrial zoning
districts ("I-1" and "I-2"). Wireless telecommunication antennas
shall not extend greater than five (5) feet beyond the edge of the
structure to which they are attached. The wireless
telecommunication antennas shall be camouflaged, screened,
painted to match the existing structure or otherwise obscured so as
not to be easily identifiable to a casual observer.
A. The following regulations pertain to all new wireless
telecommunication facilities proposed to be located within the City:
1. Right to modify regulations and/or impose additional requirements
and conditions. In granting site plan approval and/or a conditional
use permit for a proposed wireless telecommunication facility, the
Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council may impose
any additional requirements or conditions deemed necessary to
minimize any adverse effect of the proposed wireless
telecommunication facility on adjoining properties or the general
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City and
adjacent communities. In addition, in granting site plan approval
and/or a conditional use permit for a proposed wireless
telecommunication facility, the Planning and Zoning Commission
and/or City Council may modify any of the requirements of this
Article deemed to constitute an unnecessary hardship on the
Section
400.850
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.860
100:761
applicant without the need for a variance(s) through the City's
Board of Adjustment if it is determined that it shall not adversely
affect the general health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants
of the City and adjacent communities. By allowing the Planning
and Zoning Commission and/or City Council to modify any of the
requirements of this Article deemed to constitute an unnecessary
hardship on the applicant, this would no longer place the burden
upon the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council of
having to decide whether a proposed wireless telecommunication
facility should be approved contingent upon receiving a variance(s)
through the Board of Adjustment. This would also no longer place
the burden upon the Board of Adjustment of having to decide
whether or not to grant the requested variance(s) on a proposed
wireless telecommunication facility that it has limited familiarity
with that was approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and/or City Council contingent upon receiving the requested
variance(s).
2. Capacity of wireless telecommunication facilities. All new wireless
telecommunication support structures over fifty (50) feet in height
shall be designed to accommodate the maximum number of
wireless telecommunication antennas that is proportional to the
type and height of said wireless telecommunication support
structure as determined by the applicant's licensed engineer and
shall be attested to in his or her application.
3. Measurement of the height and distance requirements for wireless
telecommunication support structures. The height of a wireless
telecommunication support structure shall be measured from the
existing grade of the base of the wireless telecommunication
support structure to the top of the wireless telecommunication
support structure or, if higher, to the top of the highest wireless
telecommunication antenna mounted on said wireless
telecommunication support structure. The distance of a wireless
telecommunication support structure from another wireless
telecommunication support structure shall be measured from the
center of the bases of the wireless telecommunication support
structures. The distance of a wireless telecommunication support
structure from a residentially zoned property or property used for
residential purposes shall be measured from the center of the
wireless telecommunication support structure to the property line
of any residentially zoned property or property used for residential
purposes.
4. Design of wireless telecommunication facilities. Wireless
telecommunication facilities shall be constructed of non-reflective
materials and colors that match or blend with the surrounding
natural or built environment to minimize visibility. Unless
otherwise required, muted colors, earth tones and subdued hues
shall be used. Wireless telecommunication antennas that are
Section
400.860
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.860
100:762
external shall be camouflaged, screened, painted or otherwise
obscured so as not to be easily identifiable to a casual observer.
Rooftop-mounted antenna telecommunication facilities shall only
be erected on buildings and structures with a flat roof and shall
be set back from the edge of the building or structure no less
than one (1) foot for every one (1) foot of vertical height of the
wireless telecommunication antenna and shall be screened so as
not to be readily visible from surrounding properties. Stealth
telecommunication towers in the form of artificial trees must
resemble trees native to this region that hold their leaves or
needles during the winter, including, but not limited to, evergreens
such as pine and spruce trees. Stealth telecommunication towers
in the form of artificial trees shall be compatible in size and scale
with the surrounding natural environment, and all wireless
telecommunication antennas must be completely internal and
completely concealed from view.
5. Design of wireless telecommunication equipment shelters,
enclosures and cabinets. Equipment and other supplies in support
of wireless telecommunication facilities shall be stored inside a
wireless telecommunication equipment shelter, enclosure or
cabinet at least equal in height to the equipment to be stored within
said wireless telecommunication equipment shelter, enclosure or
cabinet. The equipment shelter, enclosure and cabinets and other
ground facilities shall be compatible in scale and integrated
architecturally with the design of surrounding buildings and the
surrounding natural or built environment. The Planning and Zoning
Commission and/or the City Council shall make reasonable
requirements and permit conditions with respect to the type,
design, size and appearance of all wireless telecommunication
equipment shelters, enclosures or cabinets and other ground
facilities. Wireless telecommunication equipment shelters,
enclosures or cabinets placed within underground vaults are
encouraged and may be required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and/or City Council. All wireless telecommunication
equipment shelters, enclosures and cabinets shall be located where
they will be least visible from surrounding properties. All wireless
telecommunication equipment shelters, enclosures and cabinets
must conform to the established building setbacks for the zoning
district in which they are situated. No equipment, including, but
not limited to GPS antennas, lights, cables or cable racks, etc., shall
extend above or be mounted on the outside of any equipment
shelter, enclosure or cabinet.
6. Landscaping and fencing. Wireless telecommunication equipment
shelters and cabinets and other ground facilities may be required
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council to be
enclosed with security fencing and/or sight-proof fencing.
Landscaping may be required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and/or City Council around the perimeter of the
Section
400.860
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.860
100:763
fencing to aid in the visual screening of the wireless
telecommunication equipment shelters, enclosures and cabinets.
A minimum six-foot tall security fence with an appropriate anticlimbing
device shall be placed around the perimeter of all lattice
towers and guyed towers (including the guy wires and anchors).
Landscaping at least equal in height to the security fencing may
be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City
Council around the perimeter of the security fencing of all lattice
towers and guyed towers. The Planning and Zoning Commission
and/or City Council may require fencing and/or landscaping around
the perimeter of stealth telecommunication towers and monopole
telecommunication towers if deemed necessary to visually screen
and/or provide security around the wireless telecommunication
support structures.
7. Lighting of wireless telecommunication support structures. Beacon
lights shall not be permitted on the top of wireless
telecommunication support structures except as required by the
Federal Aviation Administration. Ground-mounted lighting of
flagpoles in the form of stealth telecommunication towers shall be
required for all flags flown at night. Other forms of lighting may be
permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City
Council.
8. Access and parking. Paved access shall be provided to all wireless
telecommunication equipment shelters, enclosures and cabinets
and to all wireless telecommunication support structures. A
minimum of one (1) paved parking space may be required on site
for each two (2) wireless telecommunication service providers the
wireless telecommunication facility is designed to support.
9. Maintenance, construction and operation. Licensed maintenance
and construction personnel shall perform all maintenance and
construction of wireless telecommunication facilities. Wireless
telecommunication service providers shall at all times employ
ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use
nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause
damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. Operators shall install
and maintain wireless telecommunication facilities and equipment
in full compliance with the requirements of the National Electric
Safety Code and all Federal Communication Commission, State and
City regulations. All wireless telecommunication facilities shall at
all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and
repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or
property of any person. Wireless telecommunication facilities shall
be operated in a manner that will minimize noise impacts. All airconditioning
units and any other equipment that may emit noise
shall be enclosed or equipped with noise attenuation devices. Back-
Section
400.860
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.860
100:764
Section 400.870. Application Requirements For Wireless
Telecommunication Facilities. [R.O. 2007 §400.870; Ord. No. 4992
§1, 4-14-2006; Ord. No. 6047 §8, 12-11-2014]
up generators shall only be operated during periods of power
outages or for routine daytime testing.
10. Removal of abandoned wireless telecommunication facilities. Any
wireless telecommunication facility that is no longer in service for
any reason for six (6) consecutive months shall be deemed
abandoned and hazardous to the public health and safety. In the
case of multiple operators sharing use of a wireless
telecommunication facility, this provision shall not become effective
until all users cease operations. Determination of the date of
abandonment shall be made by the Director of Planning and
Development based upon documentation provided from the owner/
operator of the wireless telecommunication facility and/or the
Federal Communication Commission as to the date the said
wireless telecommunication facility ceased operation. Any wireless
telecommunication facility that is deemed abandoned shall be
removed at the owner/operator's expense and the site restored to a
natural state. The owner/operator shall be given ninety (90) days
from the date of abandonment to remove the wireless
telecommunication facility. If the owner/operator fails to remove
said wireless telecommunication facility within ninety (90) days
from the date of abandonment, the City shall cause the removal of
the wireless telecommunication facility and the restoration of the
site to its natural state, the cost of which shall be billed to the
owner/operator. In any legal action to recover any delinquent
payments, the City shall recover its costs and attorney fees.
11. Pre-existing wireless telecommunication support structures. An
inventory of all wireless telecommunication support structures that
exist within the City and within a one-mile radius of the City shall
be maintained by the Planning and Development Department.
Wireless telecommunication support structures that are not in
compliance with this Article that exist prior to the effective date of
this Article shall be considered a legal non-conforming use subject
to the provisions of Article VIII, Non-Conforming Uses; provided,
however, that collocation and replacements may be made to such
structure in accordance with this Article.
A. General Requirements.
1. Applicants for a wireless telecommunication facility that include a
proposed new or enlarged wireless telecommunication support
structure and substantial modifications to such structures shall
require a conditional use permit and site plan review approval.
a. In accordance with Section 400.820(A) of this Article, a
proposed wireless telecommunication facility that includes a
Section
400.860
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.870
100:765
new wireless telecommunication support structure that is
within a one-mile radius of any existing wireless
telecommunication support structure(s) (regardless of political
jurisdiction) shall only be conditionally permitted if the
applicant states in its application that it conducted an analysis
of available collocation opportunities on existing wireless
telecommunication support structures within such radius and
considered those if any were available.
b. Speculative wireless telecommunication support structures,
whereby there is not at least one (1) wireless
telecommunication service provider identified for the proposed
structure at the time of application for the conditional use
permit and site plan, shall be prohibited.
2. Applicants for the following shall require site plan approval:
a. A concealed telecommunication facility; and
b. A disguised antenna telecommunication facility; and
c. Substantial modifications to a concealed telecommunication
facility or disguised antenna telecommunication facility.
3. Applicants for collocations and replacements not deemed
substantial modifications shall require administrative site plan
approval. Neither review and approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission nor a conditional use permit are required.
4. Pre-application conference. Prior to the submittal of any of the
above-listed application(s), it is highly recommended that the
applicant request and attend a pre-application conference with the
staff of the City's Planning and Development Department. The
purpose of the pre-application conference is to:
a. Identify which type of a proposed wireless telecommunication
facility the applicant is requesting per the requirements of this
Article; and
b. Discuss the siting requirements, design requirements, building
and construction requirements, and application requirements
of this Article.
B. Application Requirements — Proposed Wireless Telecommunication
Facilities That Include A New Or Enlarged Wireless Telecommunication
Support Structure and Substantial Modifications To Such Structures.
Applicants for a proposed wireless telecommunications facility that
includes a new or enlarged wireless telecommunication support
structure and substantial modifications to such a structure shall require
both approval of a conditional use permit and a site plan submitted in
accordance with the following requirements:
Section
400.870
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.870
100:766
1. A completed conditional use permit application with all the
required accompanying information listed on the application
checklist. If the applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land
upon which the wireless telecommunication facility is proposed,
the applicant shall submit, as part of the application, a copy of the
lease or the written consent of the owner and the name, address,
and telephone number of the owner. Note: Conditional use permit
applications are subject to the public hearing notification and sign
posting requirements established in Section 400.685 of the Zoning
Code. The application shall be deemed complete unless the
Commission notifies the applicant of any deficiencies in writing
within thirty (30) days of the date of the submission of the
application.
2. For any wireless telecommunication facility that includes a new
wireless telecommunication support structure that is within a onemile
radius of any existing wireless telecommunication support
structure(s) (regardless of political jurisdiction), the applicant shall
state in its application that it conducted an analysis of available
collocation opportunities on existing wireless telecommunication
support structures within such radius and considered those if any
were available.
3. A completed site plan application with all the required
accompanying information listed on the application checklist. If the
applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the
wireless telecommunication facility is proposed, the applicant shall
submit, as part of the application, a copy of the lease or the written
consent of the owner and the name, address, and telephone
number of the owner. The application shall be deemed complete
unless the Commission notifies the applicant of any deficiencies in
writing within thirty (30) days of the date of the submission of the
application.
4. In addition to information required to be shown on the site plan per
Section 400.580 of the Zoning Code, the site plan, drawn to a scale
that is easily readable, shall clearly indicate:
a. The location of the proposed wireless telecommunication
facility;
b. The location and dimension of the proposed lease area;
c. A vertical profile sketch of the type, design and height of the
proposed new or enlarged wireless telecommunication support
structure or substantial modification that includes the type,
size, number, design and location of the wireless
telecommunication antenna to be installed on the wireless
telecommunication support structure;
d. Identification of the number of additional wireless
telecommunication antennas (collocation) that the
Section
400.870
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.870
100:767
telecommunication support structure has been designed to
accommodate;
e. The setback distances and required fall line distances from
adjacent residential property boundaries or property used for
public assembly, such as churches, schools or fraternal
organizations, etc.;
f. The proposed location, size and design of the applicant's
proposed wireless telecommunication equipment shelter,
enclosure or cabinet or substantial modifications thereto;
g. The proposed landscaping and fencing of both the
telecommunication support structure and the wireless
telecommunication equipment shelter, enclosure or cabinet;
and
h. The proposed access and parking for the wireless
telecommunication support structure and the wireless
telecommunication equipment shelter or cabinet.
5. Written, technical report from a licensed professional engineer that
the proposed wireless telecommunication facility meets the
standards set forth in Section 400.860 of this Article.
6. Color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the wireless
telecommunication facility with a photo-realistic representation of
the proposed wireless telecommunication support structure and
wireless telecommunication antennas as it/they would appear
viewed from all sides of the site. The color photo simulations shall
show the proposed wireless telecommunication facility and all
proposed landscaping, fencing and other methods of screening.
7. Material and color samples shall be provided of the proposed
wireless telecommunication support structure, wireless
telecommunication antennas and wireless telecommunication
equipment shelter, enclosure or cabinet at the meetings of the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
8. Time period for consideration of application. The Planning and
Zoning Commission and the City Council shall, within one hundred
twenty (120) calendar days following submission of an application
under this section or other time period mutually agreed upon by
the applicant and the City, review the application and make its final
decision to approve or deny the application and advise the
applicant in writing of its final decision. If no action is taken within
the required time period, the application shall be deemed
approved.
C. Application Requirements — Concealed Telecommunication Facilities
And Disguised Antenna Telecommunication Facilities And Substantial
Modifications To Such facilities. Applicants for a concealed
Section
400.870
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.870
100:768
telecommunication facility and a disguised antenna telecommunication
facility and substantial modifications to such facilities shall require
approval of a site plan review submitted in accordance with the
following requirements:
1. A completed site plan application with all the required
accompanying information listed on the application checklist. If the
applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the
wireless telecommunication facility is proposed, the applicant shall
submit, as part of the application, a copy of the lease or written
consent of the owner and the name, address, and telephone
number of the owner. The application shall be deemed complete
unless the Commission notifies the applicant of any deficiencies in
writing within thirty (30) days of the date of the submission of the
application.
2. In addition to Information required to be shown on the site plan per
Section 400.580 of the Zoning Code, the site plan shall clearly
indicate:
a. The type of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility;
b. The location and type of building or structure upon which or
within which the proposed wireless telecommunication
antenna is to be located;
c. The type, design, height, location and method of screening for
the proposed wireless telecommunication antenna;
d. The location and dimension of the proposed lease area;
e. Identification of the number of additional wireless
telecommunication antennas (collocation) that the wireless
telecommunication facility has been designed to accommodate
(if applicable);
f. The proposed location, size and design of the proposed
wireless telecommunication equipment shelter, enclosure or
cabinet;
g. The proposed landscaping and fencing of both the
telecommunication support structure (if applicable) and the
wireless telecommunication equipment shelter, enclosure and
cabinet; and
h. The proposed access and parking for the existing wireless
telecommunication support structure (if applicable) and the
wireless telecommunication equipment shelter, enclosure or
cabinet.
3. Written, technical report from a licensed professional engineer that
the proposed wireless telecommunication facility meets the
standards set forth in Section 400.860 of this Article.
Section
400.870
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.870
100:769
4. Color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the wireless
telecommunication facility with a photo-realistic representation as
it would appear viewed from all sides of the site. The color photo
simulations shall show the proposed wireless telecommunication
facility and all proposed landscaping, fencing and other methods of
screening.
5. Material and color samples shall be provided of the proposed
concealed telecommunication facility, wireless telecommunication
antennas and wireless telecommunication equipment shelter,
enclosure or cabinet at the meetings of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council.
6. Time period for consideration of application. The Planning and
Zoning Commission and the City Council shall, within one hundred
twenty (120) calendar days following submission of an application
under this section or other time period mutually agreed upon by
the applicant and the City, review the application and make its final
decision to approve or deny the application and advise the
applicant in writing of its final decision. If no action is taken within
the required time period, the application shall be deemed
approved.
D. Application Requirements - Proposed Collocation and Replacement Not
Deemed Substantial Modifications. Applicants for a proposed
collocation or replacement not deemed to be a substantial modification
shall require administrative approval of a site plan submitted in
accordance with the following requirements:
1. A completed site plan application with all the required
accompanying information listed on the application checklist. If the
applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the
wireless telecommunication facility is proposed, the applicant shall
submit, as part of the application, a copy of the lease or written
consent of the owner and the name, address, and telephone
number of the owner. The application shall be deemed complete
unless the Commission notifies the applicant of any deficiencies in
writing within fifteen (15) days of the date of the submission of the
application.
2. In addition to information required to be shown on the site plan per
Section 400.580 of the Zoning Code, the site plan shall clearly
indicate:
a. The type and placement of the collocation or replacement
proposed;
b. The location and type of building or structure upon which or
within which the proposed wireless telecommunication
antenna is to be located or replacement is to be made;
Section
400.870
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.870
100:770
c. The type, design, height and method of screening for the
proposed wireless telecommunication antenna or replacement
(in the case of a disguised telecommunication facility or
mounted telecommunication facility);
d. A vertical profile sketch of the type, design and height of the
existing wireless telecommunication support structure and the
type, size, design and location of the proposed wireless
telecommunication antenna to be installed or replacement to
be made to the existing wireless telecommunication support
structure;
e. The setback distances and required fall line distance from
adjacent residences or property used for public assembly, such
as churches, schools or fraternal organizations, etc.;
f. The location and dimension of the proposed lease area;
g. Identification of the number of additional wireless
telecommunication antennas (collocation) that the wireless
telecommunication facility has been designed to accommodate
(if applicable);
h. The location, size and design of the existing shelter or cabinet
or other ground facilities and the proposed location, size and
design of the proposed wireless telecommunication equipment
shelter or cabinet or ground facilities;
i. The proposed landscaping and fencing of both the
telecommunication support structure (if applicable) and the
wireless telecommunication equipment shelter;
j. The proposed access and parking for the existing wireless
telecommunication support structure (if applicable) and the
wireless telecommunication equipment shelter or cabinet; and
k. Any other information required for telecommunication
facilities and support structures within the particular zoning
district.
3. Written, technical report from a licensed professional engineer that
the proposed wireless telecommunication facility meets the
standards set forth in Section 400.860 of this Article.
4. Color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the wireless
telecommunication facility with a photo-realistic representation as
it would appear viewed from all sides of the site. The color photo
simulations shall show the proposed wireless telecommunication
facility and all proposed landscaping, fencing and other methods of
screening.
5. Material and color samples shall be provided of the proposed
disguised telecommunication facility, wireless telecommunication
Section
400.870
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.870
100:771
Section 400.875. Installation of Antenna on Certified Historic
Structure. [Ord. No. 6047 §9, 12-11-2014]
antennas and wireless telecommunication equipment shelter or
cabinet.
6. No administrative collocation or replacement shall result in an
increase of the structure itself or any appurtenance to a height
which exceeds the maximum height for such structure in the
particular zoning district.
7. No administrative collocation or replacement shall result in an
increase of the width of the structure.
8. No administrative collocation or replacement shall result in the
placement of exterior appurtenances on the structure where such
exterior appurtenances are prohibited within the zoning district.
9. The proposed collocation of additional wireless telecommunication
antennas on and replacement of components of a legal nonconforming
wireless telecommunication support structure shall
only require administrative site plan approval. In reviewing the site
plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission may impose any of the
requirements of this Article deemed necessary to minimize any
adverse effect of the wireless telecommunication facility on
adjoining properties or the general health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the City and adjacent communities.
10. Time period for consideration of application. The Department shall,
within forty-five (45) calendar days following submission of an
application under this section or other time period mutually agreed
upon by the applicant and the City, review the application and make
its final decision to approve or deny the application and advise the
applicant in writing of its final decision. If no action is taken within
the required time period, the application shall be deemed
approved.
A. General Requirements.
1. Applicants seeking to install an antenna and related equipment to a
certified historic structure as defined in Section 253.545 RSMo.
shall obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic
Preservation Commission and site plan review approval. All
applications under this section shall be the subject of at least one
(1) public hearing held by either the Historic Preservation
Commission or the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Pre-application conference. Prior to the submittal of an application
for installation of an antenna on a certified historic structure, it is
highly recommended that the applicant request and attend a preapplication
conference with the staff of the City's Planning and
Development Department and representatives of the City's Historic
Section
400.870
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.875
100:772
Preservation Commission. The purpose of the pre-application
conference is to:
a. Identify which type of a proposed wireless telecommunication
facility the applicant is requesting per the requirements of this
Article; and
b. Discuss the siting requirements, design requirements, building
and construction requirements, and application requirements
of this Article.
3. Certificate of appropriateness. Applicants shall submit an
application for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with
Section 120.460 of the Municipal Code. The application shall be
deemed complete unless the Commission notifies the applicant of
any deficiencies in writing within thirty (30) days of the date of the
submission of the application.
4. Site plan approval. The applicant shall submit a completed site plan
application with all the required accompanying information listed
on the application checklist. If the applicant is not the owner of the
parcel of land upon which the wireless telecommunication facility
is proposed, the applicant shall submit, as part of the application, a
copy of the lease or written consent of the owner and the name,
address, and telephone number of the owner. The application shall
be deemed complete unless the Commission notifies the applicant
of any deficiencies in writing within thirty (30) days of the date of
the submission of the application.
a. In addition to information required to be shown on the site plan
per Section 400.580 of the Zoning Code, the site plan shall
clearly indicate:
(1) The type and location of all proposed attachments and
components to be attached to or installed upon the
certified historic structure and the type and location of all
other equipment, ground facilities and cabinets proposed
to be constructed on the property;
(2) The type, design, height and method of screening for the
proposed wireless telecommunication antenna or
replacement;
(3) An architectural rendering of the certified historic
structure showing the facade and all architectural features
of the existing structure and the type, size, design, height,
and screening of the proposed antenna and other facilities
in relation to the facade and existing architectural
features;
(4) The setback distances and required fall line distance from
adjacent residences or property used for public assembly,
Section
400.875
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.875
100:773
such as churches, schools, or fraternal organizations, etc.
if applicable;
(5) The location and dimension of the proposed lease area;
(6) Identification of the number and location of additional
wireless telecommunication antennas currently located on
the certified historic structure (if applicable);
(7) The location, size and design of any existing shelter or
cabinet or other ground facilities and the proposed
location, size and design of the proposed wireless
telecommunication equipment shelter or cabinet or
ground facilities;
(8) The proposed landscaping and fencing of the wireless
telecommunication equipment shelter; and
(9) The proposed access and parking for the wireless
telecommunication equipment shelter or cabinet.
b. Written, technical report from a licensed professional engineer
that the proposed wireless telecommunication facility meets
the standards set forth in Section 400.860 of this Article.
c. Color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the
wireless telecommunication facility with a photo-realistic
representation as it would appear viewed from all sides of site.
The color photo simulations shall show the proposed wireless
telecommunication facility and all proposed landscaping,
fencing and other methods of screening.
d. Material and color samples shall be provided of the proposed
disguised telecommunication facility, wireless
telecommunication antennas and wireless telecommunication
equipment shelter or cabinet.
5. Public hearing. All applications submitted under this Section shall
be subject to the public hearing notification and sign posting
requirements established in Section 400.685 of the Zoning Code.
B. Time Period For Consideration Of Application. The Historic
Preservation Commission and the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall, within one hundred fifty (150) calendar days following submission
of an application under this section or other time period mutually
agreed upon by the applicant and the City, review the application and
make its final decision to approve or deny the application and advise the
applicant in writing of its final decision. If no action is taken within the
required time period, the application shall be deemed approved.
Section
400.875
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.875
100:774
ARTICLE XIX
Utility Facilities Permits and Regulations
Section 400.880. Facilities Permits. [Ord. No. 5356 §1(B),
8-14-2008]
A. Any person desiring to place facilities on private property must first
apply for and obtain a facilities permit, in addition to any other permit,
license, easement, franchise or authorization required by law. The
Planning Director may design and make available standard forms for
such applications, requiring such information as allowed by law and as
the Planning Director determines in his or her discretion to be
necessary and consistent with the provisions of this Article and to
accomplish the purposes of this Article. Each application shall at
minimum contain the following information, unless otherwise waived by
the Planning Director:
1. The name of the person on whose behalf the facilities are to be
installed and the name, address and telephone number of a
representative whom the City may notify or contact at any time
(i.e., twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week)
concerning the facilities;
2. A description of the proposed work, including a site plan and such
plans or technical drawings or depictions showing the nature,
dimensions and description of the facilities, their location
(including an identification of the interest of the applicant or the
facilities owner in the property where the facilities are proposed to
be located) and their proximity to other facilities that may be
affected by their installation.
B. Each such application shall be accompanied by an application fee in the
sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) or such other amount as may
be approved by the City to cover the cost of processing the application.
C. Application Review And Determination.
1. On receipt of an application for a new or expanded facilities
installation, the Planning Director shall provide written notice of
the proposed work and location to the owner of the property on
which the new or expanded facilities are proposed and to the
owners of all adjoining properties. The Planning Director shall
promptly review each application and shall grant or deny the
application within thirty-one (31) days.
2. Unless the application is denied pursuant to Subparagraph (5)
hereof, the Planning Director shall issue a facilities permit upon
determining that the applicant:
a. Has submitted all necessary information,
b. Has paid the appropriate fees, and
Section
400.880
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.880
100:775
c. Is in full compliance with this Article and all other City
ordinances.
The Planning Director may establish procedures for
bulk processing of applications and periodic payment
of fees to avoid excessive processing and accounting
costs.
3. It is the intention of the City that proposed facilities will not impair
public safety, harm property values or significant sight lines or
degrade the aesthetics of the adjoining properties or neighborhood
and that the placement and appearance of facilities on private
property should be minimized and limited in scope to the extent
allowed by law to achieve the purposes of this Section. To
accomplish such purposes the Planning Director may impose
conditions on facilities permits, including alternative landscaping,
designs or locations, provided that such conditions are reasonable
and necessary, shall not result in a decline of service quality and
are competitively neutral and non-discriminatory.
4. An applicant receiving a facilities permit shall promptly notify the
Planning Director of any material changes in the information
submitted in the application or included in the permit. The
Planning Director may issue a revised facilities permit or require
that the applicant reapply for a facilities permit.
5. The Planning Director may deny an application, if denial is deemed
to be in the public interest, for the following reasons:
a. Delinquent fees, costs or expenses owed by the applicant;
b. Failure to provide required information;
c. The applicant being in violation of the provisions of this Article
or other City ordinances;
d. For reasons of environmental, historic or cultural sensitivity as
defined by applicable Federal, State or local law;
e. For the applicant's refusal to comply with reasonable
conditions required by the Planning Director; and
f. For any other reason to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, provided that such denial does not fall within the
exclusive authority of the Missouri Public Service Commission
and is imposed on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory
basis.
D. Permit Revocation And Ordinance Violations.
1. The Planning Director may revoke a facilities permit without fee
refund after notice and an opportunity to cure, but only in the event
of a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of the permit or
Section
400.880
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.880
100:776
this Article. Prior to revocation the Planning Director shall provide
written notice to the responsible person identifying any substantial
breach and allowing a reasonable period of time not longer than
thirty (30) days to cure the problem, which cure period may be
immediate if certain activities must be stopped to protect the public
safety. The cure period shall be extended by the Planning Director
on good cause shown. A substantial breach includes, but is not
limited to, the following:
a. A material violation of the facilities permit or this Article;
b. An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the
permit or this Article or the perpetration or attempt to
perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the City or its residents;
c. A material misrepresentation of fact in the permit application;
d. A failure to complete facilities installation by the date specified
in the permit, unless an extension is obtained or unless the
failure to complete the work is due to reasons beyond the
applicant's control; and
e. A failure to correct, upon reasonable notice and opportunity to
cure as specified by the Planning Director, work that does not
conform to applicable national safety ordinances, industry
construction standards or the City's pertinent and applicable
ordinances including, but not limited to, this Article, provided
that City standards are no more stringent than those of a
national safety ordinance.
2. Any breach of the terms and conditions of a facilities permit shall
also be deemed a violation of this Article and in lieu of revocation
the Planning Director may initiate prosecution of the applicant or
the facilities owner for such violation.
E. Appeals And Alternative Dispute Resolution.
1. Any person aggrieved by a final determination of the Planning
Director may appeal in writing to the Managing Director of
Community Development within five (5) business days thereof. The
appeal shall assert specific grounds for review and the Managing
Director shall render a decision on the appeal within fifteen (15)
business days of its receipt affirming, reversing or modifying the
determination of the Planning Director. The Managing Director
may extend this time period for the purpose of any investigation or
hearing deemed necessary. A decision affirming the Planning
Director's determination shall be in writing and supported by
findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision. Any
person aggrieved by the final determination of the Managing
Director may file a petition for review pursuant to Chapter 536,
RSMo., as amended, in the Circuit Court of the County of St. Louis.
Section
400.880
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.880
100:777
Section 400.890. Facilities Regulations. [Ord. No. 5356 §1(B),
8-14-2008]
Such petition shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the
Managing Director's final determination.
2. On agreement of the parties and in addition to any other remedies,
any final decision of the Managing Director may be submitted to
mediation or binding arbitration.
a. In the event of mediation, the Managing Director and the
applicant shall agree to a mediator.
The costs and fees of the mediator shall be borne equally by the
parties and each party shall pay its own costs, disbursements
and attorney fees.
b. In the event of arbitration, the Managing Director and the
applicant shall agree to a single arbitrator. The costs and fees
of the arbitrator shall be borne equally by the parties. If the
parties cannot agree on an arbitrator, the matter shall be
resolved by a three (3) person arbitration panel consisting of
one (1) arbitrator selected by the Managing Director, one (1)
arbitrator selected by the applicant or facilities owner and one
(1) person selected by the other two (2) arbitrators, in which
case each party shall bear the expense of its own arbitrator and
shall jointly and equally bear with the other party the expense
of the third (3rd) arbitrator and of the arbitration. Each party
shall also pay its own costs, disbursements and attorney fees.
A. The following general regulations apply to the placement and
appearance of facilities:
1. Facilities shall be placed underground, except when other similar
facilities exist above ground or when conditions are such that
underground construction is impossible, impractical or
economically unfeasible, as determined by the City, and when in the
City's judgment the above ground construction has minimal
aesthetic impact on the area where the construction is proposed.
Facilities shall not be located so as to interfere, or be likely to
interfere, with any public facilities or use of public property.
2. Facilities shall be located in such a manner as to reduce or
eliminate their visibility. Non-residential zoning districts are
preferred to residential zoning districts. Preferred locations in
order of priority in both type districts are:
a. Thoroughfare landscape easements,
b. Rear yards, and
Section
400.880
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.890
100:778
c. Street side yards on a corner lot behind the front yard setback.
Placements within side yards not bordered by a street or within
front yards are discouraged.
3. Facilities shall be a neutral color and shall not be bright, reflective
or metallic. Black, gray and tan shall be considered neutral colors,
as shall any color that blends with the surrounding dominant color
and helps to camouflage the facilities. Sightproof screening,
landscape or otherwise, may be required for facilities taller than
three (3) feet in height or covering in excess of four (4) square feet
in size. Such screening shall be sufficient to reasonably conceal the
facility. A landscape plan identifying the size and species of
landscaping materials shall be approved by the Planning Director
prior to installation of any facility requiring landscape screening.
The person responsible for the facilities shall be responsible for the
installation, repair or replacement of screening materials.
Alternative concealment may be approved by the Planning Director
to the extent it meets or exceeds the purposes of these
requirements.
4. Facilities shall be constructed and maintained in a safe manner and
so as to not emit any unnecessary or intrusive noise and in
accordance with all applicable provisions of the Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1970, the National Electrical Safety Code
and all other applicable Federal, State or local laws and
regulations.
5. No person shall place or cause to be placed any sort of signs,
advertisements or other extraneous markings on the facilities,
except such necessary minimal markings approved by the City as
necessary to identify the facilities for service, repair, maintenance
or emergency purposes or as may be otherwise required to be
affixed by applicable law or regulation.
6. If the application of this Subsection excludes locations for facilities
to the extent that the exclusion conflicts with the reasonable
requirements of the applicant, the Planning Director shall
cooperate in good faith with the applicant to attempt to find
suitable alternatives, but the City shall not be required to incur any
financial cost or to acquire new locations for the applicant.
B. Any person installing, repairing, maintaining, removing or operating
facilities, and the person on whose behalf the work is being done, shall
protect from damage any and all existing structures and property
belonging to the City and any other person. Any and all rights-of-way,
public property or private property disturbed or damaged during the
work shall be repaired or replaced and the responsible person shall
immediately notify the owner of the fact of the damaged property. Such
repair or replacement shall be completed within a reasonable time
specified by the Planning Director and to the Planning Director's
satisfaction.
Section
400.890
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.890
100:779
C. The applicant shall provide written notice to the owner of the property
on which the new or expanded facilities are to be installed and to the
owners of all adjoining properties at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to
the date of any installation, replacement or expansion of its facilities.
Notice shall include a reasonably detailed description of work to be
done, the location of work and the time and duration of the work.
D. At the City's direction, a person owning or controlling facilities shall
protect, support, disconnect, relocate or remove facilities, at its own
cost and expense, when necessary to accommodate the construction,
improvement, expansion, relocation or maintenance of streets or other
public works or to protect the ROW or the public health, safety or
welfare.
E. If a person installs facilities without having complied with the
requirements of this Article or abandons the facilities, said person shall
remove the facilities and if the person fails to remove the facilities
within a reasonable period of time, the City may, to the extent permitted
by law, have the removal done at the person's expense.
F. Facilities shall be subject to all other applicable regulations and
standards as established as part of the City Code including, but not
limited to, Building Codes, Zoning Requirements and the Rights-of-Way
Usage Code in addition to the regulations provided herein.
Section
400.890
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.890
100:780
ARTICLE XX
Renewable Energy
Section 400.900. Purpose. [Ord. No. 5763 §1, 1-26-2012]
The purpose of this Article is to balance the need for clean, renewable
energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety
and welfare of the community. The City of O'Fallon finds these regulations
are necessary to ensure that renewable energy systems are appropriately
designed, sited, and installed.
Section 400.910. Definitions. [Ord. No. 5763 §1, 1-26-2012]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
ARRAY — A number of solar panels or modules connected together in a
single structure. One (1) installation can have more than one (1) array.
BLADES — The aerodynamic surface of a wind energy system that catches
the wind.
BRAKING — A method of overspeed control that utilizes a brake, which
is applied mechanically, electrically, or hydraulically, to stop the rotor of a
wind energy system in emergencies.
BUILDING-INTEGRATED PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM (BIPV) — Photovoltaic
system used to replace traditional building materials in part of a building
envelope, like awnings, roofs, facades, and sunrooms. PV shingle or tiles,
PV laminates, and PV glazing are all examples of BIPV.
BUILDING-MOUNTED SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A small wind
energy system affixed to either a principal or accessory structure.
BUILDING-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system
affixed to either a principal or accessory structure.
DECORATIVE WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A freestanding small wind energy
system intended primarily for aesthetics. Small yard windmills or wind
systems not exceeding fifteen (15) feet in height are considered decorative
wind energy systems.
GEOTHERMAL OR GROUND-SOURCE HEAT-PUMP SYSTEM — A system
for heating and/or cooling buildings using the earth's thermal properties in
conjunction with electricity. This system may include open and closed loop
systems.
GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system
that is not attached to another structure and is affixed to the ground.
MONOPOLE TOWER — A wind energy system tower consisting of a single
pole, constructed without guyed wires and anchors.
PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) SYSTEM — A solar energy system that converts
sunlight into electrical energy.
Section
400.900
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.910
100:781
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS — Geothermal or ground-source heatpump,
solar energy, and small wind energy systems used to reduce on-site
energy consumption.
ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system
affixed to the roof of either a principal or accessory structure.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — Any apparatus or equipment designed
for the purpose of converting wind energy into electrical energy to reduce
on-site consumption of utility power. This includes vertical-axis and
horizontal-axis systems mounted on a building or a freestanding tower over
fifteen (15) feet in height.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — Any apparatus or equipment designed for
the purpose of collecting and transforming solar energy into thermal or
electricity energy. Solar energy systems may include photovoltaic or solarthermal
systems.
SOLAR THERMAL SYSTEM — A solar energy system that uses sunlight to
produce heat that is used for water heating or space heating or cooling.
TOWER — The vertical component of a wind energy system that elevates
the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the ground.
Section 400.920. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 5763 §1, 1-26-2012]
A. Accessory Uses. Renewable energy systems intended primarily to offset
part or all of the customer-generator's own electrical energy
requirements shall be an accessory use subject to the provisions of this
Article. All other renewable energy systems are considered a principal
use.
B. Lot Location. All renewable energy systems shall be located on the
same lot as the principal use.
C. Building Permit. It shall be unlawful for any renewable energy system
to be constructed, erected, and/or installed without a building permit.
Renewable energy systems shall comply with all applicable Building,
Mechanical, Plumbing, and Electrical Codes adopted by or applicable to
the City of O'Fallon. A building permit fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00)
for systems installed on residential property and one hundred dollars
($100.00) for commercial or industrial properties.
D. Approval By Planning And Development Department. Geothermal
energy systems and roof-mounted solar energy systems may be
approved by the Planning and Development Department in accordance
with this Article by the issuance of a building permit. Ground-mounted
solar energy systems constructed or installed to serve a single-family
home, mobile home, and multi-family structure containing four (4) or
less dwelling units may also be approved by the Planning and
Development Department.
E. Conditional Use Permit. The issuance of a conditional use permit is
required for any small wind energy system or renewable energy system
Section
400.910
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.920
100:782
Section 400.930. Solar Energy Systems. [Ord. No. 5763 §1,
1-26-2012]
not intended primarily to offset part or all of the customer-generator's
own electrical energy requirements.
F. Site Plan Approval. Site plan approval is required for all small wind
energy system towers, ground-mounted solar energy systems not
subject to approval by the Planning and Development Department as
provided above, and renewable energy systems not intended primarily
to offset part or all of the customer-generator's own electrical energy
requirements.
G. Federal And State Compliance. All renewable energy systems shall
meet or exceed State and Federal standards and regulations in force at
the time of installation.
A. General Requirements. The provisions of this Section apply to the
construction and/or installation of all solar energy systems:
1. Glare. All facilities shall comply with the performance standards set
forth in Section 400.550 of this Code of Ordinances.
2. Setbacks and lot coverage. Solar energy systems must comply with
all setback and lot coverage requirements for the zoning district in
which the property is located.
B. Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems.
1. Yard requirement. Ground-mounted energy solar systems shall only
be located in the rear yard of any zoning district. Solar carports
may be permitted in any off-street parking area in commercial or
industrial properties, and on residential properties in compliance
with Section 400.275 of this Code of Ordinances.
2. Height requirement. Ground-mounted solar energy systems may
not exceed the maximum height of the principal structure on the
property. In any event, ground-mounted solar energy systems may
not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height in any residential zoning
district.
3. Underground utilities. All exterior electrical and/or plumbing lines
must be buried below the surface of the ground in accordance with
the current Electrical and Plumbing Codes adopted by the City.
4. Maintenance. All ground-mounted systems shall be well maintained
underneath the array with the installation of mulch, chat, rocks, or
other attractive materials. No weeds or other vegetation around
the ground-mounted system shall be in violation of Section
220.100.
C. Roof-Mounted Solar Energy Systems.
Section
400.920
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.930
100:783
Section 400.940. Application Requirements For Solar Energy
Systems. [Ord. No. 5763 §1, 1-26-2012]
1. Mounting on pitched roofs. Solar arrays shall be permitted on any
pitched roof if panels are mounted flush or parallel to the roof
plane. Parallel mounting shall be placed no more than eight (8)
inches higher than the roof surface. Any mounting of a solar array
with a different pitch than the roof plane shall require a conditional
use permit. Mounted solar arrays shall not exceed the height of the
roofline.
2. Mounting on flat roofs. Solar arrays on flat roofs shall be screened
in accordance to Section 400.278 of this Code of Ordinances.
3. Written analysis. The applicant must submit a written certification
from a Missouri licensed structural engineer providing details of
the weight of each panel or array per square foot and certifying
that the supporting structure has the structural integrity to carry
the weight and wind loads of the solar energy system.
4. Building-integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) systems. Buildingintegrated
photovoltaic systems may locate on any roof plane or
wall.
A. A completed building permit with all the applicable electrical,
plumbing, and structural engineering information and drawings.
B. A licensed Missouri engineer seal for any applicable set of plans.
C. A plot plan illustrating the following features for roof-mounted solar
energy systems:
1. North arrow and bar scale.
2. Roof dimensions.
3. Show all ridge line and/or parapets for roof-mounted solar energy
systems.
4. Identify all vents, chimneys, or other apparatus, including vertical
objects (i.e., trees), that may affect the placement of the panel.
5. Provide details of the overall size of the panel array and the
arrangement of the array.
D. A plot plan illustrating the following features for ground-mounted solar
energy systems:
1. North arrow and bar scale.
2. Lot dimensions.
3. Identify all streets adjacent to lot.
Section
400.930
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.940
100:784
Section 400.950. Geothermal Systems. [Ord. No. 5763 §1,
1-26-2012]
Section 400.955. Application Requirements For Geothermal
Systems. [Ord. No. 5763 §1, 1-26-2012]
Section 400.960. Small Wind Energy Systems. [Ord. No. 5763 §1,
1-26-2012]
4. Identify easements and setbacks.
5. Provide details of solar unit's maximum height from grade and
overall size of panel array, and any screening details (vegetation,
fencing, etc.).
6. Provide distances from existing structures, trees, fences, and
adjacent property lines.
E. Provide detailed drawings of support structures or footings where
applicable.
F. A picture showing the sample colors for the proposed solar energy
system and the structure's roof material.
G. A copy of the design approval letter from the utility company shall be
submitted for customers requesting to interconnect to the utility
company's electrical grid.
A. Setback Requirements. Drilling and trenching for geothermal heat
pump systems shall be prohibited on any easement.
B. State Requirements. All geothermal heat pump systems shall comply
with the Missouri Department of Natural Resource regulations
established in 10 CSR 23 (Heat Pump Construction Codes).
A. A completed building permit with all the applicable electrical and
mechanical engineering information and drawings.
B. A plot plan illustrating the location of all geothermal systems:
1. North arrow and bar scale.
2. Lot dimensions.
3. Identify easements and setbacks.
4. Provide details of the location of all geothermal apparatus.
A. General Requirements. The provisions of this Section apply to the
construction and/or installation of all small wind energy systems:
1. Location. All wind energy systems shall be located in the rear yard
on a lot.
Section
400.940
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.960
100:785
2. Electrical wires. All electrical wires associated with a wind energy
system must be buried below the surface of the ground, except for
those wires necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower
wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the
grounding wires, in accordance to the current Electrical Code
adopted by the City.
3. Controls and brakes. All systems shall contain an internal governor
or braking device which engages at a manufacturer-specified wind
speed intended to ensure the safe operation of the system in all
wind conditions.
4. Lighting. Wind energy conversion systems shall not be illuminated
by artificial means, except where the illumination is specifically
required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other Federal,
State, or local regulations.
5. Colors. Wind turbines shall be painted a non-reflective, nonobtrusive
color such as the manufacturer's default color option or a
color that conforms to the environment and architecture of the area
in which it is located.
6. Noise. The noise emitted from any wind turbine shall comply with
Section 400.555 and Section 215.237 of this Code of Ordinances.
7. Signage. Signs shall be limited to the manufacturer's or installer's
identification, and required warning signs (e.g., electrical hazard
or high voltage) placed on the wind turbine tower(s), electrical
equipment, and the wind turbine. Commercial advertising is
strictly prohibited.
B. Building-Mounted Wind Energy Systems.
1. Allowed structures. Building-mounted wind energy systems shall
only be allowed on non-residential structures.
2. Height requirements. No building-mounted wind energy system
shall exceed the height requirement for zoning district in which it is
located.
3. Written analysis. A written certification from a Missouri licensed
structural engineer regarding the weight of the total installation
per square foot and certifying that the structure has the structural
integrity to carry the weight and wind loads of the wind energy
conversion system and have minimal vibration impacts on the
structure.
C. Decorative Wind Energy Systems.
1. Requirements. Decorative wind energy systems shall be permitted
in any yard without a building permit.
D. Small Wind Energy System Towers.
Section
400.960
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.960
100:786
Section 400.970. Application Requirements For Small Wind Energy
Systems. [Ord. No. 5763 §1, 1-26-2012]
1. Monopole tower. Monopole wind energy systems shall be
conditionally permitted in commercial and industrial zoning
districts. Monopole structures shall be prohibited in all residential
zoning districts and the Mixed-Use Traditional Development
District (MUTDD), unless located in a property used solely for a
non-residential use (such as religious institutions, schools, fire
stations, libraries, utility substations, cemeteries, parks, golf
courses, etc.).
2. Guyed and lattice towers. Guyed and lattice towers shall only be
permitted in industrial zoning districts.
3. Number of towers per lot. No more than two (2) ground-mounted
wind energy systems that supplement energy consumption may be
installed on any lot.
4. Rotor distance. The minimum distance between the ground and any
part of the rotor blade system shall be fifteen (15) feet.
5. Height and setback requirements. The setbacks listed below shall
apply to all adjacent property and utility lines.
DISTRICTS
MAX.
HEIGHT
MIN.
SETBACK
TOWER
DESIGN
PERMITTED
Non-residential
uses in "R-1",
"R-1A", "R-1B",
"R-2", "R-3",
"R-4", "R-5",
"TGB" and
"MUTDD"
75 feet Monopole
"C-O", "C-1",
"C-2", "C-3",
"SC-1", "HTCD",
"AG" and "P-R"
125 feet Monopole
"I-1" and "I-2" 150 feet
One (1) foot of
setback for each
foot of height of
a freestanding
tower in motion
plus ten (10)
feet when
adjacent to
residential uses
or zoned
property.
Monopole,
guyed-wire,
latice
A. A completed building permit with all the required electrical and
structural engineering information and drawings.
B. A set of standard drawings (twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36)
inches) of the wind turbine structure and stamped engineered drawing
of the tower, base, footings, and/or foundation as provided by the
manufacturer.
Section
400.960
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.970
100:787
C. Written, technical report from a licensed professional engineer that the
wind energy system meets all applicable local, State, and Federal
regulations.
D. A description of the safety precautions provided in order to ensure that
the structure will not be detrimental to adjacent properties in the case
of high winds and/or if the unit fails.
E. Color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the wind energy
system with a photo-realistic representation as it would appear viewed
from all sides of site. The color photo simulations shall show the
proposed wind energy system and all proposed landscaping, fencing
and other methods of screening.
F. A copy of the design approval letter from the utility company shall be
submitted for customers requesting to interconnect to the utility
company's electrical grid.
G. A plot plan illustrating the following features for wind small energy
system towers:
1. North arrow and bar scale.
2. Lot dimension.
3. Location, dimensions, and types of existing major structures on the
property.
4. Location of the proposed wind system tower.
5. Identify all streets adjacent to the lot.
6. The setback distances and required fall line distance from adjacent
properties.
7. Identify all easement and any overhead utility lines.
8. Provide distances from existing structures, trees, fences, and
adjacent property lines.
9. Tower blueprints or drawings, including foundation drawing.
H. A plot plan illustrating the following features for building-mounting
small wind energy systems:
1. North arrow and bar scale.
2. Lot dimensions.
3. Location, dimensions, and types of existing major structures on the
property.
4. Location of the proposed wind system tower.
5. Identify all streets adjacent to the lot.
Section
400.970
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.970
100:788
Section 400.980. Applicability. [Ord. No. 5763 §1, 1-26-2012]
Section 400.990. Abandonment. [Ord. No. 5763 §1, 1-26-2012]
Any system that is out of service for a continuous period of twelve (12)
months will be considered abandoned and must be removed within ninety
(90) days. If such system is not removed within ninety (90) days, the City
may remove such system at the owner's expense after giving the owner
notice and an opportunity to be heard with respect to removal.
6. Identify all easement and any overhead utility lines.
A. This Article applies to renewable energy systems to be installed and
constructed after the effective date of the Article.
B. Except as specified below, renewable energy systems constructed prior
to the effective date of this Article shall not be required to meet the
requirements of this Article.
C. Any upgrades, modifications or changes that materially alter the size or
placement of an existing renewable energy systems shall comply with
the provisions of this Chapter.
Section
400.970
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.990
100:789
Chapter 402
TREES AND LANDSCAPING
Section
400.990
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
400.990
100:790
ARTICLE I
Purpose and Intent
Section 402.010. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
A. It is the purpose of this Chapter to protect and enhance the quality of
life and general welfare of the City, its residents and visitors through
the planting, maintenance and removal of trees. It is the intent of this
Article to provide shade for energy conservation, establish healthy
environmental conditions by providing air purification, oxygen
regeneration, ground water recharge, noise, glare and heat abatement,
reduce storm water runoff and flooding, aid in the reduction of erosion,
provide greenery to visually soften paved areas and buildings, to buffer
uncomplimentary land uses, provide wildlife habitat, and protect and
increase real property values. It is to encourage the preservation and
protection of trees within the City of O'Fallon, and to prevent their
unnecessary destruction. It is not intended to be punitive nor cause
hardship upon those individuals and concerns exercising reasonable
care and diligence to protect trees.
B. This Chapter specifies the best management practices for the publicly
owned trees of O'Fallon. All work performed on, or affecting, trees shall
comply with the American National Standards Institute, Inc. standards
and all relevant tree-related ordinances.
Section
402.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.010
100:791

ARTICLE II
Definitions
Section 402.020. Definitions. [Ord. No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
The following definitions shall apply in interpretation and enforcement of
this Chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated:
BUFFERYARD — A combination of distance and a visual buffer or barrier.
It includes an area, together with the combination of plantings, berms and/
or fencing that are required to eliminate or reduce existing or potential
nuisances. These nuisances can occur between adjacent zoning districts
and between different land uses. Such nuisances include dirt, litter, noise
and glare of lights, signs and incompatible land uses, buildings or parking
areas.
CALIPER — A measurement of the tree trunk diameter measured at twelve
(12) inches above ground level.
CITY TREE PLAN — A written document that plans for the care,
replacement, maintenance, and removal of trees in parks, along streets, and
in other public spaces.
LANDSCAPE MATERIAL — Landscaping materials are considered to be
native or exotic plantings, lawns, ground cover, trees, shrubs, and other
planting materials. Paved or decorated surfaces, outdoor landscape
elements, pools, fountains, water features, paved or decorative surfaces are
also considered landscape materials.
PLANT UNIT — A plant unit shall consist of a combination of landscape
materials which shall equal thirty (30) points where deciduous canopy trees
measuring two (2) to two and one-half (2.5) inch caliper equal ten (10)
points each, evergreen trees measuring six (6) to eight (8) feet tall equal ten
(10) points each, ornamental deciduous trees measuring one and one-half
(1.5) to two (2) inch caliper equal five (5) points each, and shrubs measuring
eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches tall or three (3) to four (4) feet
wide equal one (1) point each. All sizes specified are at the time of planting.
While any combination of materials may be used to achieve the total point
requirement, the mixture of a combination of types of materials is strongly
encouraged. An example of various plant unit alternatives is on file in the
City offices.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land opened, reserved or dedicated for a street,
sewer, water, walk, drainage course or other public purpose.
ROOT FLARE — It is the swelling at the base of the trunk where the roots
and the trunk connect.
SHRUB — Any woody plant that has several stems, none of which is
dominant, and is usually less than ten (10) feet (3 m) tall.
TREE — A perennial woody plant typically having one (1), but possibly
multiple main trunks reaching a mature height greater than fifteen (15) feet
Section
402.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.020
100:793
and a mature trunk of at least eight (8) inches in diameter at one (1) foot
above the ground.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE — That portion of any parcel of land covered
by the front, side and rear yard setback requirements as established by the
City of O'Fallon Zoning Code.
Section
402.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
402.020
100:794
ARTICLE III
Preservation of Trees
Section 402.030. Application and Exemption. [Ord. No. 5752 §1,
12-8-2011]
This Article shall apply to all real property (including all agricultural,
commercial, industrial, office, multi-family and residential property) located
within the City of O'Fallon, with the following exemption: It shall not apply
to any parcel of land used exclusively for a single-family or two-family
dwelling.
Section 402.040. Tree Protection. [Ord. No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
Section 402.050. Existing Trees Saved. [Ord. No. 5752 §1,
12-8-2011]
Existing trees saved on the site during construction may be credited toward
the minimum tree requirements specified for the landscaped open space for
each zoning district, except the residential districts. Those existing trees
credited shall be a minimum of two (2) inch caliper. Minimum size for
existing ornamental and evergreen species shall be six (6) feet in height.
A. Prior To Development. The destruction of more than twenty-five percent
(25%) of the trees on any one parcel shall be prohibited. However,
where the topography of the land is such as to necessitate extensive
grading or filling to make the land suitable for future development,
upon grading permit approval, that portion of the parcel of land graded
or filled shall be exempted from application of this Chapter for a period
of two (2) years, or until it is developed (whichever is earlier) at which
time trees so removed shall be replaced at the rate of at least fifteen
(15) trees per acre, provided such filled or graded area will be seeded
or sodded per City regulations.
B. During Development. Once a site plan or preliminary plat approval has
been requested, a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the existing
trees or fifteen (15) trees per acre of the entire development (whichever
is greater) shall be retained. Existing trees which have been retained
will count toward the landscaping requirements set forth in this Code.
If some or all trees cannot be retained as provided, these shall be
replaced with trees of like or similar kind having a minimum mature
trunk caliper four (4) inches and a height of eight (8) feet. Trees should
be of a hardwood variety and consistent with the trees referenced
elsewhere in this Chapter. Replaced trees shall be properly maintained
to insure their survival for a period of at least eighteen (18) months
from the date planted.
C. Protective Barrier. During development, there shall be erected and
maintained, where appropriate, suitable protective barriers around all
trees and the drip line so as to prevent damage thereto.
Section
402.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.050
100:795
All existing plant material saved as a credit toward the minimum tree
requirements shall be healthy and free of mechanical injury.
Section 402.060. Submission of Site Plans. [Ord. No. 5752 §1,
12-8-2011]
Section 402.070. Emergencies. [Ord. No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
In the case of emergencies, such as wind storms, ice storms, or other
disasters, the requirements of this Chapter may be waived during the
emergency period so as not to hamper private or public work to restore
order in the City.
A. Where site plan application is made for the development or
improvement of any non-exempt parcel of land, the site plan shall show:
1. The tree protective zone; and
2. Trees to be maintained within the tree protective zone, with
location for each to be shown with reasonable accuracy and
indicate type and size.
Section
402.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
402.070
100:796
ARTICLE IV
Minimum Tree Quantities and Location Requirements
Section 402.080. Residential Zoning Districts ("R-1" Through
"R-5") and Residential Uses Within The Mixed-Use Traditional
Development District. [Ord. No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
Section 402.090. Commercial Zoning Districts ("C-O" Through
"C-3"). [Ord. No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
One (1) tree for every forty (40) feet, or portion thereof, of street frontage,
public or private, shall be required within the landscape setback abutting
said street frontage (as determined by the type of roadway). Said trees may
be clustered or arranged within the setback and need not be placed evenly
at forty (40) foot intervals. In addition to the required trees, based upon
street frontage, one (1) tree shall also be required for every three thousand
(3,000) square feet of landscaped open space. These may include the trees
required in parking lots as set out in this Chapter. Trees along the roadway
shall conform to the tree standards set forth elsewhere in this Chapter.
A. Where record plats have been approved in a subdivision prior to
November 1, 2001 without an approved landscape plan, said plat shall
conform with the ordinance requirements in place at the time of
approval which typically required the installation of one (1) tree per
fifty (50) feet, or portion thereof of street frontage, public or private,
within an area between the front of a structure and the curb. Said trees
can be clustered or arranged within the setback and need not be placed
evenly at fifty (50) foot intervals.
B. For residential subdivisions approved between November 1, 2001 and
the adoption of this Article there shall be a minimum of one (1) tree for
every lot; in cases of lots having frontage on more than one (1) street
(e.g., corner lots, through-lots), there shall be a minimum of one (1) tree
for each street on which the lot has frontage, unless the developer and/
or homeowners association has established a landscaped buffer along
the street frontage. Each tree shall be at least two (2) inches in caliper
at planting and must meet the definition of a "tree" at maturity.
C. Prior to the adoption of this Article, City codes had allowed trees on lots
to be placed within the City right-of-way, specifically between the
sidewalk and back of curb. It has been observed that this has caused
damage to City and private infrastructure as well as sight-distance
issues, safety issues and property damage. Unless otherwise provided
by this Code, trees will no longer be located within fifteen (15) feet from
back of curb. City codes still require one (1) tree to be located within
each lot and two (2) trees if located on a corner lot.
Section
402.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.100
100:797
Section 402.100. Industrial Zoning Districts ("I-1" and "I-2"). [Ord.
No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
One (1) tree for every forty (40) feet (or portion thereof) of street frontage,
public or private, shall be required within the landscape setback (as
determined by the type of roadway) and need not be placed evenly at
forty (40) foot intervals. In addition to the required trees, based upon
street frontage, one (1) tree shall be required for every four thousand
(4,000) square feet of landscaped open space. These trees may include trees
required in parking lots as set out in this Chapter. Trees along the roadway
shall conform to the tree standards set forth elsewhere in this Chapter.
Section 402.110. Tree Standards Along A Roadway. [Ord. No. 5752
§1, 12-8-2011]
A. Minor Residential/Local Access Road.
1. One (1) tree shall be located in the front yard of every lot, unless on
a corner lot in which case a tree shall be located on the frontage of
each side as required per the zoning district.
2. No trees are to be located within the right-of-way, following the
standards set forth in this Chapter.
3. Unless otherwise approved as part of a development plan, trees are
to be no closer than fifteen (15) feet to the back of curb and not
within five (5) feet of an underground utility or lateral line.
B. Collector And Minor Arterial Road.
1. One (1) tree for every fifty (50) linear feet as required per the
zoning district.
2. Trees shall not be located within City right-of-way unless a
landscaping plan is reviewed and approved by the City.
Section
402.100
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
402.110
100:798
3. If a tree is located within City right-of-way or within fifteen (15) feet
to the back of the curb, it must be an acceptable species as outlined
in the tree list and not within a ten (10) foot easement.
C. Medians For Collector And Minor Arterial Roads.
1. Median must be a minimum of seven (7) feet in width.
2. If trees are planted in the median, the tree spacing will be based on
the type and size of tree or shrub.
3. No trees shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the median
tip or within the intersection line of sight, whichever is greater. No
trees shall block the line of sight for a traffic signal.
4. Tree must be an acceptable species as outlined in this Chapter. If
the median is wider than seven (7) feet, additional tree species may
be approved by the City.
5. The median shall be served by automated irrigation.
6. The minimum soil depth shall be provided to accommodate the
trees proposed.
7. Turf areas to be finish graded in a manner that eliminates mower
scalping.
8. Permanent subsurface drainage that collects and removes
gravitational water from the pavement and root zone area
eliminating seepage to the road surface.
9. Tree planting in roadway/median landscapes. If the landscape
planting is to support tree growth above eight (8) feet in height, the
root zone supporting the landscape plantings must be excavated
below pavement grade to a point below that interfaces the root
zone mix with the soil below the road bed. Pavement, concrete
rubble, gravel, etc., that restricts or limits root growth is prohibited
from the root zone area.
D. Sight Triangle And Obstruction. On the point of any access onto a public
street or the intersection of any two (2) streets, development shall
conform to the requirements of the sight triangle in which nothing shall
be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of thirty-six (36) inches and
fifteen (15) feet above the grade at the back of the curb of the
intersecting streets, within the triangular area formed by the right-ofway
lines and a line connecting them at points twenty-five (25) feet
from their point of intersection or at equivalent points on private streets
or as otherwise shown on the approved site plan.
Section
402.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.120
100:799
Section 402.120. County or State Right-Of-Way. [Ord. No. 5752 §1,
12-8-2011]
The necessary agency must be contacted for their review of any trees to
be located within their right-of-way. If acceptable, the trees must meet the
minimum requirements and tree type set forth in this Chapter.
Section 402.130. Tree Location Standards. [Ord. No. 5752 §1,
12-8-2011]
A. Trees are required to meet this Section if located along a roadway or
utility line subject to the following:
1. Trees shall not be placed within twenty-five (25) feet of any street
light or within fifteen (15) feet of the back of curb unless otherwise
provided in this Code.
2. Trees shall not be placed within twenty-five (25) feet of traffic
control or street signs or within fifteen (15) feet of the back of curb
unless otherwise provided in this Code.
3. Trees shall not be planted within ten (10) feet of street stormwater
inlets or manholes.
4. All new trees within the City right-of-way must be an acceptable
species as outlined in this Chapter. All other trees to be installed
are recommended, not required, to follow the recommended
species list outlined in this Chapter.
5. Trees may not be planted closer to the centerline of an overhead
power line as listed below:
Maximum Mature Tree
Height
(Feet)
Minimum Distance From
Centerline
(Feet)
<15 No minimum
15—24 15
25—45 35
>45 45
6. To reduce potential damage to sidewalks the City recommends the
following setback:
Maximum Mature Tree
Height
(Feet)
Minimum Distance From
Sidewalk
(Feet)
<15 5
15—25 10
Section
402.120
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
402.130
100:800
Section 402.140. Recommended Planting Standards. [Ord. No. 5752
§1, 12-8-2011]
Maximum Mature Tree
Height
(Feet)
Minimum Distance From
Sidewalk
(Feet)
26—45 15
45 20
B. Tree standards in common ground or on private property:
1. Recommended (not required) tree species are outlined in this
Chapter.
2. It is not recommended to have a tree located within an easement
since it could be removed in the future with no replacement costs
provided.
3. Tree location standards as provided in this Chapter shall be
followed.
A. Plant Material Selection, Handling, Inspection, Storage And Planting.
1. Only desirable, long-lived trees of good appearance shall be
planted on public sites. All trees shall have reasonably straight
trunks with well developed leaders and tops. All plant material
should be free from insects, diseases, wounds, and cankers. Trees
planted shall be adaptable to USDA Zone 5 climate conditions.
There must be a well developed root system and root ball must be
moist. Root balls must be protected from freezing.
2. Trees should not be picked up by their trunk. The soil ball should be
supported when moving the tree. Trees should be protected during
transport and kept cool and moist at all times.
3. All trees must adhere to the Standards for Nursery Stock.
4. The City has the ability to reject any and all nursery stock.
B. Tree Planting. Missouri law requires that a locate request be placed
before beginning any excavation. Place a locate request by calling
1-800-DIG-RITE (800-344-7483). The utilities should respond to your
request and mark the approximate location of their facilities within
three (3) working days. You can then proceed with your excavation
avoiding damages.
C. Planting Procedures For Potted Or Balled And Burlapped Trees.
1. Optimal time for planting trees is the fall or early spring, when the
tree is dormant. Planting trees at other times is discouraged due to
Section
402.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.140
100:801
increased stress on the tree. If you have any questions on planting
times contact the O'Fallon Parks and Recreation Department.
2. The hole should be dug with the width three (3) times the spread of
the root ball no deeper than the root ball. Holes should have
slanted sides and be roughed with a shovel.
3. Trees will be planted no deeper than the original root flare. Do not
confuse a graft union for the root flare. In clay soils trees can be
planted slightly high. Excavation and soil replacement may be
necessary where there is overlay compacted subsoil and excessive
amounts of gravel.
4. Remove tree from pot or cut away twine or rope from stem and wire
basket below ground level. When possible, roll back burlap from
top and cut off top one-third (1/3) of the wire basket. Always
remove all plastic twine and artificial burlap.
5. Straighten tree and completely backfill hole with existing soil.
Avoid using excessive amounts of organic matter.
6. Apply water to settle the soil and eliminate any voids. At this time a
solution of root stimulator (not fertilizer) can be watered in.
7. Chop up any dirt clods; add soil if needed.
8. Place a two (2) to four (4) inch layer of mulch around the tree in a
minimum three (3) foot radius. Make sure that the mulch is not
mounded against the base of the tree trunk.
Section
402.140
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
402.140
100:802
ARTICLE V
Landscaping and Screening Requirements
Section 402.150. Authority. [Ord. No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
City staff shall have authority to approve the landscape plan subject to such
additional requirements as may be deemed necessary by the Planning and
Zoning Commission or City Council to promote the purpose of this Chapter.
Section 402.160. Application. [Ord. No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
Section 402.170. Landscape Plan Requirements. [Ord. No. 5752 §1,
12-8-2011; Ord. No. 5831 §9, 12-13-2012]
A. All plans submitted in support of a final development plan or building
permit shall hereafter include a landscape plan with a transition strip,
where applicable. Upon an application for a building permit, each of the
following districts/uses shall be exempt from the bufferyard
requirements:
1. "AG" Agricultural District.
2. "P-R" Park-Recreation District.
3. Single-Family and Duplex Dwellings in "R-1" "R-1A" R-1B" "R-2"
and "PUD" Districts.
A. Information Required. All plans submitted for approval of a landscape
plan shall have the following information included:
1. North point and scale.
2. Topographic information and final grading adequate to identify and
properly specify planting for areas needing slope protection.
3. The location, size, and surface materials of all structures and
parking areas.
4. The location, size, and type of all above ground and underground
utilities and structures with proper notation, where appropriate, as
to any safety hazards to avoid during landscape installation.
5. The approximate location, type, size and quantity of all proposed
landscape materials, along with the common name of all plant
species. The size, grading and condition shall be specified
according to American Association of Nurserymen standards.
6. The location, size and common name of all existing plant materials
to be retained on the site (large masses of trees may be indicated
by mass outline only).
7. Mature sizes of plant material shall be drawn to scale and called
out on the landscape plan by common name or appropriate key.
Section
402.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.170
100:803
8. Location of hose connections and other water sources.
9. The location of all existing trees, twelve (12) inch caliper or larger
on sites where trees are proposed for removal.
10. The location, size and type of required screening methods.
B. Planting Requirements Within Parking And Vehicular-Use Areas.
1. The intent of this Section is to encourage interior landscaping
within vehicular parking areas; to break up the large expanses of
pavement; to provide relief from the reflected glare and heat; as
well as to guide vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
2. Except for vehicle storage lots, multiple level parking structures,
and parking lots having a paved area no wider than a double-loaded
aisle no more than sixty-five (65) feet in width, all parking areas in
all zoning districts shall include the following as minimum
requirements:
a. Not less than six percent (6%) of the interior of a parking lot
shall be landscaped. The interior of a parking lot shall be
calculated by multiplying the number of parking spaces by two
hundred seventy (270) square feet. Planting which is required
along the perimeter of a parking lot shall not be considered as
part of the interior landscaping requirement.
b. The landscaping and planting areas shall be reasonably
dispersed throughout the parking lots.
c. The interior dimensions of any planting area or planting
median shall be sufficient to protect the landscaping materials
planted therein and to insure proper growth. Any protected
planting strip where trees are to be planted shall be a
minimum of seven (7) feet wide and shall be protected from
vehicle overhang.
d. The primary landscaping materials used in parking lots shall
be trees which provide shade or are capable of providing shade
at maturity. Shrubbery, hedges and other planting material
may be used to complement the tree landscaping. Effective use
of rain gardens, earthen berms and existing topography is also
encouraged as a component of the landscaping plan.
e. In those instances where plant material exists on the parking
lot site prior to its development, such landscape material may
be used if approved as meeting the requirements in this
Section.
f. No landscaping, tree, shrub, fence, wall or similar item shall be
placed in the zones of ingress or egress at street corners, or in
the intersection of a public right-of-way that will create an
obstruction to visibility, or is a traffic hazard.
Section
402.170
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
402.170
100:804
Section 402.180. Standards For Bufferyard Areas Between Non-
Residential and Residential Land Uses and Zoning Districts. [Ord.
No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
g. Exterior light fixtures shall be located within landscaped
islands or in vegetated areas along the perimeter of the
parking/vehicular use area. Light fixtures shall not be placed
within required transition strips as defined in Section 400.425.
h. Where determined to be necessary by the City's Traffic
Consultant, landscaped islands within parking lots shall be
configured in a manner to direct traffic entering, exiting and/or
traveling within a particular site.
C. Planting Requirements. The minimum planting sizes for all plant
material shall be the following:
1. Medium and large deciduous shade trees. Two (2) inch caliper.
2. Small deciduous or ornamental trees. Four (4) feet in height as
specified by the American Association of Nurserymen, with the
exception of true dwarf species.
3. Conifers. Six (6) feet in height.
4. Upright evergreen trees. Six (6) feet in height as specified by the
American Association of Nurserymen, except for true dwarf
varieties.
5. Shrubs. (Deciduous and conifer including spreader and globe tree
forms): Size optional as determined by applicant.
6. Ground cover plants. Crowns, plugs or containers in a number as
appropriate by species to provide fifty percent (50%) surface
coverage after two (2) growing seasons.
7. Grass seeding. As appropriate to provide complete coverage within
the first (1st) growing season.
8. Sod. As necessary to provide coverage and soil stabilization.
A. Purpose. This Section provides the landscaping and width requirements
for bufferyards on lots developed after May 10, 1999. One (1) of the
most important functions of the Zoning Code is the separation of land
uses into districts which have similar character and contain compatible
uses. The location of districts is supposed to provide protection, but in
the City of O'Fallon this is not the case since zoning districts permitting
uses as diverse as single-family residential and industrial use were
located adjacent to each other long before May 10, 1999. Bufferyards
will operate to minimize the negative impact of any future use on its
neighboring uses.
Section
402.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.180
100:805
B. Required Locations For Bufferyards. Bufferyards shall be located along
(and within) the outer perimeter of a lot wherever two (2) different
zoning districts, or a non-residential land use and a residential land use
abut one another. Bufferyards are not required adjacent to any right-ofway
of or between residential development and properties zoned "P-R"
Park-Recreation.
C. Determination Of Required Bufferyard.
1. The following paragraphs shall be used to select the minimum
levels of bufferyard width, landscaping, berming and/or fencing
needed to achieve the minimum level of screening for the required
bufferyard. The landscaping component of each option is given in
plant units. For any given bufferyard, any combination of options
for the same level of screening may be used. This approach
provides a range of choice for bufferyard width, landscaping,
berming and/or fencing which can be varied according to site
features. However, the minimum bufferyard requirements shall
consist of conifers or upright evergreen trees planted on ten (10)
foot centers and staggered to achieve maximum visual density
coverage. Note that in all instances, bufferyard areas must remain
as permanent green space although they may be included within
the required building setback areas.
2. For commercial zoning districts or uses otherwise permitted in
commercial districts which abut any residentially zoned property or
property projected for future residential development by the City's
Comprehensive Plan, the following additional bufferyard options
shall be available:
a. For everyone hundred (100) feet of frontage where the
bufferyard is required:
(1) A total of two (2) plant units and a sight-proof, six (6) foot
high (as measured from the adjacent finished grade and
placed on the highest elevation or other location as
determined by the Director of Planning and Development)
sight-proof vinyl fence, decorative masonry wall, brick wall
or other fence as approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be provided within a minimum twenty
(20) foot wide bufferyard area;
(2) A total of four (4) plant units and a four (4) foot high
earthen berm shall be provided within a minimum forty
(40) foot wide bufferyard area; or
(3) A total of five (5) plant units shall be provided within a
minimum fifty (50) foot wide bufferyard area.
3. For industrial zoning districts or uses otherwise permitted in
industrial districts which abut any residentially zoned property or
property projected for future residential development by the City's
Section
402.180
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
402.180
100:806
Comprehensive Plan, the following additional bufferyard options
shall be available:
a. For everyone hundred (100) feet of frontage where the
bufferyard is required:
(1) A total of three (3) plant units and a sight-proof, six (6) foot
high (as measured from the adjacent finished grade and
placed at the highest elevation or other location as
determined by the Director of Planning and Development)
vinyl fence, decorative masonry wall, brick wall or other
fence as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be provided within a minimum thirty (30) foot wide
bufferyard area; or
(2) A total of five (5) plant units and a five (5) foot high earthen
berm shall be provided within a minimum fifty (50) foot
wide bufferyard area.
4. For multi-family zoning districts ("R-3", "R-4" and "R-5") or uses
otherwise permitted in these districts, which abut any "R-1",
"R-1A", "R-1B" or "R-2" residentially zoned property or property
projected as low or medium density residential development by the
City's Comprehensive Plan future land use map, the following
earthen bufferyard options shall be available (given that a variety
of housing types are possible within the City's residential districts,
the intent of this Subsection is to provide a buffer between singlefamily
and triplex or greater density developments. However, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may at their discretion require or
not require a bufferyard, depending upon the densities involved):
a. For every one hundred (100) feet of frontage where the
bufferyard is required:
(1) A total of one and one-half (1.5) plant units and a sightproof,
six (6) foot high (as measured from the adjacent
finished grade and placed on the highest elevation or other
location as determined by the Director of Planning and
Development) vinyl fence or decorative masonry wall,
brick wall or other fence as approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be provided within a minimum
fifteen (15) foot wide bufferyard area;
(2) A total of two and one-half (2.5) plant units and a two and
one-half (2½) foot high earthen berm shall be provided
within a minimum thirty (30) foot wide bufferyard area; or
(3) A total of three (3) plant units shall be provided within a
minimum fifty (50) foot wide bufferyard area.
D. Credits For Maintaining Existing Landscaping.
Section
402.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.180
100:807
1. The maintenance of existing mature landscaping on a property
where it may serve the bufferyard requirements is strongly
encouraged and to this end the following incentive for its retention
bufferyard area shall count toward meeting plant unit point total
requirements based on the size of the materials. For instance, a ten
(10) inch caliper deciduous canopy tree will count as fifty (50)
points in that it is equal to five (5) trees under the plant unit
definition. The amounts that such existing landscaping will count
toward meeting plant unit requirements will be at the discretion of
the Planning and Development Department and, as necessary, the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Special circumstances such as topography may necessitate
changes in the location of the screened fencing as recommended by
staff and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Generally such fencing is expected to be placed on the nonresidential
or denser residential side of the bufferyard area.
Increased screening may be required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission through the site plan or conditional use permit
processes where the Commission finds that such screening is
necessary based on the nature of the proposed commercial or
industrial use and its relationship to the adjacent residential use.
Below is Exhibit A, an illustration depicting the layout of the
above bufferyard scenarios.
COMMERCIAL COMMERCIAL
COMMERCIAL MULTI-FAMILY
Section
402.180
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
402.180
100:808
Section 402.190. (Reserved)
INDUSTRIAL MULTI-FAMILY
INDUSTRIAL MULTI-FAMILY
Section
402.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.190
100:809

ARTICLE VI
Installation, Maintenance and Enforcement
Section 402.200. Landscaping Material in Place Prior To Occupancy
Permit. [Ord. No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
Section 402.210. Maintenance. [Ord. No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
A. All landscape material shall be in place prior to issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy. If all landscape material, except trees required
with residential lots located along a minor residential/local access road,
is not installed at the time of final inspection, the Building Official may
issue a certificate of temporary occupancy and the builder shall escrow
with the City a cash amount, certified check or irrevocable bank letter
of credit in an amount determined by the Building Official to be equal to
the material and installation cost. If all landscape material is not
installed when the proper season arrives, it shall be the responsibility of
the City Council to have such work completed and reimburse the City
for the cost and expense thereof by appropriating funds in the escrow.
B. Trees must be planted by the builder within one (1) year of issuance of
the final certificate of occupancy.
A. The landscaping materials depicted on site plans approved by the City
shall be considered as elements of the project in the same manner as
parking, building materials and other details are elements of the site
plan.
B. The developer, his/her successor and/or subsequent owners and their
agents shall be responsible for the continued maintenance of trees
outside the City right-of-way. For trees within the City's right-of-way
adjacent to common ground, the developer is responsible for the
continued maintenance until the City accepts the right-of-way for
maintenance at which time the homeowners association will be
responsible for maintenance.
C. The bottom of the canopy (mature tree) is to be no lower than fifteen
(15) feet above and no closer than three (3) feet from the back of curb at
that street location and the bottom of the canopy (mature) is to be no
lower than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk elevation at that location.
Within radiuses or sight-triangles, the minimum canopy height is to be
no less than fifteen (15) feet.
D. Plant material which exhibits evidence of insect pests, disease, and/or
damage shall be appropriately treated, and dead plants promptly
removed and replaced within the next planting season.
E. Should landscaping not be installed, maintained and replaced as
needed to comply with the approved landscape plan, the owner and his/
her agent or agents shall be considered in violation of the terms of the
building or occupancy permit. The Director of Planning and
Section
402.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.210
100:811
Section 402.220. Emergency Maintenance By Public Utilities. [Ord.
No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
Public utilities shall be subject to this Chapter, provided that nothing in this
Section shall require a public utility or its representative to obtain a permit
prior to pruning, removing or cutting a City tree to the extent necessary
to repair damaged utility lines or facilities that must be repaired on an
emergency basis and where it is impracticable for the public utility to obtain
a permit without endangering the public welfare.
Section 402.230. Insurance Required of Permit Holder. [Ord. No.
5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
The City may require a person seeking an application under this Section
to demonstrate that it is insured under an insurance policy in an amount
sufficient to cover potential damage to people or property that may occur in
the performance of the tree-related work for which the permit is sought.
Section 402.240. Recommended Early Tree Care Procedures. [Ord.
No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
Development or his/her designee is empowered to enforce the terms of
this Chapter.
F. Maintenance of trees on private property is the responsibility of the
property owner. Maintenance of trees located within City right-of-way
adjacent to an individual lot, either residential or commercial, is the
responsibility of the adjacent property owner. Tree maintenance for
street and sidewalk canopies and sight distance must be in
conformance with this Chapter.
G. The City of O'Fallon is responsible for the care of trees in the right-ofway
along the following roadways:
1. Bryan Road south of Veterans Memorial Parkway and north of Feise
Road.
2. Feise Road east of Bryan Road and west of Highway K.
3. Mexico Road east of Bryan Road and west of Rock Creek Road.
4. Bryan Road south of Feise Road and north of the Highway 364
extension.
5. Woodlawn Road south of Highway 70 and north of Plackemeier.
6. Sonderen Road south of Virgil and north of Veterans Memorial
Parkway.
7. Tri Sports Drive and Tri Sports Circle south of Waterford Crossing
to the Renaud Spirit Center entrance.
8. Lloyd King Drive and Corporate Center Drive.
Section
402.210
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
402.240
100:812
A. Early Tree Care. This Section covers care of the tree for the three (3)
years after planting. It is essential that the care after planting occurs to
guarantee the early healthy development of the tree.
1. Plants should be thoroughly watered every five (5) to ten (10) days
as needed to supplement the natural rainfall.
2. Trees, at planting, should only be pruned if there are dead or
broken limbs. For one (1) to three (3) years after planting, trees can
be pruned as needed to remove dead and broken limbs. Only after
trees are fully established (3—5 years), lower branches be removed
to promote tree structure and facilitate pedestrian and vehicular
clearance.
3. Only those trees in windy open areas need to be staked. Stake to
prevent movement of root ball, not the trunk of the tree. Stake with
three (3) guy lines, protecting trunk of tree from rope damage.
4. Shredded bark mulch shall be maintained at all times in a minimum
of a three (3) foot radius around the tree.
5. Trees that are healthy are less susceptible to attracting insects and
diseases. Spraying shall be done for the control of specific diseases
of insects, with the proper materials, applied at the proper time and
according to label recommendations to obtain the desired control.
6. If disease or insects appear to be a problem on any tree, contact the
O'Fallon Parks and Recreation Department.
Section
402.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.240
100:813

ARTICLE VII
Tree Lists, Selection, and Standards
Section 402.250. Selection of Species and Varieties. [Ord. No. 5752
§1, 12-8-2011; Ord. No. 5831 §10, 12-13-2012]
A. "Right Tree—Right Place". Consider the physical conditions of your
planting site. Sun and wind exposure, soil type and drainage pattern
are all factors that can affect the growth and performance of the tree.
Other site factors can also have bearing on the species selection.
Overhead power lines, street lamps, utility panels, traffic, buildings,
fences, and the like must be taken into consideration when deciding
"Right Tree—Right Place".
B. Tree lists are labeled as Tables 1, 2 and 3 and contain lists of acceptable
trees, shrubs and plants. Trees on these lists have been proven
adaptable to and suitable for urban conditions in O'Fallon and
numerous are directly taken from the Missouri Urban Tree Book
published by the Missouri Department of Conservation. This booklet
can also be found on the Missouri Department of Conservation website.
These lists contain species by size category and common and scientific
name. Tree species other than those listed will be approved under the
discretion of the City Landscape Manager. Table 4 is a list of
unacceptable trees and should not be planted in the City of O'Fallon.
Table 1
Trees Located Within City Right-of-Way Along Collector and
Arterial Roads and/or Within a Median
Trees from Table 1 will be utilized in City right-of-way along collector
and arterial roads and/or within a median. No trees on this list shall
be placed within the City right-of-way on minor residential streets. The
trees in this list will be considered due to their limited size and shape.
SMALL TREE
CONSIDERATION FOR ROADWAY/MEDIAN LANDSCAPE
PLANTINGS
Common Name Scientific Name
Corneliancherry Dogwood Cornus mas
Crab Apple "Lollipop" Malus "Lollizam"
Crabapple, Flowering Malus species (small varieties)
Crabapple, "Spring Snow" Spring Snow (sterile/fruitless)
Fringetree Chionanthus virginicus
Goldenraintree Koelreuteria paniculata
Japanese tree lilac Syringa reticulata "Ivory Silk"
Magnolia, Southern Magnolia grandiflora
Section
402.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.250
100:815
SMALL TREE
CONSIDERATION FOR ROADWAY/MEDIAN LANDSCAPE
PLANTINGS
Common Name Scientific Name
Magnolia, Sweetbay Magnolia virginiana
Maple, Hedge Acer campestre
Plum, Purple-leaf Prunus cerasifera
Redbud, Eastern Cercis canadensis
Serviceberry Amelanchier species
Sumac, Staghorn Rhus typhina
COLUMNAR TREE
CONSIDERATION FOR ROADWAY/MEDIAN LANDSCAPE
PLANTINGS
Common Name Scientific Name
Bald Cypress Columnar Taxodium ascendens "Praire
Sentinel"
Cherry Columnar Prunus serrulata "Amanogawa"
Cherry, Sargent Columnar Prunus sargentii "Columnaris"
Cherry, Sargent Columnar Prunus sargentii "Rancho"
Crab Apple Columnar Malus baccata "Columnaris"
Crab Apple Columnar Malus robusta "Erecta"
Crab Apple Columnar Malus "Srathmore"
Crab Apple Columnar Malus "Van Eseltine"
Dogwood Columnar Cornus florida "Fastigiata"
Ginko Columnar Ginko biloba "Fastigiata"
Ginko Columnar Ginko biloba "Princeton Sentry"
Golden Rain Tree Columnar Koelruteria paniculata "Fastigiata"
Hawthorn Columnar Crataegus monogyna "Stricta"
Hawthorn Columnar Crataequs phaenopyrum "Fastigiata"
Hornbeam, European Carpinus betulus "Columnaris"
Hornbeam, European Carpinus betulus "Fastigiata"
Locust, Honey Columnar Gleditsia triacanthos "Columnaris"
Maple, Amur Acer ginnala
Maple, Red Acer rubrum "Armstrong"
Maple, Red Acer rubrum "Columnare"
Maple, Sugar Acer saccharum "Columnare"
Section
402.250
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
402.250
100:816
COLUMNAR TREE
CONSIDERATION FOR ROADWAY/MEDIAN LANDSCAPE
PLANTINGS
Common Name Scientific Name
Maple, Sugar Acer saccharum "Monumentale"
Maple, Sugar Acer saccharum "Newton's Sentry"
Maple, Sugar Acer saccharum "Temple's Upright"
Maple, Sugar Acer saccharum nigrum "Salvin's
Upright"
Oak, English Columnar Quercus robur "Fastigiata"
Tulip Tree Columnar Liriodendron tulipifera
"Fastigiatum"
Table 2
Plants and Shrubs Located Within City Right-of-Way and/or
Within a Median
Plants and shrubs from Table 2 will be utilized in City right-of-way
within a median. Vegetation within this list are acceptable to be
planted within a median because they will not interfere with roadways
and/or sight visibility for traffic.
SALT TOLERANT PLANTS AND GROUND COVER
CONSIDERATION FOR ROADWAY/MEDIAN LANDSCAPE
PLANTINGS
Common Name Scientific Name
GROUND COVERS
Creeping Lily Turf Lirope spicata
English Ivy Hedera Helix
Juniper, Blue Rug Juniperus horizontalis "Wiltoni"
(Blue Rug)
Juniper, Chinese Juniper var.
sargentii
Juniperus chinensis var. sargentii
Juniper, Creeping "Bar Harbor" Juniperus horizontalis "Bar Harbor"
Juniper, Creeping "Blue Chip" Juniperus horizontalis "Blue Chip"
Juniper, Creeping "Blue
Horizon"
Juniperus horizontalis "Blue
Horizon"
Juniper, Creeping "Douglasii"
(Waukegan)
Juniperus horizontalis "Douglasii"
(Waukegan)
Juniper, Creeping "Emerald
Spreader"
Juniperus horizontalis "Emerald
Spreader"
Section
402.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.250
100:817
SALT TOLERANT PLANTS AND GROUND COVER
CONSIDERATION FOR ROADWAY/MEDIAN LANDSCAPE
PLANTINGS
Common Name Scientific Name
Juniper, Creeping "Mother
Lode"
Juniperus horizontalis "Mother
Lode"
Juniper, Creeping "Prince of
Wales"
Juniperus horizontalis "Prince of
Wales"
Juniper, Creeping "Turquoise
Spreader"
Juniperus horizontalis "Turquoise
Spreader"
Juniper, Sargent "Glauca" Chinese Juniper var. sargentii
"Glauca"
Juniperus horizontalis "Webberi" Creeping Juniper "Webberi"
PERENNIALS
Coneflower Echinacea
Daylily Hemerocallis
Japanese Water Iris Iris ensata
Variegated Sweet Iris IrisIris pallida
Siberian Iris Iris siberica
Sedum Sedum telephium "Autumn Joy"
Yarrow Achellia
ORNAMENTAL GRASSES
Feather Reed Grass Calamagrostis acutiflora
Fountain Grass, Dwarf Pennisetum alopecuroides
Maiden Grass Miscanthus sinensis
SHRUBS
Lilac spp. Syringavulgaris
Austrian Pine "Hornibrookiana" Pinus nigra "Hornibrookiana"
Bayberry, Northern Myrica pensylvanica
Burning Bush, Dwarf Euonymus alatus "Compactus"
Cherrylaurel, Common Prunus laurocerasus
Cotoneaster, Spreading Cotoneaster divaricata
Dogwood, Red osier Cornus sericea
Euonymus "Manhattan" Euonymus kiautschovicus
"Manhattan"
Euonymus Wintercreeper Euonymus fortunei
Forsythia Forsythia x intermedia cvs.
Holly, Winterberry Ilex verticillata
Section
402.250
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
402.250
100:818
SALT TOLERANT PLANTS AND GROUND COVER
CONSIDERATION FOR ROADWAY/MEDIAN LANDSCAPE
PLANTINGS
Common Name Scientific Name
Hydrangea paniculata Hydrangea paniculata "Tardiva"
Japanese Box or Littleleaf Box Buxus microphylla
Juniper, Andorra Juniperus horizontalis "Plumosa"
Lilac Syringa meyeri "Palabin"
Lilac Syringa patula "Miss Kim"
Mockorange Philadelphus spp.
Pine, Mugo Pinus mugo
Privet, Amur Ligustrum amurense
Privet, Golden Vicary Ligustrum x vicaryi
Pyracantha Pyracantha coccinea
Sand Cherry Prunus x cistena
Spirea, Japanese Spiraea japonica
St. John's Wort Hypericum
Summersweet Clethra alnifolia
Viburnum, Arrowwood Viburnum dentatum
Viburnum, Cranberry Bush Vibrunum trilobum
Viburnum, European Cranberry
Bush
Vibrunum opulus
Viburnum, Nannyberry Vibrunum lentago
Witch Hazel Hamamelis spp.
Yucca, Adam's Needle Yucca filamentosa
TREES
Fringetree Chionanthus virginicus
Goldenraintree Koelreuteria paniculata
Magnolia, Southern Magnolia grandiflora
Magnolia, Sweetbay Magnolia virginiana
Maple, Hedge Acer campestre
Sumac, Staghorn Rhus typhina
Section
402.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.250
100:819
Table 3
Trees Located Outside of City Right-of-Way
Trees from Table 3 are recommended to be utilized outside of the City
right-of-way. These trees can be utilized outside of the City right-ofway
along minor residential streets, subdivision common ground, City
parks, private property, etc.
Common Name Scientific Name Description
Amur Corktree Phellodendron amurense 45 feet
Arborvitar "Green
Giant"
Thuja (standishii x
plicata) "Green Giant"
45 feet
Austrian Pine Pinus nigra Taller than 45 feet
Baldcypress Taxodium distichum Taller than 45 feet
Birch "Dura Heat" Betula nigra Taller than 45 feet
Birch, River Betula nigra 25 feet
Blackgum Nyssa sylvatica 45 feet
Coffeetree, Kentucky Gymnocladus dioicus Taller than 45 feet
Colorado Spruce Picea pungens Taller than 45 feet
Corneliancherry
Dogwood
Cornus mas 15 feet
Crabapple, Flowering Malus species 25 feet
Dogwood, Flowering Cornus florida 15 feet
Eastern Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana 25 feet
Eastern White Pine Pinus strobus Taller than 45 feet
Fringetree Chionanthus virginicus 15 feet
Ginkgo Ginkgo biloba Taller than 45 feet
Goldenrain Tree Koelreuteria paniculata 25 feet
Hackberry Celtis occidentalis Taller than 45 feet
Hawthorn, Green Crataegus viridus 25 feet
Hawthorn,
Washington
Crataegus phaenopyrum 25 feet
Honeylocust Gleditsia tricanthos Taller than 45 feet
Hophornbeam Ostrya virginiana 45 feet
Hornbeam American Carpinus caroliniana 45 feet
Hornbeam, European Carpinus betulus 45 feet
Japanese Tree Lilac Syringa reticulata 15 feet
Linden "Redmond" Tilia americana Taller than 45 feet
Linden, American
(Basswood)
Tilia americana Taller than 45 feet
Section
402.250
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
402.250
100:820
Common Name Scientific Name Description
Linden, Littleleaf Tilia cordata 45 feet
Linden, Silver Tilia tomentosa Taller than 45 feet
London Planetree Platanus x acerifolia Taller than 45 feet
Magnolia, Saucer Magnolia x soulangiana 25 feet
Magnolia, Sweetbay Magnolia virginiana 15 feet
Maple "Autumn
Blaze"
Acer x freemanii Taller than 45 feet
Maple "Autumn
Fantasy"
Acer x freemanii Taller than 45 feet
Maple "Jeffers Red" Acer x freemanii Taller than 45 feet
Maple "Sienna Glen" Acer x freemanii Taller than 45 feet
Maple, Amur Acer ginnala 15 feet
Maple, Black Acer nigrum Taller than 45 feet
Maple, Hedge Acer campestre 25 feet
Maple, Red Acer rubrum 45 feet
Maple, Sugar Acer saccharum 45 feet
Maple, Trident Acer buergeranum 45 feet
Northern Catalpa Catalpa speciosa Taller than 45 feet
Norway Spruce Picea abies Taller than 45 feet
Oak, Bur Quercus macrocarpa Taller than 45 feet
Oak, English Quercus robur Taller than 45 feet
Oak, Northern Red Quercus rubra Taller than 45 feet
Oak, Pin Quercus palustris Taller than 45 feet
Oak, Shingle Quercus imbricaria Taller than 45 feet
Oak, Shumard Quercus shumardii Taller than 45 feet
Oak, Swamp White Quercus bicolor Taller than 45 feet
Oak, White Quercus alba Taller than 45 feet
Oak, Willow Quercus phellos Taller than 45 feet
Pagodatree,
Janpanese
Sophora japonica 25 feet
Plum Purple-leaf Prunus cerasifera 15 feet
Redbud, Eastern Cercis canadensis 15 feet
Serviceberry Amelanchier species 15 feet
Shagbark Hickory Carya ovata Taller than 45 feet
Shortleaf Pine Pinus echinata Taller than 45 feet
Sweetgum "Happi
Daze" (sterile)
Liquiodambar styraciflua
"Happi Daze"
Taller than 45 feet
Section
402.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.250
100:821
Common Name Scientific Name Description
Sycamore, American Platanus occidentalis Taller than 45 feet
Tuliptree Liriodendron tulipifera Taller than 45 feet
Zelkova, Japanese Zelkova serrata Taller than 45 feet
Table 4
Trees not Recommended for Planting
Trees from Table 4 are not recommended for planting in the City of
O'Fallon. These trees are objectionable for various reasons including:
1. Messy (fruit, nuts, seed pods, twigs);
2. Weak wood;
3. Untreatable insect pest; or
4. Uncontrollably invasive.
These trees and their objectionable characteristics are noted in the
following table.
Common Name Scientific Name Objection
Ash, Blue Fraxinus
quadrangulata
3
Ash, European Fraxinus excelsior 3
Ash, Green Fraxinus
pennsylvanica
3
Ash, White Fraxinus americana 3
Bamboo Phyllostachys 4
Birch, European White Betula pendula 3
Boxelder Acer negundo 2
Cherry, Black Prunus serotina 1, 2
Cottonwood Populus deltoides 1
Elm, American Ulmus americana 3
Elm, Siberian Ulmus pumila 1
Empress Tree Paulownia spp. 2, 4
Honeysuckle, Amur Lonicera maackii 4
Locust, Black Robinia pseudoacacia 1
Maple, Silver Acer saccharinum 2
Mulberry, Red Morus rubra 1, 4
Mulberry, White Morus alba 1, 4
Osage-orange Maclura pomifera 1
Section
402.250
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
402.250
100:822
Common Name Scientific Name Objection
Pear, (ornamental) all
varieties including
Bradford Pears
Pyrus calleryana 2, 4
Persimmon Diospyros virginiana 1
Poplar Lombardy Populus nigra 1, 2
Russian olive Elaeagnus
angustifolia
1, 2
Scotch Pine Pinus sylvestria 3
Sweetgum (common) Liquiodambar
styraciflua
1
Tree-of-Heaven Ailanthus altissima 2
Walnut, Black Juglans nigra 1
Willow Salix spp. 2, 4
Section
402.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.250
100:823

ARTICLE VIII
Tree Advisory Committee
Section 402.260. Establishment and Membership of Tree Advisory
Committee. [Ord. No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
Section 402.270. Responsibility and Duties. [Ord. No. 5752 §1,
12-8-2011]
A. Establishment. There shall be a Tree Advisory Committee in which the
Committee shall be primarily responsible for cooperating with all City
departments in the development of the City's annual tree plan.
B. Membership Of The Tree Advisory Committee. The Landscape Manager
and Landscape Division staff shall assume all the responsibilities and
duties of the Tree Advisory Committee as set forth in this Article, and
each member of the Landscape Division shall be a member of the Tree
Advisory Committee.
A. Responsibility. The Tree Advisory Committee shall have the
responsibility to participate in the writing and implementing of the
City's annual tree plan which plan shall set forth goals for the City with
respect to the planting, pruning, maintenance and removal of trees
within the City.
B. Duties. The Tree Advisory Committee shall fulfill the following duties:
1. Meet on an as-needed basis to fulfill the duties set forth in this
Article for the Tree Advisory Committee.
2. Document the condition of the trees within the City and create the
City's annual tree plan.
3. Receive citizen comment on the condition of the trees within the
City and make recommendations regarding the City's annual tree
plan.
4. Assist in the planning, advertise the occurrence, and participate in
the recognition of the City's annual Arbor Day activities.
5. Work in conjunction with all other City boards, commissions and
staff to improve the urban forest within the City.
Section
402.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.270
100:825

ARTICLE IX
Violation and Penalty Provisions
Section 402.280. Notice of Violation. [Ord. No. 5752 §1, 12-8-2011]
The City will typically give a ten (10) day written notice of a violation in
the event of an obstruction to the sight distance, canopy violation or other
violation within this Chapter. If, after the proper notice, no action has been
taken, the City, acting through the Director or his or her designee, may
plant, maintain and remove all vegetation as may be necessary to ensure
public safety. The City will then invoice the property owner in question
and if the invoice is not paid within the required time frame, a lien will be
placed on the property. It shall be a violation of this Section for any person
to interfere with the City's planting, pruning, maintenance or removal of
trees, and a violator shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each occurrence and, in addition thereto, shall be
required to replace the trees required by the Chapter. Violators may be
issued a summons to appear in the Municipal Court for the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri. Appeals from a conviction for violations of this Chapter shall be
as provided under Missouri law to the Circuit Court of St. Charles County,
Missouri.
Section
402.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
402.280
100:827
Chapter 405
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
Section
402.280
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
402.280
100:828
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 405.010. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018100]
A. Short Title. This Chapter shall be known and may be cited hereinafter
as the "Subdivision and Land Development Code" of the City of
O'Fallon, Missouri.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate and control
subdivision and development of land and matters relating thereto
within the City of O'Fallon in order to promote public safety, health and
general welfare of the community. These regulations are specifically
designed to:
1. Provide for orderly growth and harmonious development of
O'Fallon consistent with established policies of the City.
2. Secure proper arrangement of streets for efficient traffic
circulation through the coordination of existing and planned
streets, the Comprehensive Plan, public facilities and adjoining
developed land.
3. Achieve lots of maximum utility and viability laid out and of size so
as to be in harmony with existing and proposed development of the
area.
4. Secure adequate provisions for water, drainage and sanitary sewer
facilities based upon City, State and Federal requirements.
5. Provide open space, recreation areas, school sites and other public
facilities.
C. Authority. This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the statutory authority of
Sections 89.010 through 89.490, RSMo., as amended.
D. Interpretation And Conflict With Other Laws. This Chapter is not
intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere
with existing provisions of other ordinances or regulations, private
agreements, or with recorded restrictive covenants running with the
land to which the City of O'Fallon is a party. Where this Chapter
imposes a greater restriction upon land than is imposed or required by
previous ordinances of the City of O'Fallon, the provisions of this
Chapter shall prevail.
E. Administration. The provisions of this Chapter shall be administered in
accordance with Chapter 89, RSMo., as amended, and shall be
administered by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City
Administrator, the Director of Planning and Development or Building
Official or their delegate, the Mayor and the City Council.
100. Editor's Note: Section 1 of this ordinance repealed former Ch. 405, adopted and/or
amended by R.O. 2007; Ord. No. 1499, 8-17-1987, and as further amended.
Section
405.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.010
100:829
F. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and approve the
various application forms and checklists used for the subdivision and
land development process.
G. Schedule Of Fees, Costs And Expenses. The City Council shall establish
a Schedule of Fees, Costs and Expenses for all matters pertaining to the
Subdivision and Land Development Code. The Schedule of Fees, Costs
and Expenses shall be established as Appendix B of Title IV: Land Use.
The Schedule of Fees, Costs and Expenses shall be filed with the City
Clerk. The Schedule of Fees, Costs and Expenses shall only be amended
by the City Council and shall not require a recommendation from the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
1. No final action shall be taken on any display house plat variance
request or appeal of an administrative decision that requires a
straight application fee until said fee has been paid in full.
2. For a preliminary plat, the applicant shall pay for the following
costs:
a. The initial application fee.
b. The cost for the legal notice advertising the public hearing.
c. The cost for the notification of adjacent property owners.
d. If a traffic study is required to be performed by the developer's
traffic engineer, the developer will be responsible for the cost
for the review of the traffic study by the City's traffic
consultant.
e. If the application is tabled by the Planning and Zoning
Commission at the request of the applicant or for failure of the
applicant and/or their authorized or designated
representative(s) to attend the meeting, the applicant will be
responsible for the costs, if any, of readvertising the public
hearing and the renotification of the adjacent property owners.
f. Failure to pay for these costs within thirty (30) days of being
billed by the City will result in the issuance of a summons by
the Code Enforcement Division.
3. Construction site plans and grading plans which require that the
applicant pay a fee of two percent (2%) of the estimated cost for
improvements shall be due at the time of plan approval.
H. Conformity With Zoning Code. All plats reviewed under provisions of
this Chapter shall conform to all Zoning Code provisions for the district
in which the proposed plat is to be located. All required zoning changes
shall be made prior to approval of the record plat by the Council.
I. Platting Exceptions. The requirements of this Chapter do not apply to
the following types of land subdivision:
Section
405.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.010
100:830
1. The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of fifteen
(15) acres or more in size which do not involve any new public
streets or access easements, provided no illegally zoned lot is
created by the subdivider.
2. Boundary Adjustment Plats. Recording of a subdivision plat shall
not be required in case of the sale or exchange of parcels of land
between owners of adjoining properties for the purpose of
adjustments in boundaries, provided that additional lots are not
thereby created; that the original lots are not reduced below the
minimum sizes required by this Chapter or the Zoning Code; and
that a survey of the adjustments of boundaries is recorded with the
Recorder of Deeds of St. Charles County. Refer also to Section
405.060. If the boundary adjustment plat contains changes to any
existing easements or addition of new easements or right-of-way
dedicated to the City of O'Fallon for public use, the plat is required
to be reviewed and approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council to be recorded. Boundary
adjustment plats which do not affect any easements or right-of-way
dedicated to the City of O'Fallon may require only administrative
review and approval by the Director of Planning and the City
Engineer to be recorded.
3. The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a
right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities or other
pipelines which do not involve any new streets or involving rights of
access to adjacent parcels.
4. The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or
grants or conveyance relating to the vacation of land impressed
with a public use.
5. Conveyances made to correct description of prior conveyances.
6. Condominium/Villa Plats. The subdivision or resubdivision of lots or
parcels of land for the use of villa, condominium or multifamily
units as defined by the Zoning Code consisting of no more than
twelve (12) dwelling units per structure or the subdivision or
resubdivision of the lots or parcels of land for commercial or
industrial condominiums, where appropriately zoned. Said plat
shall be reviewed and approved administratively by the Director of
Planning and Development and the City Engineer and/or his/her
designees for compliance with approved final plans and/or
preliminary plats. The Director of Planning and Development, at
his/her discretion, may submit these plats to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for review and action.
J. Non-Platted Developments — Development Performance Guarantee. All
developments will be reviewed for performance guarantee of
construction plans and site plan improvements.
Section
405.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.015
100:831
Section 405.015. Hazardous Pipelines. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
A. A subdivider shall determine whether a hazardous pipeline crosses a
proposed subdivision.
B. A subdivider shall depict on the plat a restricted pipeline area and a
limited improvement area, if any.
C. A person may not place a structure or excavate within a restricted
pipeline area.
1. This prohibition does not apply to:
a. The hazardous pipeline or an appurtenance to the pipeline;
b. A facility that produces, consumes, processes or stores the
product transported by the hazardous pipeline, including a
power generation facility;
c. A utility line that crosses the restricted pipeline area, including
an appurtenance to the line;
d. A utility service connection;
e. A road;
f. A surface parking lot;
g. A structure or excavation that the Building Official and City
Engineer determine does not disturb the pipeline or impede its
operation;
h. Grading that the Building Official and City Engineer determine
does not disturb the pipeline or impede its operation.
2. Before a person may place a road, surface parking lot or utility line
in a restricted pipeline area, the person must deliver to the
Manager of Building and Code Enforcement and City Engineer a
certification by an engineer registered in the State of Missouri
stating that the proposed construction activity and structure are
designed to prevent disturbing the hazardous pipeline or impeding
its operation.
D. A person with actual knowledge of the existence of a restricted pipeline
area or a limited improvement area on his/her lot who seeks to convey a
lot containing such area shall, before execution of a contract to convey
the lot or if no contract is executed before title is transferred, deliver to
the other party a document describing such area, the limitations on its
development and the name and address of the pipeline owner or
operator. All marketing materials related to any new construction
occurring or contemplated to occur upon any portion of a lot which
contains a restricted pipeline area or a limited improvement area shall
include a description of such area, the limitations on its development
and the name and address of the pipeline owner or operator.
Section
405.015
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.015
100:832
E. All residential property within the restricted pipeline area shall be
platted as common ground.
F. All other provisions of the code must be met, including Sections
406.130 and 400.250.
Section
405.015
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.015
100:833

ARTICLE II
Rules And Definitions
Section 405.020. Rules Applying To The Text. [Ord. No. 6496,
9-13-2018]
Section 405.030. Definitions. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in interpretation and
enforcement of this Chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated:
ABUTS/ABUTTING — To be separated by common property lines or an alley.
This term implies a closer proximity than the term "adjacent."
ACCESS — A place or means of entering and exiting from a public right-ofway
to private property.
ACCESS EASEMENT — An easement which grants the right to cross
property.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A subordinate building or
structure having a use customarily incident to and located on the lot
occupied by the main building. A building housing an accessory use is
considered an integral part of the main building when it has any part of a
wall in common with the main building or is under an extension of the main
roof and designed as an integral part of the main building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use
of the premises.
ALLEYS — A private right-of-way that provides secondary vehicular access
to the rear or side of a lot, block or parcel of land otherwise abutting a
street.
ALTERATION — Any addition, removal, extension or change in the location
of any exterior wall of a main building or accessory building.
AREA, GROSS — The entire area within the boundary lines of a territory
proposed for a subdivision, including the area to be dedicated for street and
alley right-of-way and public use.
A. Rules Of Construction. For the purposes of this Chapter, rules of
construction applying to the text, as follows:
1. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and the
singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary.
2. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the
word "may" or "should" is permissive.
3. Words or terms not interpreted or defined by this Article shall be
used with a meaning of common or standard utilization.
Section
405.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.030
100:835
AREA, NET — The entire area within the boundary lines of a territory
proposed for subdivision, less the area to be dedicated for street and alley
right-of-way and public use.
AS-BUILT PLANS — Construction plans revised to show a facility or
structure as actually constructed and as it appears on the tract of land
involved.
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The City of O'Fallon, Missouri,
and specifically the employees designated by the City Administrator.
BENCHMARK — A definite point of known elevation and location and more
or less permanent character.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BLOCK — An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded
by streets, highways or rights-of-way, except alleys, or between streets,
highways, streams, parks, etc., or any other barrier, or combination thereof,
to the continuity of development.
BUFFER STRIP — See "greenbelt."
BUILDER — That person, firm, or corporation by whom a building or
buildings will be constructed on a development pursuant to the
requirements of these regulations. A developer may also be a builder.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels
or property of any kind, but not including any vehicle, trailer (with or
without wheels) nor any movable device, such as furniture, machinery or
equipment.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The proportion of the lot area, expressed as
a percent that is covered by the maximum horizontal cross section of a
building or buildings.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average ground level
abutting a building or structure to the highest point of the roof of a building
or highest point of any permanent part of a structure other than a building.
BUILDING LINE OR SETBACK LINE — A line parallel to a street rightof-
way line, shore of a lake, edge of a stream, or other property line
established on a parcel of land or lot for the purpose of prohibiting
construction of a building or structure in the area between such building
line and right-of-way, lakeshore, streambank or other property line.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Building Official for the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri.
Section
405.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.030
100:836
CAPTION OR TITLE — The name by which the plat is legally and commonly
known.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Official certification which permits the
use of a building in accordance with the approved plans and specifications
and which certifies compliance with the provisions of law for the use and
occupancy of the building in its several parts together with any special
stipulations or conditions of the building permit.
CITY — The City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
CITY CLERK — The person designated by the City Council to sign the record
plat signifying approval by the City Council.
CITY COUNCIL — The officially elected City Council of the City of O'Fallon;
the term may be abbreviated in this Chapter as the "Council."
CITY ENGINEER — The officially appointed Engineer of the City of O'Fallon.
CITY PLANNER — The person designated by the City Council to work with
the City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of Adjustment
on all development-related matters.
CITY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION — The officially appointed
Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of O'Fallon; the term may be
abbreviated in this Chapter as the "Commission."
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CLEARING — Disturbance of the existing topography as part of the
development by the removal of existing trees, shrubs and other indigenous
vegetation but not including grass and weeds or any disruption to the
existing soil. This activity does not require a permit but requires compliance
with the City's tree preservation ordinance.
COMMON ELEMENTS (CONDOMINIUMS) — All portions of a
condominium property except the units.
COMMON GROUND — That land set aside for open space, recreational or
other common use by the owners of the lots in a subdivision and which is
owned by trustees for the sole benefit, use and enjoyment of the lot owners
present and future. No lot owner shall have the right to convey his/her
interest in the common ground except as an incident of the ownership of a
platted lot.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A comprehensive land use plan made and
adopted by the City Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council
for the City of O'Fallon which, through any combination of tests, charts
and maps, sets forth proposals for general locations for various land uses,
streets, parks, schools, public buildings, utilities and for the physical
development of O'Fallon.
CONDOMINIUM — A form of ownership pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 448, RSMo., in which individuals own the interior space of separate
Section
405.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.030
100:837
units, but together through an owner's association share ownership of all
common elements and common ground appurtenant to the units.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) construction permits issued by
MDNR. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
one (1) acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
CONSTRUCTION PLANS (IMPROVEMENT PLANS) — The engineering
drawings showing types of materials and construction details for physical
structures and facilities, excluding dwelling units to be installed in
conjunction with development of a subdivision.
CULs-DE-SAC — A local street with only one (1) outlet and having an
appropriate turnaround at the end for the safe and convenient reversal of
traffic movement.
CURB LEVEL — The mean level of the curb in front of the lot or, in case
of a corner lot, along that abutting street where the mean curb level is the
highest.
DEDICATION — Intentional transfer by the developer to the public of
ownership of or an interest in land for a public purpose. Dedication may
be effected by compliance with Statutes relating to dedication of land,
by formal deed of conveyance, or by any other method recognized by
the laws of the State of Missouri. Acceptance by the City of maintenance
responsibilities will be an action by the City Council separate from the
dedication.
DEED — A legal document which conveys real property.
DEED RESTRICTION — A form of covenant contained in a deed of
conveyance.
DETENTION FACILITY — Any detention facility controlling stormwater
discharge from a site wholly owned/maintained and controlled by a property
owner. Also, all facilities incorporating detention/retention storage of
stormwater in or on any of the following:
DEVELOPER — That person, firm or corporation by whom a tract will be
subdivided and improved pursuant to the requirements of these regulations.
DEVELOPMENT — Any subdivision of land as herein defined or any
material change in the use or appearance of any parcel of land subject to
1. Roofs of buildings or structures also used for other purposes.
2. Paved or surfaced areas also used for other purposes.
Enclosed underground pipes or structures on private property when the
surface is used for other purposes.
3.
Depressed or open grassy areas also used for water quality or
stormwater storage purposes.
4.
Section
405.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.030
100:838
provisions of this Chapter or the act of building structures and/or installing
site improvements.
DIRECTOR OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT — The Director of
Planning and Development for the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
DISPLAY HOME — A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision.
DRAINAGE AREA — The part of the tributary area for which a detention
facility is designed to control peak discharge rates.
DRAINAGE DEVELOPMENT — Any activity, including subdivision, that
alters the surface of the land to create additional impervious surfaces,
including, but not limited to, pavement, buildings and structures except:
EASEMENT — A right or privilege to use a portion of another's property for
a particular purpose.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A device or devices used to discharge water
under conditions of inflow that exceed the design inflow. The emergency
spillway functions primarily to prevent damage to the detention facility that
would permit the sudden release of impounded water. It shall be designed
to handle the runoff from the 100-year storm.
EMPC — Abbreviation for Eastern Missouri Pavement Consortium.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer registered in the State of Missouri.
ESCROW AGENT — A title company, bank, savings and loan association,
trust company, attorney or other person, company or agency approved by
the City Council to act as escrow agent under the provisions of Article IV,
Section 405.110, of this Chapter.
EXCAVATING — The removal or recovery of soil, rock, minerals, sand,
gravel or other similar earthen materials from water or land, on or beneath
the land surface, whether exposed or submerged.
FILLING — The depositing or dumping of earthen material on or into the
ground resulting in the raising of the grade at that location.
Additions to, improvements and repair of existing single-family and
duplex dwellings.
1.
Construction of any buildings, structures and/or appurtenant service
roads, drives and walks on a site having previously provided
stormwater control as part of a larger unit of development consistent
with the original development plan.
2.
Remodeling, repair, replacement and improvement to any existing
structure or facility and appurtenances that does not increase the
impervious area on the site in excess of ten percent (10%) or add one
(1) acre of impervious area.
3.
Construction of any one (1) new single-family or duplex dwelling unit,
irrespective of the site area on which the same may be situated.
4.
Section
405.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.030
100:839
FLOODPLAIN — The area of land adjoining the channel of a river, stream,
watercourse, lake or similar body of water which has a one-percent chance
to be inundated by a flood in any given year as defined by FEMA.
FREEBOARD — The difference in elevation between the top of a structure
such as a dam or open channel and the maximum design water surface
elevation or high-water mark and is an allowance against overtopping by
waves or other transient disturbances or the difference between the base
flood elevation (BFE) and the lowest floor elevation of any structure.
FRONTAGE — The length of the property abutting on one (1) side of a street
measured along the dividing line between the property and the street rightof-
way.
GRADE — The slope of a surface specified in percent and shown on a
surface profile plan as required herein.
GRADING — An activity requiring a permit that alters the natural or
existing grade, including excavating, grubbing, filling, stockpiling,
stripping, quarrying or any combination thereof.
GRADING PLAN — The development plan that must be reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer and/or his/her designee prior to the grading
of fifty (50) or more cubic yards of any site within the City.
GREENBELT OR BUFFER STRIP — A strip of land located between
incompatible land uses which is subject to private use restrictions, or a
negative easement, or is dedicated to public use as open space, for the
purpose of protecting the built environment of a subdivision or to enhance
a street right-of-way, or both.
GRUBBING — The removal or destruction of plant root systems by
mechanical, chemical or other means. This activity requires a grading
permit.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
HAZARDOUS PIPELINE — A pipeline:
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge
to the storm drain system, except as exempted in Section 405.245(G)(1) of
this Chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Either of the following:
Designed for the transmission of a "hazardous liquid," as defined by
Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Section 195.2, with an
inside diameter of eight (8) inches or more; and
1.
2. Which is regulated by the United States Department of Transportation.
Section
405.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.030
100:840
IMPROVEMENT PLANS (CONSTRUCTION PLANS) — The engineering
plans showing types of materials and construction details for the physical
structures and facilities to be installed both in, or in conjunction with, the
proposed subdivision.
IMPROVEMENTS — Any structural, material or physical change incident to
servicing or furnishing facilities for a subdivision such as, but not limited
to, grading, street pavements, curb and gutter, driveway approaches,
sidewalks and pedestrianways, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities, lakes, waterways, canals,
permanent street monuments and other appurtenant construction;
demolition of structures; planting and landscaping; or removal of trees and
other vegetative cover.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26
(b) (14).
INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision and development of land, as
defined in this Article, in which the land is to be used for medium or
light manufacturing plants, trucking and/or railroad facilities, warehousing,
industrial research and similar activities.
LIMITED IMPROVEMENT AREA — Includes an area that begins twenty-five
(25) feet of either side of any hazardous pipeline and extends to fifty (50)
feet from either side of any hazardous pipeline.
LOT — A measured portion of a tract of land, described and fixed in a
recorded plat or in a plat proposed to be recorded, considered and intended
as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal surface area within the boundaries of a
lot exclusive of any area designated for street purposes.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance from the front lot line to the
rear line.
LOT LINE WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines,
measured at the front building line.
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including,
but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater
discharge, including sewage, process wastewater and chlorinated
water discharged from swimming pools, to enter the storm drain
system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had
been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
1.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
2.
Section
405.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.030
100:841
LOT LINE, FRONT — The boundary between a lot and the street on which
it fronts.
LOT LINE, REAR — The boundary line or lines opposite and most distant
from the front street line; except that in the case of uncertainty, the Building
Inspector shall determine the rear line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot boundary line not a front or rear line thereof; a
side line may be a party lot line, a line bordering on an alley or place or a
side street line.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot having frontage on two (2) nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. Also known as a
"through lot."
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot whose side lines do not abut upon any street.
MANAGER OF BUILDING AND CODE ENFORCEMENT — The Manager of
Building and Code Enforcement for the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
MATERIAL CHANGE — Includes, but is not limited to, any commencement
of mining, excavation, grading or land clearance; deposit of refuse, waste or
fill on land not already used for that purpose or permitted to be used for that
purpose by the Zoning Code; or which extends the height of any existing
deposit above the level of land adjoining the site; alteration of a shore bank,
or floodplain of a river, stream or any lake, natural or artificial.
MSD — Abbreviation for Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — The system
of facilities designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater,
including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, inlets, ditches, storm drains, swales,
sidewalks, and natural or man-made drainage channels, owned and
operated by the City and which is not used for the collecting or conveying
of sewage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency [or by a State under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)] that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an
individual, group or general area-wide basis.
NEGATIVE EASEMENT — A grant by the developer to the public, a
corporation or person(s) for use of a recorded strip of land for open space
or other non-developed purposes.
NON-ACCESS RESERVATION — A parcel or tract of subdivision land
withheld from development and subject to private use and access
restrictions for the purpose of protecting the environment of a subdivision
or to enhance a street right-of-way or to improve traffic flow on a principal
street.
Section
405.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.030
100:842
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
OFF SITE — Any premises not located within the area of the property to
be subdivided or developed, whether or not in the same ownership of the
applicant for subdivision approval or a building permit.
OPEN SPACE — Land dedicated or reserved for use by the general public
or for use by residents of the subdivision, or land held out of development
and retained in its natural conditions, with or without public access. Open
space includes, but is not limited to, parks, parkways, playgrounds, school
sites, wildlife or plant life preserves and nature study areas.
PARCEL OR TRACT — A continuous area or acreage of land which can be
divided or subdivided as provided for in the State of Missouri and by this
Chapter.
PDF — Abbreviation for an electronic file format known as "portable
document format."
PEDESTRIANWAY — A separate right-of-way dedicated to or reserved for
public use by pedestrians, which crosses blocks or other tracts of land to
facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) — An area with a minimum
continuous coverage of five (5) acres which is to be developed as a single
entity according to a plan and which is to contain one (1) or more
residential, commercial, industrial or other land uses; along with associated
uses primarily for the benefit of the planned unit development, a PUD may
be planned, developed and regulated as a single land use unit.
PLAT — A map or chart of a tract of land or a subdivision of land.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The map(s), drawing(s) and/or chart(s) on which
a developer's plan of subdivision and existing conditions are presented to
the Planning and Zoning Commission which will submit its findings as to
approval, conditional approval or disapproval to the City Council and shall
include the reasons for such action as part of its permanent record.
PLAT, RECORD — A plat depicting a subdivision previously granted
preliminary approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission, designating
information set forth in this Chapter, designating exact survey location of
lots or parcels, as well as bearing the seal of a professional engineer or
surveyor registered in the State of Missouri.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; silt, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other
discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;
Section
405.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.030
100:843
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel or land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PRINCIPAL SPILLWAY — A device such as an inlet, pipe, weir, (structural or
non-structural) opening in a berm, etc., discharging water during operation
of the facility.
PRIVATE STREET OR ROADWAY — Property in either platted or unplatted
areas, which has been approved under the terms of this Chapter used and
open for private and public vehicular traffic, but not dedicated, owned or
maintained by the City of O'Fallon.
PRIVATE-SHARED DETENTION FACILITY — Any detention facility
controlling discharge from a tributary area owned by more than one (1)
owner. This is treated the same as defined in "private detention facility"
above.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any facility for which the local government
or utility may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and
operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government
or utilities responsibility is established.
PUBLIC USE — Public parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, designated
scenic or historic sites; school sites or sites for other public buildings; and
other areas dedicated to public use or enjoyment.
PUBLIC USE, QUASI — Any use which is essentially public, as in services
rendered, although it is under private ownership or control.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A business or service having an appropriate franchise
from the City/State and engaged in regularly supplying the public with some
commodity or service which is of public consequence and need, such as
electricity, gas, water, etc.
QUARRYING — The removal, excavation or processing of stone, rock, sand,
gravel or other earthen material by method of blasting, crushing or
excavation equipment.
RATIONAL METHOD — An empirical formula for calculating peak rates of
runoff resulting from rainfall.
REPLAT — The process of changing, or the map or plat which changes, the
boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or portion thereof.
RESTRICTED PIPELINE AREA — Includes an area within twenty-five (25)
feet of either side of any hazardous pipeline.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT — A restriction on the use of land, normally
among private participants, contained in the deed to the property or
otherwise formally recorded.
Section
405.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.030
100:844
REVEGETATION — Establishment of germinated plant life to control
sediment and erosion control at a minimum rate of seventy percent (70%)
of coverage per square foot.
REVERSE FRONTAGE — When a subdivision lot occurs between two (2)
non-intersecting streets, one (1) of which is a parkway, thoroughfare or
collector and the other is a minor residential street, the lot will front on
the minor residential street and a non-access reservation will be provided
buffering the rear of the lot from the traffic artery.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land opened, reserved or dedicated for a street,
sewer, water, walk, drainage course or other public purpose.
ROAD BED — The entire improved portion of the street, including shoulder,
parking lanes, travel ways, curbs and gutters, which lie between the rightof-
way lines.
SETBACK — The required distance between every structure and the lot line
on the lot on which it is located.
SIDEWALK — A structure, including necessary guardrails and steps, placed
within the right-of-way of existing streets or connecting buildings, parking
lots, public use area or other facilities having access to the street right-ofway
for the purpose of providing safe pedestrian movement.
SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE METHOD — A technique for calculating
stormwater runoff volume and peak flow described in Soil Conservation
Services (SCS) Technical Release 55, Second Edition, June 1986.
STOCKPILING — The accumulation or storage of soil, rock, stone, sand,
gravel or other earthen material.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Private or publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage
structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting of water
from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices (BMPs) and activities to be
implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or
contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant
discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems and/or receiving
waters to the maximum extent practicable.
STREET — A general term denoting a public or private thoroughfare which
affords the principal means of access to abutting property. The term
includes all facilities which normally are found within the right-of-way;
it shall also include such other designations as highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or court or
other such terms but shall not include alley or pedestrianway. Refer to the
Section
405.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.030
100:845
St. Louis County Design Criteria for the Preparation of Improvement Plans
for a more detailed breakdown of additional street classification definitions.
STRIPPING — Any activity performed as part of a development which
removes or disturbs vegetated or otherwise stabilized soil surfaces.
STRUCTURE — Any object or assembly of materials constructed or installed
on, above or below the surface of a parcel and includes, but is not limited
to, any combination of materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof
to form a building for occupancy by persons, animals or property; anything
attached to a building; any pole, pipeline or other part of a distribution
system whether located on, above or below the surface of a parcel. A
structure is any improvement as defined in this Article, other than a
material change as defined in this Article.
SUBBASE (BASE) — That portion of a roadbed upon which lies above a
compacted subgrade and is to be constructed of material meeting Missouri
Department of Transportation (MoDOT) Type 1 or Type 5 aggregate
specifications and compacted for a road surface to be placed upon.
SUBDIVIDER — The owner, agent or person having control of such land
as the term is used in this Chapter. "Subdivision" shall mean the division
of land into two (2) or more parts, including the resubdivision of a lot
or parcel. Any sale or rental of a division of land by metes and bounds
or lot description shall constitute a subdivision of land and shall require
compliance with this Chapter unless it is a separate parcel of record at the
time of the effective date of this Chapter. Cemeteries shall not be included
in the definition of "subdivision" and shall not be subject to provisions of
this Chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The partitioning of a parcel or tract of land by an owner or
developer into two (2) or more lots of any size for the purpose of sale, lease
or development, whether immediate or future; included are all changes
in street lines, dedication or platting of streets, and changes in lot lines.
Cemeteries shall not be included in the definition of "subdivision" and shall
not be subject to provisions of this Chapter.
SUBGRADE — That portion of a roadbed upon which a compacted subbase
is to be constructed.
SURETY BOND — A bond approved by the City Council posted with a surety
company, as defined in this Article, to guarantee a developer's performance
of subdivision improvements in accordance with Section 405.110 of this
Chapter.
SURETY COMPANY — A surety, title or insurance company approved by the
City Council to act as surety under Section 405.110 of this Chapter.
SURVEYOR — A professional land surveyor registered in the State of
Missouri.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A permit to occupy a
development prior to site improvements being completed.
Section
405.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.030
100:846
TRANSITION — A strip of land located between incompatible land uses
which is subject to private use restrictions, or a negative easement, or is
dedicated to public uses as open space, for the purpose of protecting the
built environment of a development or to enhance a street right-of-way, or
both.
TRIBUTARY AREA — All land draining to the point of consideration,
regardless of ownership.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
YARD — An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot
lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the
ground upward, except as otherwise provided. In measuring a yard for the
purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or
the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line
and the building shall be used. Where lots abut a street, all yards abutting
said street shall be measured from the street right-of-way.
YARD, FRONT — A yard across the full width of the lot extending from the
front line of the main building to the front line of the lot.
YARD, REAR — A yard between the rear lot line and the rear line of the main
building and the side lot lines.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the main building and the adjacent side line
of the lot and extending entirely from a front yard to the rear yard.
Section
405.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.030
100:847

ARTICLE III
Plat Procedures And Specifications
Section 405.040. Preliminary Plat Procedures. [Ord. No. 6496,
9-13-2018]
[Note — Ord. No. 5585 § 1, adopted April 22, 2010, sets out the applications
and checklists for record plats, condominium, resubdivision and boundary
adjustment plats and commercial site plans for all reviews pertaining to said
applications, etc. All material noted herein is on file in the City offices.]
A. Filing Procedures. Meeting dates, application fees and application
submittal deadlines for the Planning and Zoning Commission are posted
on the City's website (www.ofallon.mo.us) or can be obtained by calling
the Planning and Development Department. For all submittals, the
developer shall submit electronic pdf sets of the preliminary plat and
colored building elevations (if applicable).
B. Information Required. The preliminary plat shall be designed by a
registered professional engineer or land surveyor, with their stamp,
signature and address, that shall contain a complete set of notations
and descriptions that supply the City staff with all relevant site
information. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council
shall approve the applications and checklists for preliminary plats. (See
Engineering Department for application and checklist for compliance
with this Section.)
C. Procedure For The Review Of A Preliminary Plat. [Ord. No. 6500,
9-27-2018]
1. Public Hearing Notification And Sign Posting Requirements. The
preliminary plat application shall be subject to the public hearing
notification and sign posting requirements established in Section
400.685 of the Zoning Code.
2. Review Of The Preliminary Plat Application. Upon receipt of the
preliminary plat application, staff of the City's Planning and
Development Department will determine if it contains all the
necessary information to proceed with the review. If it is
determined that it is complete, staff from the City's Planning and
Development Department will conduct a comprehensive review of
the applicant's first submittal and provide a written list of any items
that will need to be corrected, modified or amended in order to
meet the requirements of this Article. The applicant will then be
given the opportunity to make the needed corrections,
modifications and amendments on their second submittal. If the
applicant fails to address the needed corrections, modifications and
amendments on the second submittal to the satisfaction of the
Director of Planning and Development, staff will recommend to the
Planning and Zoning Commission that this item be tabled. If tabled
by the Planning and Zoning Commission for failure of the applicant
Section
405.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.040
100:849
to address the needed corrections, modifications and amendments
on the second submittal to the satisfaction of the Director of
Planning and Development, the applicant will be responsible for
the cost, if any, of readvertising the public hearing and the
renotification of the adjacent property owners.
3. Preparation Of A Staff Report. The Planning and Development
Department will prepare a staff report containing an analysis of the
proposed preliminary plat application. A copy of the preliminary
plat and the staff report will be distributed to each of the members
of the Planning and Zoning Commission. A copy of the staff report
will be provided to the applicant.
4. Review By The Planning And Zoning Commission And Subsequent
Review And Right Of Appeal.
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission will review the
preliminary plat and conduct a public hearing. The public
hearing is open to all citizens. The applicant and/or their
authorized or designated representative(s) must attend the
meeting and make a formal presentation to the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Failure of the applicant and/or their
authorized or designated representative(s) to attend the
meeting shall cause the Planning and Zoning Commission to
table and continue or postpone the public hearing at the
Commission's discretion the request for preliminary plat
approval. If tabled by the Planning and Zoning Commission for
failure of the applicant and/or their authorized or designated
representative(s) to attend the meeting, the applicant will be
responsible for the cost, if any, of readvertising or continuing
the public hearing and the renotification of the adjacent
property owners. During the public hearing, the Planning and
Zoning Commission will entertain comments from both
proponents and opponents of the proposed preliminary plat.
After the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall conduct a formal vote on the preliminary plat and either:
(1) Table the request due to lack of sufficient information;
(2) Approve the preliminary plat;
(3) Approve the preliminary plat with conditions; or
(4) Deny the preliminary plat.
b. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall then notify the City
Council and the Director of Planning and Development of its
approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the
preliminary plat along with written reasons for its action. The
City Council may review and modify such decision in the
Council's discretion.
Section
405.040
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.040
100:850
c. In addition to the City Council's review of the Commission's
decision, any aggrieved party may, within fifteen (15) days of
the Commission's decision regarding a preliminary plat, file
with the City Council a written request for reconsideration and
appeal of the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission
under this Section. The written request must set forth in a
concise manner the decision being appealed and all grounds
known to the appellant as to wherein and why the decision is
allegedly in error. The request for reconsideration and appeal
must be filed with the City Clerk within the time specified
above. A copy of the request and all supporting documents or
materials filed by the aggrieved party must be served by the
aggrieved party on the applicant (if different than the
aggrieved party) by personal service or by certified United
States mail, return receipt requested, within three (3) days of
filing with the City Clerk. Proof of service on the applicant
must be filed with the City Clerk within six (6) days of filing of
the request. The City Council may consider the appeal on the
record of the prior decision and the City's records or may, at its
sole discretion, receive additional evidence in such manner as
it deems appropriate in light of the circumstances. The City
Council shall then take action to approve, conditionally
approve or deny the preliminary plat.
D. Effect Of Preliminary Plat Approval. Preliminary plat approval shall
confer upon the developer, for a period of one (1) year from date of
approval, the conditional right that the general terms and conditions
under which the approval was granted will not be changed by the
Commission or Council. This one-year period may be extended by the
Commission if the developer has applied in writing for such an
extension and the Commission determines a longer period should be
granted due to unusual circumstances. If an extension is not granted,
the preliminary plat approval is null and void. If no record plat of a
subdivision for which preliminary approval has been given is approved
within said one-year period, or such longer period as the Commission
may allow, a resubmission and review by the Planning and Zoning
Commission may be required upon determination by the Commission.
After approval of the preliminary plat, the developer may proceed with
the detailed construction plan required for all facilities and utilities to
be provided and may submit the proposed record plat to the City
Council for approval. Once a construction plan is approved (based on
the approved preliminary plat), the approval of the preliminary plat
shall be automatically extended as long as the construction plan
approval is valid. Extension of a preliminary plat prior to construction
plan approval must be requested prior to the expiration of the approved
plat. [Ord. No. 6500, 9-27-2018]
Section
405.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.050
100:851
Section 405.050. Display Home Plat Procedure. [Ord. No. 6496,
9-13-2018]
[Note — Ord. No. 5585 § 1, adopted April 22, 2010, sets out the applications
and checklists for record plats, condominium, resubdivision and boundary
adjustment plats and commercial site plans for all reviews pertaining to said
applications, etc. All material noted herein is on file in the City offices.]
A. Purpose. To provide a procedure whereby the construction of a display
home or homes may begin prior to the recording of the record plat.
B. Procedure. [Ord. No. 6500, 9-27-2018]
1. After receiving approval of a preliminary plat of a proposed
subdivision from the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
developer may submit an application for a display home plat for
review and action by the Planning and Zoning Commission. A
reasonable number of displays may be approved where, in the
opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, they are
appropriate for the type of development contemplated.
2. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall then notify the City
Council and City Engineer of its approval, conditional approval or
disapproval of the preliminary plat along with written reasons for
its action. The City Council may review and modify such decision in
the Council's discretion.
3. In addition to the City Council's review of the Commission's
decision, any aggrieved party may, within fifteen (15) days of the
Commission's decision regarding a display home plat, file with the
City Council a written request for reconsideration and appeal of the
decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission under this
Section. The written request must set forth in a concise manner the
decision being appealed and all grounds known to the appellant as
to wherein and why the decision is allegedly in error. The request
for reconsideration and appeal must be filed with the City Clerk
within the time specified above. A copy of the request and all
supporting documents or materials filed by the aggrieved party
must be served by the aggrieved party on the applicant (if different
than the aggrieved party) by personal service or by certified United
States mail, return receipt requested, within three (3) days of filing
with the City Clerk. Proof of service on the applicant must be filed
with the City Clerk within six (6) days of filing of the request. The
City Council may consider the appeal on the record of the prior
decision and the City's records or may, at its sole discretion, receive
additional evidence in such manner as it deems appropriate in light
of the circumstances. The City Council shall then take action to
approve, conditionally approve or deny the display home plat.
C. Information Required. The display house plat shall be designed by a
registered professional engineer with their stamp, signature and
Section
405.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.050
100:852
Section 405.060. Record Plat Procedures. [Ord. No. 6496,
9-13-2018]
[Note — Ord. No. 5585 § 1, adopted April 22, 2010, sets out the applications
and checklists for record plats, condominium, resubdivision and boundary
adjustment plats and commercial site plans for all reviews pertaining to said
applications, etc. All material noted herein is on file in the City offices.]
address that shall contain a complete set of notations and descriptions
that supply the City staff with all relevant site information. The display
house plat shall show the location, size, proposed builder, and the
number and location of parking areas of each display home in relation
to the proposed lots. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council shall approve the applications and checklists for display house
plats.
A. Filing Procedures. One (1) copy of the proposed record plat shall be
submitted in the form required in this Chapter to the City Engineer and/
or his/her designee together with completed application form, approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, and fees and
security agreement required for performance guarantee. Upon
correction, notification and corrections made accordingly, a
reproducible original (Mylar) must be submitted at least ten (10)
working days prior to the meeting of the City Council at which the plat
is to be considered. The City Engineer and/or his/her designee shall
determine if the submittal is complete and, if so, transmit same to the
Council in adequate time for inclusion on the agenda for the Council's
next meeting. If the application is not complete, the City Engineer and/
or his/her designee shall so notify the applicant in writing and shall
indicate deficiencies. A record plat shall not be accepted for review
after the date of expiration of the approval of the preliminary plat. The
draft record plat shall be signed by the registered engineer or land
surveyor prior to submitting to the City Engineer and/or his/her
designee. The final record plat shall be prepared and signed by all
parties on Mylar, or similar quality material, with maximum size of
nominally twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches or those
dimensions required by the St. Charles County Recorder of Deeds.
B. Information Required. Prior to approval of the record plat, the City
Council shall require the information as required per the application
and checklist approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
City Council. Unless the entire (master) subdivision is less than or equal
to twenty-five (25) lots, then the following conditions are preferred but
not required:
1. No record plat is to be submitted with less than or equal to twentyfive
(25) lots.
2. The lots must be directly adjacent to each other.
Section
405.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.060
100:853
3. If the entire subdivision has a total of twenty-six (26) to forty-nine
(49) lots, then special consideration may be given on the number of
lots to be platted.
C. Review Procedures. The record plat shall conform closely to the
preliminary plat as approved. Adequate security for all improvements
and facilities to be provided by the developer shall be submitted in
accordance with Section 405.110, and all dedications and easements
shall be evidenced as having been made before the Council may
approve the record plat. However, approval of the record plat shall not
constitute acceptance of items for dedication. Such acceptance
requires separate, formal action of the Council.
D. Record Plat Approval. The City Council shall review all
recommendations and either approve or disapprove the proposed
record plat within thirty (30) days of the date of submission. The
Council shall approve the plat if it conforms to the preliminary plat as
finally approved and to the provisions of the Subdivision Code and
Zoning Code.101 If the proposed record plat is approved and accepted
by the Council by ordinance, the City Clerk shall sign the record plat
signifying approval by the City Council which shall include the date of
approval and the date on which the City Clerk signs the certificate. If
the proposed record plat is disapproved, the City Clerk shall record the
reasons for rejection in the minutes of the Council meeting. The City
Clerk or the Director of Planning and Development shall then notify the
developer in writing of the action and reasons therefor and return the
plat to the developer.
1. Any subdivision with a pending Letter of Map Revision being
required may still seek City approval through the normal process.
The City highly recommends that the FEMA map changes be
approved prior to record plat approval; however, if that is not the
case, then the City will still process the record plat through City
Council with these requirements:
a. All lots within existing floodplain shall be listed on the record
plat.
b. The existing floodplain limits shall be shown on the record plat.
c. No occupancy permit may be issued on that affected lot until
the approved map changes from FEMA have been sent to the
City.
E. Effect Of Record Plat Approval. Approval of the record plat shall confer
upon the developer, for a period of one (1) year from the date of
approval, a right that all existing zoning regulations and subdivision
regulations shall remain unchanged as they apply to the property
included in the record plat. No subdivision or plat shall be recorded in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds for St. Charles County, Missouri,
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Zoning Code.
Section
405.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.060
100:854
unless and until the City Engineer and/or his/her designee approves the
construction plan and the approval of the City Council of the record
plat is endorsed thereon. No lot in the subdivision plat may transfer in
ownership until the construction plan has been approved by the City
Engineer and/or his/her designee and the plat officially recorded by the
County Recorder of Deeds. In cases where development is not proposed
and a record plat is desired by the property owner, an exemption on
the need for an approved construction plan may be given by the City
Engineer and/or his/her designee; however, suitable escrow or other
surety must be provided to ensure public access to the subdivided lots.
If no record plat of a subdivision for which final approval has been
given is recorded by the St. Charles Recorder of Deeds within said oneyear
period, the Council shall formally request the developer to explain
the extenuating circumstances preventing recording of the plat. The
Council shall then determine whether provision of an extension would
serve the best interests of the City of O'Fallon. If these findings are
negative, then the Council shall formally revoke final approval of the
plat and shall so notify the developer and the St. Charles Recorder
of Deeds. If the construction plan is approved and the plat officially
recorded within said time periods, the developer must diligently
proceed with the proposed construction (applying for construction and
building permits, installing streets, utilities, etc.) within two (2) years
of recording the plat; the City shall have authority to complete all
escrow items. If construction under the approved construction plan is
to continue beyond the two-year period, the developer must request an
extension of the approved plan and provide for extending the escrow or
other surety on the project prior to the expiration of the plan; otherwise
work on the project must cease.
F. Once the developer has received record plat approval, the developer
shall, when applicable, prominently display the following items of
information in their sales office:
1. Description of the developer's/subdivision trustees' responsibilities
for common ground within the subdivision.
2. A copy of the approved record plat/area map indicating the nature
of all current zoning adjacent to the development is required to be
prominently posted in the sales office.
3. A copy of all indentures, restrictions and covenants.
4. Developers are required to post these items at the sales office for
review by potential buyers and for inspection by City of O'Fallon
employees.
G. As a part of record plat submittal, all trust indentures/covenants/deed
restrictions will be required. These should address the maintenance of
common areas, private roads, and other applicable amenities and
minimum square footage for structures located within the subdivision.
Section
405.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.060
100:855
Section 405.065. Easement Procedures (Not For Record Plats).
[Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
H. Any recorded trust indentures/covenant/deed restriction establishing a
Board of Trustees or Board of Directors shall provide for not less than
the following elected representation by purchasers of developed lots
among the trustees/directors: one-third (1/3) of the trustees/directors
shall be purchasers of developed lots after occupancy permits for fifty
percent (50%) of the lots have been issued; two-thirds (2/3) of the
trustees shall be purchasers of developed lots after occupancy permits
for ninety-five percent (95%) of the lots have been issued; all of the
trustees shall be chosen by purchasers of developed lots after all of the
lots have been sold.
A. When Required. When easements are needed or required to be granted
to the City after a record plat has been approved, or outside of any
required plat, the owner or developer of the property shall file with the
City Engineer and/or his/her designee an easement.
B. Filing Procedures. The owner shall submit an unsigned easement
document to the City for review.
1. The easement shall contain the granting language, legal
description, and visual exhibit of the ground being granted.
2. Any easement submitted to the City of O'Fallon shall be formatted
per the requirements of the St. Charles County Recorder of Deeds
standards, fit for recording.
C. Review Of Draft Easement Language And Format. The City Engineer
and/or his/her designee shall review the easement for conformance to
standards and specifications set forth in this Chapter and other
applicable ordinances. The City Engineer and/or his/her designee may
request modifications in the easement. The City Engineer and/or his/
her designee shall then confer approval, conditional approval or
disapproval of the easement.
D. Approval Process. Once the City has reviewed the easement and
recommends approval, the owner shall submit a signed easement
document to the City for approval.
1. All easements either being granted to the City, being vacated by the
City, or City-owned property being sold shall follow these steps:
a. Planning and Zoning Commission consent calendar. The
easement will be placed on the soonest available Planning and
Zoning meeting.
b. City Council consent calendar if the easement is being granted
to the City at no cost to the City.
c. City Council ordinance if the City spends funds to acquire.
Section
405.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.065
100:856
2. The easement shall be recorded as soon as possible following
approval. The City will be provided with a book and page and/or a
recorded copy, from the Recorder's office, confirming approval.
Section
405.065
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.065
100:857

ARTICLE IV
Subdivision Improvements
Section 405.070. Grading Plan Process. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
[Note — Ord. No. 5454 § 1, adopted May 14, 2009, sets out the grading
permit applications and checklists and matters related thereto. Said
checklist and related information is on file in the City offices.]
A. Scope And Application. The requirements of this Section shall apply to
all site plan and construction plan approvals.
B. Filing Procedures. With regard to any real property within the City, the
owner(s) of real property must have first obtained approval of the
applicable site plan, preliminary plat or area plan for a proposed land
development project prior to submitting a grading plan for said
proposed land development project. The owner/developer shall submit
one (1) copy of the proposed grading plan in PDF format and a
completed application form to the City Engineer and/or his/her
designee.
C. Information Required. The grading plan shall be designed by a
registered professional engineer, with their stamp, signature and
address, and shall contain a complete set of notations and descriptions
that supply the City staff with all relevant site information. The
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall approve the
applications and checklists for grading plans. (See section Title IV
Notes: Notes and Appendixes, Appendix C for the checklists.102)
D. Review Procedures. The City Engineer and/or his/her designee shall
review the grading plan for conformance to standards and
specifications set forth in this Chapter and other applicable ordinances.
The City Engineer and/or his/her designee may request modifications in
the grading plan. The City Engineer and/or his/her designee shall then
confer approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the grading plan
within forty-five (45) days of filing and shall notify the developer with
written reasons for its action.
E. Effect Of Grading Plan Approval. Grading plan approval shall confer
upon the developer, for a period of one (1) year from date of approval,
the conditional right that the general terms and conditions under which
the approval was granted will not be changed by the City Engineer and/
or his/her designee. This one-year period may be extended by the City
Engineer and/or his/her designee if the developer has applied in writing
for such an extension and the City Engineer and/or his/her designee
determines a longer period should be granted due to unusual
circumstances. If an extension is not granted, the grading plan approval
is null and void. After approval of the grading plan, the developer may
proceed with the grading operations upon the final direction of the City
102. Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the City offices.
Section
405.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.070
100:859
Engineer and/or his/her designee and under the inspection of the
Department of Public Works. Construction site plan approvals granted
under Section 405.100 of this Chapter (which include grading
operations and do not already have a separate grading approval) shall
be considered as including a grading plan component and be subject to
the terms of this Section.
F. Improvement Installation Or Performance Guarantee. Refer to Section
405.112 for provisions.
G. Grading Operations. The following procedures are to be followed on all
sites:
1. The erosion and sediment control plans shall be implemented
before grading operations begin. It is noted that certain clearing,
removals and grading operations may be required in order to
establish the erosion and sediment control plan.
2. All erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented so
as to prevent the flow or runoff of mud, silt, dirt, debris and other
materials onto streets, sidewalks and other public rights-of-way.
Additionally, positive steps shall be exercised to prevent mud, silt,
dirt, debris and other materials from damaging adjacent property
and silting up all storm drainage systems whether on or off site.
Erosion and sediment control measures shall be designed at a
minimum to accommodate flows from a fifteen-year, twenty-minute
storm. It is understood that the Missouri Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) approves a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP). In this plan, certain areas are designed to collect silt and
other debris on site. It shall not be construed that the collection of
silt and other debris in compliance with the DNR-approved SWPPP
be a violation of City ordinances. Upon request, copies of the
SWPPP shall be provided to the City.
3. Graded areas shall be seeded and mulched (strawed) within
fourteen (14) days of stopping land disturbance activities. Unless it
can be shown to the City Engineer and/or his/her designee that
weather conditions are not favorable, vegetative growth is to be
established within six (6) weeks of stopping grading work on the
project. The vegetative growth established shall be sufficient to
prevent erosion, and the standard shall be as required by EPA and
DNR (seventy-percent coverage per square foot).
4. The property owner, his/her agent or applicant shall inspect all
erosion control and correct any deficiencies within forty-eight (48)
hours of the end of any storm producing more than one-half (1/2)
inch of rain at the project site.
H. Enforcement.
1. Violations — Nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate
any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
Section
405.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.070
100:860
Section 405.080. Initial Considerations. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
Section. Any failure to adequately correct a deficiency in erosion
and sediment control measures within forty-eight (48) hours after
notification by the City shall be a violation of City ordinances. Any
failure to comply with a SWPPP (Missouri Department of Natural
Resources-approved stormwater pollution prevention plan) for a
site that results in sediment entering streets or the stormwater
system shall be considered a violation of City ordinances. For
storms exceeding the design storm (fifteen-year, twenty-minutes),
any silt or debris leaving the site and affecting public rights-ofways
or stormwater drainage facilities shall be cleaned up within
twenty-four (24) hours after the end of the storm. Any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this Section is a threat to public health, safety and welfare
and is declared and deemed a nuisance. The administration of
violations and nuisances shall follow the City's ordinances related
thereto and specifically Chapters 100 (General Provisions) and 220
(Nuisances).
2. Each incident of failure shall be deemed a separate violation of City
ordinances, and each day where violations are not corrected shall
be considered separate additional violations.
3. The City shall have the right to issue stop work orders to projects/
sites not complying with the requirements of this Section.
4. Prosecution For Violations. Any person that has violated or
continues to violate this Section shall be liable to prosecution to the
fullest extent of the law and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a
fine in an amount of a minimum of two hundred dollars ($200.00)
and not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per charge and/or
imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days
per charge.
A. General. After approval of the preliminary plat and prior to City Council
approval of the record plat, construction plans prepared by an engineer
for the subdivision of all, or a specified stage, of the tract shall be
submitted to the City Engineer and/or his/her designee. If substantive
changes are to be made after approval of the construction plan has
been granted, the City Engineer and/or his/her designee shall require
revised plans be submitted for approval. Improvements required under
this Chapter are the minimum acceptable improvements.
B. Preparation Of Plan. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to
have prepared by a registered engineer in the State of Missouri a
complete construction plan for streets, utilities and other
improvements required. Such construction plans are subject to
approval by the City Engineer and/or his/her designee and shall be
prepared in accordance with standards and specifications stipulated in
this Chapter (see Section 405.100).
Section
405.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.080
100:861
Section 405.090. Engineering Drawings Of Improvements. [Ord. No.
6496, 9-13-2018]
C. Approval Of Construction Plan. Prior to both recording of the record
plat and sale of any lot in the plat, the City Engineer and/or his/her
designee must review and approve the construction plans; after such
approval, the City Engineer and/or his/her designee shall issue an
appropriate letter certifying approval for construction to commence.
D. Timing Of Improvements. No grading, removal of trees or other
vegetation, land filling, construction of improvements or other material
change shall commence on the subject property until the developer has:
1. Received a letter of approval of grading plan and removal of trees
or other vegetation; and
2. Obtained necessary approvals and permits from other affected
municipal, County, State or Federal agencies.
E. Staging. Where a subdivision is to be developed in stages, the
provisions of this Article shall apply to each stage. However,
improvements and financial guarantees may be required to extend
beyond the boundaries of a subdivision stage if such extension is
necessary to ensure the relative self-sufficiency of the stage pending
completion of the entire subdivision. Such extensions, schedules and
similar arrangements shall be set forth in an agreement between the
developer and the Council prior to approval of the record plat.
A. Required Prior To Construction. Engineering drawings of all required
improvements shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer
and/or his/her designee, except for improvements to be made under the
jurisdiction of other municipal, County or State agencies, in which case
the drawings shall be submitted to the appropriate agency for review
and approval. Where review and approval of engineering drawings is
made by such agency, the City Engineer and/or his/her designee shall
be given written confirmation that the necessary reviews have been
completed and approvals have been granted.
B. Modification During Construction. All installations and construction
shall conform to the approved engineering drawings. However, if the
developer chooses to make minor modifications in design and/or
specifications during construction, he/she shall make such changes at
his/her own risk, without any assurance that the City Engineer and/or
his/her designee will approve the completed installation or
construction. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to notify and
obtain approval from the City Engineer and/or his/her designee of any
changes from the approved drawings prior to making that change. The
developer may be required to correct the installed improvement so as
to conform to the approved engineering drawings. The developer may
request a letter from the Construction Inspection Division regarding
any field changes approved by the City inspectors.
Section
405.080
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.090
100:862
Section 405.100. Construction Plan Requirements. [Ord. No. 6496,
9-13-2018]
C. As-Built Drawings. The developer shall submit to the City Engineer and/
or his/her designee an electronic copy of as-built engineering drawings
of the required improvements that have been completed. Electronic
copy shall be in PDF format, or format that is deemed acceptable by the
Department of Public Works. Items that are to be included on the asbuilt
drawings are storm systems, sanitary systems, water systems,
streetlight locations (City owned), and permanent swales with flows in
excess of one (1) cfs during the design storm event. The as-builts for
pavement and grading for sites is not required if the developer's
engineer certifies that these items were installed or graded per plan.
Each set of drawings shall be signed, sealed and dated by a registered
professional surveyor or engineer. In all cases the as-built plan
submission should include an as-built plan application and checklist as
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council
and all information as required per that application. This provision does
not apply to improvements made under the jurisdiction of other public
agencies.
A. General. The construction plan for all aspects of the site development
shall be prepared by an engineer in an electronic format and shall be
submitted for review to the City Engineer and/or his/her designee. Any
resubmittal plans shall also be in an electronic format.
1. Electronic copy shall be in PDF format, or format that is deemed
acceptable by the Department of Public Works.
2. All plans, details and reports shall be signed, sealed and dated by a
registered professional engineer (per MO Econ. Dev. requirement).
B. The construction plan shall be any scale from 1 inch = 10 feet through 1
inch = 100 feet, so long as the scale is an increment of ten (10) feet and
is sufficiently clear in reflecting details of the proposed construction.
Construction plans shall be prepared on exhibits nominally twenty-four
(24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. The site plan or title page shall be
used as the cover sheet for the construction plan. [1]
[NOTE – Ord. No. 5585 § 1, adopted April 22, 2010, sets out the
applications and checklists for record plats, condominium,
resubdivision and boundary adjustment plats and commercial site plans
for all reviews pertaining to said applications, etc. All material noted
herein is on file in the City offices.]
C. Amenities Plan And Schedule. In regard to amenities required as a
condition of Planning and Zoning approval, detailed construction plans
and specifications along with progress schedules shall be provided for,
but not limited to, recreational buildings, swimming pools and
appurtenant structures, tennis courts, jogging trails, fences and
decorative landscaping provided as subdivision amenities. Unless
Section
405.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.100
100:863
otherwise specified by the Planning and Zoning Commission at the
time of approval, these improvements are to be started prior to the
City issuing building permits for more than thirty percent (30%) of the
project and completed prior to the City issuing building permits for
more than fifty percent (50%) of the project.
[NOTE – Ord. No. 5585 § 1, adopted April 22, 2010, sets out the
applications and checklists for record plats, condominium,
resubdivision and boundary adjustment plats and commercial site plans
for all reviews pertaining to said applications, etc. All material noted
herein is on file in the City offices.]
D. Easements/Dedications Outside Subdivision Plat Boundaries. Where
development or construction will require easements and right-of-way
dedications, no approval of construction plans for developments will be
granted until verification of the recording of all easements and right-ofway
dedications has been received.
[NOTE – Ord. No. 5585 § 1, adopted April 22, 2010, sets out the
applications and checklists for record plats, condominium,
resubdivision and boundary adjustment plats and commercial site plans
for all reviews pertaining to said applications, etc. All material noted
herein is on file in the City offices.]
E. Information Required. In all cases the construction plan submission
should include a construction plan application. The Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council shall approve the applications and
checklists for construction plans.
[NOTE – Ord. No. 5585 § 1, adopted April 22, 2010, sets out the
applications and checklists for record plats, condominium,
resubdivision and boundary adjustment plats and commercial site plans
for all reviews pertaining to said applications, etc. All material noted
herein is on file in the City offices.]
F. Approval/Permits.
1. No person, firm or corporation shall develop, alter or modify any
tract of land, roadway or any City-owned utility within the City of
O'Fallon or cause the same to be undertaken without first securing
the approval of the construction plans as required by this Chapter
or other City ordinances, nor shall any person, firm or corporation
undertake such work or cause the same to be undertaken without
first obtaining the required permits from necessary agencies,
including the City of O'Fallon, County, State or Federal
Governments for the proposed construction.
2. Applications for building permits shall be filed with the Building
Official or his/her duly authorized representative, upon the
prescribed forms, setting forth the legal description of the lot, tract
or parcel of land, together with a general description of the
building or structure to be constructed, erected or altered thereon,
Section
405.100
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.100
100:864
including the approximate size and shape, principal material or
construction, location of the building or structure upon the lot,
tract or parcel and the intended use.
3. There shall be a separate permit for each building or structure to
be constructed, erected or altered except accessory buildings
which may be included in the permit for the principal building
when construction is simultaneous. For each permit issued there
shall be charged and collected from the applicant a fee in
accordance with ordinances establishing same.
4. No permit shall be issued for any building, structure or
construction unless the same is in conformity in every respect with
all provisions of this Chapter.
5. The Building Official, or his/her duly authorized representative,
shall be empowered to act within the provisions of this Chapter
upon all applications for building permits, and the same shall be
approved or denied not later than the 10th business day succeeding
the day of filing. In the event of refusal to issue a permit upon an
application as herein provided, the applicant shall have the right to
appeal.
6. Work on any project may be suspended by the City Official at any
time prior to the completion of the improvement, building or
structure for which the approval/permit was issued, when it shall
appear to him/her that there is departure from the plans,
specifications or conditions as required under terms of the permit,
that the same was procured by false representation, or that any
provisions of this Chapter are being violated. Written notice of such
stop work order shall be served upon the owner, his/her agent or
contractor, or upon any person employed on the building or
structure for which such approval/permit was issued, or shall be
posted in a prominent location, and thereafter no such construction
shall proceed.
G. Violation And Penalty.
1. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this Chapter, the City, in
addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use to
restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy
of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
2. Failure to obtain and display the required permit prior to making
such improvement shall constitute a violation of this Chapter. Each
day of such non-compliance shall constitute a separate violation.
Section
405.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.100
100:865
Section 405.101. Completion Of Construction. [Ord. No. 6496,
9-13-2018]
3. The owner or general agent of a building or premises where a
violation of any provision of the regulations of this Chapter has
been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of an entire
building or entire premises where such violation has been
committed or shall exist, or the owner, general agent, lessee or
tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such
violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent,
architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits,
takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any
building or premises in which any such violation exists shall be
guilty of a violation of this Chapter punishable by a fine of not less
than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each and every day that such violation continues or
by imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every day such
violation continues, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court. Any such person who, having been served
with an order to remove any such violation, shall fail to comply with
such order within ten (10) days after such service or shall continue
to violate any provision of this Chapter in the respect named in
such order shall also be subject to a civil penalty of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00).
H. Permit Applicants. The applicant shall be the owner(s) of record or
authorized representative designated by the owner(s).
I. Plans and Fees.
See Title IV, Appendix B, Schedule of Fees, Costs and Expenses, for fee
schedule.
A. The construction of all subdivision improvements shall be completed
within two (2) years of the City Engineer's approval of the construction
plans. Time extensions may be granted by the Department of Public
Works for those developments showing good cause as to why the
improvements have not been completed. If construction under the
approved construction plan is to continue beyond the two-year period,
the developer must request an extension of the approved plan and
provide for extending the escrow or other surety on the project prior to
the expiration of the plan; otherwise, work on the project must cease.
Any request for an extension under this Section that is denied by City
staff can be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The
developer may request a period of construction longer than two (2)
years with the initial approval at the Planning and Zoning Commission
meeting by providing a suitable explanation for the request. On projects
with an extended construction period, suitable escrows must be
provided for the extended period. If construction is not actively pursued
during the course of the extended period of construction approval
(beyond the initial two-year period), the City may cancel the extension
Section
405.100
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.101
100:866
with thirty (30) days' written notice to the developer. Any canceled
extension under this Section may be appealed to the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
B. Release Of Escrow; Additional Escrow.
1. The final release of escrow on all public improvements will be made
in accordance with Section 405.110 of this Chapter. A five-percent
escrow relating to certain categories of improvements may be held
if additional improvements within that particular category are
planned for additional phases of the overall project or subdivision.
If the developer chooses, a replacement escrow or maintenance
bond (for improvements outside the current phase) will be allowed
to cover this for the earlier phase of the project.
2. In special cases, the construction of the development may impact
existing facilities outside the development. In these cases, the
Department of Public Works will notify the developer of the need to
provide an additional escrow or maintenance bond prior to
Planning and Zoning approval of the development. This escrow or
maintenance bond is designated only for facilities directly affected
by work in the development. As an example this would include, but
not be limited to, the main access road into the site and water/
sewer lines to or from the site. This escrow or maintenance bond
shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the value of the existing
improvements and will be held until the project is completed.
C. Issuance Of Building Permits.
1. The Building Official shall not issue building permits for any
residential structures located on lots within a recorded plat until all
street improvements and storm sewers required to be installed
within such recorded plat have been installed and are usable.
"Usable" is defined as the aforementioned categories have been
installed and are functioning as intended and the street is
connected to another public street. For water service and sanitary
sewers, all the improvements must be installed and connected to
the system, but acceptance by the water or sewer authority is not
necessary for the building permit to be issued.
2. In a case where the water system has not been accepted, the
builder must certify that a usable fire hydrant exists within six
hundred (600) feet of the building or must obtain approval from the
fire district prior to the building permit being issued. The
Department of Public Works' lot inspection, prior to a certificate of
occupancy being issued, shall not be approved without approval of
the water service and sanitary sewers by the appropriate water or
sewer authority.
D. The Building Official shall not issue any certificate of occupancy for any
residential structure located on a lot within a recorded plat until all
permanent utilities servicing such structure have been installed and are
Section
405.101
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.101
100:867
Section 405.102. Maintenance And Supervision. [Ord. No. 6496,
9-13-2018]
Where the subdivision contains sewers, sewage treatment plants, water
supply systems, or other physical facilities that are necessary or desirable
for the welfare of the area or that are of common use or benefit and
which are not or cannot be satisfactorily maintained by an existing public
agency, provision shall be made which is acceptable to the agency having
jurisdiction over the location and maintenance of such facilities and for the
proper and continuous operations, maintenance and supervision of such
facilities.
Section 405.104. Variances. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
Variances may be granted by the Board of Adjustment where there are
demonstrated practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in compliance
with specific provisions of this Chapter, public safety and welfare are
secured and substantial justice done.
Section 405.110. Performance Guarantee And Development Escrow
(General Requirements). [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
functioning and operating as designed. For the purpose of enforcing
this Subsection (D) only, utilities shall include water, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, electric and natural gas (if applicable for heating of the
structure).
A. Escrow Agent. The developer shall deposit with the City Clerk, or an
escrow agent agreed upon by the City Administrator and the developer,
a cash amount, certified check or an irrevocable bank letter of credit
endorsed to the escrow agent. The developer has the option of which
form to utilize.
B. Escrow Agreement. For all developers proposing to establish escrows,
the escrow agreement shall be in form approved by the City Attorney.
C. Failure To Complete The Construction Of An Improvement. In the event
the developer shall, in any case, fail to complete all such improvement
work within the period of time required by the escrow agreement or
bond for the completion of improvements, the City may have such work
completed and seek reimbursement to the City for the cost and expense
thereof by appropriating funds in the escrow or by making a claim on
the bond or by bringing legal action to enforce the terms of the bond
and/or escrow.
D. Successor Developer. In the event a developer who has posted a
development escrow, letter of credit or bond with the City in
accordance with Section 405.110 transfers title of the subdivision
property prior to full release of the escrow, letter of credit or bond, the
City may accept a replacement escrow or bond from the successor
developer in the form allowed in Section 405.110 and in the amount of
Section
405.101
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.110
100:868
Section 405.111. Residential Development (Attached And Detached
Single-Family) Escrow Requirements. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
the escrow, bond or letter of credit held by the City at the time of
the property transfer and, upon receipt of the replacement escrow
bond and the required security, the City shall release the original
development escrow or letter of credit in full and release the prior
developer from all further obligations with respect to the subdivision
improvements if the successor developer assumes all of the outstanding
obligations of the previous developer. The City may accept a surety
bond from the successor developer in the form allowed in Section
405.110 and in the amount of the bond held by the City at the time
of the property transfer and, upon receipt of the replacement bond,
the City shall release the original bond in full and release the prior
developer from all further obligations with respect to the subdivision
improvements.
A. Surety Bond. The City may accept a surety bond and such bond shall be
in an amount and with surety and other reasonable conditions providing
for and securing the actual construction and installation of the
improvements and utilities.
B. Amount. The bond or escrow account shall be an amount, estimated by
the design engineer and approved by the City Engineer and/or his/her
designee, equal to the estimated cost for completing construction of the
improvements over the anticipated construction period and
contingencies based on an estimating guide reasonably acceptable to
the City Engineer and/or his/her designee. The City Engineer and/or
his/her designee, in order to protect the City's taxpayers from the cost
of correcting or completing development projects in a timely manner,
shall estimate the costs to cure or complete so as to ensure that all
estimated future costs and contingencies are included in the amount.
C. Term, Length, Extension. The initial term length in which the
development bond or development escrow is in force shall be for a
period not to exceed two (2) years, unless extended by the City. If the
developer fails to file a certificate of completion with the City and obtain
a completion certification from the City before the end of the initial
term length, the bond or escrow shall continue in force until released by
the City Engineer and/or his/her designee.
D. Development Escrow Release. The bond or escrow amount held by the
City to secure actual construction and installation on each component
of the improvements or utilities shall be released within thirty (30) days
of completion of each category of improvement or utility work to be
installed, minus a maximum retention of ten percent (10%) which shall
be released upon completion as set forth herein. The City shall inspect
each category of improvement or utility work within twenty (20)
business days after a request for such inspection. Any such category of
improvement or utility work shall be deemed to be completed upon
certification by the City that the project is complete in accordance with
Section
405.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.111
100:869
the ordinances of the City, including the filing of all documentation and
certifications required by the City in complete and acceptable form.
The release shall be deemed effective when the escrow funds are duly
posted with the United States Postal Service or other agreed-upon
delivery service or when the escrow funds are hand delivered to an
authorized person or place as specified by the owner or developer or
when notice of release is sent to the escrow bond surety. Once the
developer or builder has completed part of the site improvements in a
timely and satisfactory manner, the City should promptly release the
appropriate pro rata amount of escrow or bond funds. If the City has
not released such escrow funds or bond amount within thirty (30) days
as provided in this Section, the City shall be subject to pay the owner or
developer, in addition to the escrow funds due the owner or developer,
interest at the rate of one and one-half percent (1 1/2%) per month of
any escrow funds unlawfully retained calculated from the expiration
of the thirty-day period until the escrow funds have been released.
Any owner or developer aggrieved by the City's failure to observe the
requirements of this Chapter may bring a civil action to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter. In any civil action or part of a civil action to
enforce the provisions of this Section, a court may award the prevailing
party or the City the amount of all costs attributable to the action,
including reasonable attorneys' fees.
1. The original plat's development escrow will be released in two (2)
phases, a ninety-percent release and a final ten-percent release
with the following requirements: For the ninety-percent release,
the following requirements will be inspected with minimal
inspection time on site, and each category can be released
individually. For the final ten-percent release, the following
requirements will require a full inspection, and all categories will
be released at the same time. These conditions are minimal as
deficiencies are reported as inspected, and the standard inspection
form will be supplied to the developer at a preconstruction
meeting.
a. Criteria Inspected for Conformance to Approved Plans and City
Codes (The following items must be done prior to requesting
inspection.):
(1) Streets: 90% Release.
(a) Constructed under City of O'Fallon inspection.
(b) Roadway backfilled and compacted to City standards.
(c) Layout generally conforms to approved site plans.
(d) Concrete cylinder breaks equal to or greater than
required within twenty-eight (28) days.
(e) All joints properly located and sealed.
Section
405.111
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.111
100:870
(2) Storm Sewers: 90% Release.
(a) Constructed under City of O'Fallon inspection.
(b) Installation of all storm infrastructures has been
installed and in general conformance to approved site
plans.
(c) Proper backfill and compaction of backfill material.
(d) All grading adjacent to inlets to provide for proper
drainage in accordance with the drainage area map,
and proper grading around all other structures.
(e) Proper construction of all detention/retention basins.
(f) Erosion control in working condition.
(3) Sanitary Sewers (City of O'Fallon System): 90% Release.
(a) Constructed under City of O'Fallon inspection.
(b) Installation of all sanitary infrastructures has been
installed and in general conformance to approved site
plans.
(c) Proper placement and compaction of backfill material.
(d) Successfully pull a mandrel through all main lines
(public and private) and pressure/vacuum test
approved.
(4) Water (City of O'Fallon System): 90% Release.
(a) Constructed under City of O'Fallon inspection.
(b) Installation of all water infrastructures has been
installed and in general conformance to approved site
plans.
(c) Proper placement and compaction of backfill material.
(d) Successful bacteria testing and pressure test
approved.
(5) Grading: 90% Release.
(a) Constructed under City of O'Fallon inspection.
(b) Generally conforms to approved site plans.
(c) Erosion control, diversion swales, and sediment basins
installed.
(d) Site stabilization per County codes has been started or
completed.
Section
405.111
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.111
100:871
(6) Common Ground/Other: 90% Release.
(a) Amenities, if required, are installed in general
conformance to the approved site plans.
(b) Landscaping, if required, is installed in general
conformance to the approved site plans.
(c) Items escrowed that do not fit into other categories
have been installed under City of O'Fallon inspection
and are in general conformance to the approved site
plan.
(d) Installation of traffic control signage, pavement
markings, streetlighting, and street ID signs.
(7) All Categories: Final 10% Release.
(a) Any deficiencies that have occurred since initial
escrow release have been repaired.
(b) Subdivision record plat approved and recorded and
acceptance of the dedication of public improvements
to be maintained by the City of O'Fallon.
(c) As-builts approved.
(8) Streets: Final 10% Release.
(a) Core drills for proper thickness (performed by City).
(b) Straightedge testing meets requirements.
(c) Sidewalks, not associated with a home lot,
constructed under City of O'Fallon inspection.
(9) Storm Sewer: Final 10% Release.
(a) Grading around structures with proper drainage.
(b) All temporary siltation control devices removed.
(10) Sanitary Sewers (City of O'Fallon System): Final 10%
Release.
(a) Grading around structures completed.
(11)Water (City of O'Fallon System): Final 10% Release.
(a) Grading around structures completed.
(12) Grading: Final 10% Release.
(a) Conforms to approved site plans.
Section
405.111
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.111
100:872
Section 405.112. Grading Plan Escrow Requirements. [Ord. No.
6496, 9-13-2018]
(b) Vegetation seventy-five percent (75%) established
throughout the plat.
(13) Common Ground/Other: Final 10% Release.
(a) Amenities installed per the approved construction
plans or replacement escrow provided.
(b) Completion of all signs and lights.
2. When the final ten-percent escrow is ready to be released, staff will
make a recommendation to the City Council for the acceptance and
dedication of related City infrastructure. A maintenance escrow is
not required for the development escrow release.
A. Purpose. Grading plans are frequently submitted separately from the
primary construction plans. The purpose of the grading escrow is to
provide funding to stabilize a site in the event of a failure to develop the
grounds.
B. Improvement Installation Or Performance Guarantee. After approval of
the grading plans by the City, the owner/developer must post a financial
guarantee of performance as required by this Chapter.
1. The following items, if they apply, shall be included in the financial
guarantee:
a. Grading, including permanent drainage swales.
b. Siltation/erosion control.
c. Temporary storm drainage.
d. Revegetation.
e. Sediment basin/trap construction.
f. Sediment basin/trap maintenance (dewatering and
restoration), including sediment removal from retention
basins.
2. Escrow Amount. The amount of escrow established will be based on
a straight calculation of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) per acre of the total disturbed area, with the acreage
rounded to the nearest one-hundredth (1/100) of an acre, based on
the items in Subsection (B)(1) above.
a. Any additional improvements outside those listed above shall
be escrowed in accordance to Section 405.111 (broken out
from the flat fee).
Section
405.111
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.112
100:873
Section 405.113. Commercial, Industrial, And Apartments Escrow
Requirements. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
b. For developments, excluding Attached and Detached Single-
Family, the commercial escrow (per Section 405.113) can be
collected up front in lieu of requiring that the above-mentioned
grading escrow be collected separately.
c. For clearing-only projects (no grading operations), the amount
of escrow established will be based on a straight calculation of
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per acre of the total
disturbed area, with the acreage rounded to the nearest onehundredth
(1/100) of an acre.
3. Escrow Type And Agreement. The escrow must be in the form of a
bond, cash, check or wire transfer to the City of O'Fallon and
accompanied by a signed escrow agreement.
4. Escrow Inspection And Release.
a. For residential grading, escrow release shall follow the same
procedures as outlined in Section 405.111. Grading escrow can
be transferred into the residential development escrow in
efforts to consolidate escrows. Should this process be followed,
the grading escrow will be released after the residential
development escrow is in place.
b. For commercial grading, escrow release shall follow the same
procedures as outlined in Section 405.113.
5. All other specifics not covered above in regards to the performance
guarantee shall adhere to Section 405.110.
A. Acknowledgment. At the time of application for a building permit, the
applicant shall acknowledge, in writing, and with his/her signature,
which the applicant is responsible for assuring that the lot for which the
building permit is issued complies with the approved construction
plans.
B. Grading Only. If the permit is for site grading only, go to Section
405.070 for procedures.
C. Construction Type. Prior to a building permit being issued in all zoning
districts (except attached and detached single-family) for new
construction additions (building or site) or demolitions, a construction
escrow must be in place. A construction escrow is not required for
alterations, maintenance, interior finishes or change of use.
D. Escrow Amount.
1. The amount of escrow established will be based on the following
criteria, unless public infrastructure is being added or altered:
Section
405.112
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.113
100:874
Lot Size
(acres)
Escrow Amount < 1 1 to 5 > 5
Construction
Costs
(thousands)
< 100 $2,000.00 $5,000.00 $10,000.00
100 to 500 $5,000.00 $10,000.00 $15,000.00
500 to
1,000
$10,000.00 $15,000.00 $20,000.00
1,000 to
1,500
$15,000.00 $20,000.00 $25,000.00
> 1,500 $20,000.00 $25,000.00 $30,000.00
2. If public infrastructure is being added or altered with the site plan,
then the actual costs of such improvements will be added to the
aforementioned amounts in accordance with Section 405.111.
Acceptance for maintenance of public infrastructure will follow
Section 405.110(H), with the exception of the escrow release
percentages.
3. For small expansions on larger properties, smaller escrow based on
the disturbed area may be collected, as approved by the City
Engineer and/or his/her designee.
E. Escrow Type And Agreement. The escrow must be in the form of cash,
check or wire transfer to the City of O'Fallon and accompanied by a
signed escrow agreement. Escrow pertaining to public infrastructure
may be in the form of a performance bond in addition to the
aforementioned formats.
F. Escrow Holder. The escrow holder shall be either the property owner or
the franchise owner. If the escrow holder is anyone else, the owner shall
also be a party to the escrow agreement.
G. Term, Length, Extension. The initial term length in which the escrow is
in force shall be for a period not to exceed one (1) year, unless extended
by the City. If the contractor fails to complete the work within this time
frame and obtain an occupancy permit from the City before the end of
the initial term length, the escrow shall continue in force until released
by the City Engineer and/or his/her designee.
H. Escrow Inspection And Release.
1. At the time the contractor or owner has requested a certificate of
occupancy, the site and building shall be inspected for compliance.
If no deficiencies are encountered on the building and the site, then
a certificate of occupancy will be issued, and the escrow will be
released in full.
Section
405.113
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.113
100:875
Section 405.114. Lot Deposit (Attached And Detached Single-
Family) During Building Construction. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
2. Once the site and building are within compliance, all escrow funds
will be returned. An exception to this compliance is weatherrelated
and horticulture. If in the sound opinion of the Building and
Code Enforcement Division the weather is not conducive to correct
horticultural activities, then a certificate of occupancy can be
issued without the site being in compliance. The horticulture must
be finalized within six (6) months of the issuance of the certificate
of occupancy or the escrow will be utilized to correct the noncompliance
and/or fines established per this Chapter. Any siterelated
issues, including horticulture activities, shall be completed
within six (6) months of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy,
otherwise the site will be deemed out of compliance.
a. Any violation of the provisions of Subsection (H)(1) above shall
be punished as provided in Section 100.010 of this Code of
Ordinances. In addition to any penalties under Section
100.010, equitable relief shall also be available to enforce
compliance pursuant to Section 100.011 of this Code of
Ordinances.
I. Multiple Additions. If the original site plan and/or building plan has had
additions approved through the Planning and Zoning Commission and
are on the current or adjacent site, the original escrow agreement can
be altered so that only one (1) escrow agreement is in place; however,
this is only at the request of the owner. The owner must understand that
individual certificates of occupancy will not be approved under this
process unless the escrow agreement is modified at the time of an
individual site completion.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the lot deposit is to protect existing
infrastructure on the site from damage from building construction, on
that specific lot. This generally applies to infrastructure (except streets
unless as explained below).
B. With the various escrow options contained in Chapter 405 of the City
Code, only one (1) valid escrow is required for each phase or plat of a
project. The City cannot require duplicate escrows, but, at the same
time, each lot being constructed on must have a suitable and valid
escrow accepted by the City with the escrow being in compliance with
Chapter 405 of the City Code.
C. For each new building permit, a per-lot deposit must be established to
cover potential damage to storm, sanitary and water infrastructure.
This per-lot deposit will be done with the building permit for such lot
and will also cover items outside of the building structure such as
grading and sidewalks.
Section
405.113
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.114
100:876
D. When the per-lot deposit is to be initiated by a builder, an inspection of
the current conditions within the subdivision will be performed by the
City to document the existing conditions of the infrastructure. All
parties involved with the per-lot deposit will have to agree on the list of
existing deficiencies prior to executing the escrow documents. The
builder and escrow holder on this new per-lot deposit will not be
required to correct any of the preexisting deficiencies defined by the
inspection. The preexisting deficiencies will remain the responsibility of
the appropriate party to be repaired.
E. With the per-lot deposit in place as noted above, the home builder will
be required to post a one-thousand-dollar-cash per-lot deposit with each
home building permit being issued. This one-thousand-dollar-cash perlot
deposit will be released with the correction of any deficiencies
caused by the home construction and issuance of the certificate of
occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy for the home.
1. The builder will have the option to post a single ten-thousanddollar-
cash per-lot deposit, in lieu of individual escrows for each lot.
This option will cover the per-lot deposit for all the homes being
constructed across the City regardless of which subdivision it is in.
a. If the City is required at any time to utilize the per-lot deposit
to correct any deficiencies, the full value of the escrow must be
restored prior to any additional building permits being issued
to the builder.
2. Prior to issuance of an occupancy permit, the builder shall provide
a letter signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer
verifying and stating the lot for which the building permit is issued
complies with the approved grading and drainage plans. If this
cannot be accomplished, the Building Official may issue temporary
occupancy with the builder's already established per-lot deposit.
The temporary occupancy can be replaced with a certificate of
occupancy once a letter has been approved by the City.
a. In lieu of having a licensed engineer provide the signed/sealed
grading letter, the escrow holder may request the City to
perform this same service at a cost of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) cash.
b. If the lot is graded correctly but vegetation has not been
performed (established vegetation or sod), erosion control
must be in place and the area seed/straw per the County
vegetation type based on the time of year.
F. The City reserves the right to not approve the use of this per-lot escrow
in subdivisions where severe deficiencies in the public infrastructure
exist with no clear method of resolving those deficiencies.
G. Acknowledgment. At the time of application for a building permit, the
applicant shall acknowledge, in writing, and with his/her signature,
Section
405.114
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.114
100:877
which the applicant is responsible for assuring that the lot for which
the building permit is issued complies with the approved construction
plans.
H. Escrow Type And Agreement. The per-lot deposit must be in the form of
cash, check or wire transfer to the City of O'Fallon and accompanied by
a signed escrow agreement.
I. Term, Length, Extension. The initial term length in which the escrow is
in force shall be for a period not to exceed one (1) year, unless extended
by the City. If the contractor fails to complete the work within this time
frame and obtain an occupancy permit from the City before the end of
the initial term length, the escrow shall continue in force until released
by the City Engineer.
J. Escrow Inspection And Release.
1. At the time the contractor or owner has requested a certificate of
occupancy, the site and building shall be inspected for compliance.
If no deficiencies are encountered on the building and the site, then
a certificate of occupancy will be issued, and the escrow will be
released in full.
2. Once the site and building are within compliance, all escrow funds
will be returned. An exception to this compliance is weatherrelated
and horticulture. If in the sound opinion of the Building and
Code Enforcement Division the weather is not conducive to correct
horticultural activities, then a certificate of occupancy can be
issued without the site being in compliance. The horticulture must
be finalized within six (6) months of the issuance of the certificate
of occupancy, or the escrow will be utilized to correct the noncompliance
and/or fines established per this Chapter. Any siterelated
issues, including horticulture activities, shall be completed
within six (6) months of the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy; otherwise the site will be deemed out of compliance.
a. Any violation of the provisions of Subsection (J)(1) above shall
be punished as provided in Section 100.010 of this Code of
Ordinances. In addition to any penalties under Section
100.010, equitable relief shall also be available to enforce
compliance pursuant to Section 100.011 of this Code of
Ordinances.
K. Multiple Additions. If the original site plan and/or building plan has had
additions approved through the Planning and Zoning Commission and
are on the current or adjacent site, the original escrow agreement can
be altered so that only one (1) escrow agreement is in place; however,
this is only at the request of the owner. The owner must understand that
individual certificates of occupancy will not be approved under this
process unless the escrow agreement is modified at the time of an
individual site completion.
Section
405.114
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.115
100:878
Section 405.115. Maintenance Escrow During Building
Construction. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the maintenance escrow is to protect existing
infrastructure on the site from damage from building construction. This
generally applies to streets and site grading.
B. At any time after the ninety-percent release for all categories on the
development escrow, a maintenance escrow shall be established to
ensure that the infrastructure remains in an acceptable condition
during the building construction. If the maintenance escrow is
established prior to the full development escrow release, the City must
be provided with an agreement between the developer and
maintenance agent with terms of responsibility between the two (2)
entities with respect to potential damage to escrow items.
Accompanying the maintenance agreement will be an inspection report
of the existing infrastructure. The City's maintenance responsibility will
start when the development escrow has been released in full. After the
development escrow is released, and with the maintenance escrow in
place or still being developed, the City's maintenance responsibilities
will be limited to snow plowing, pavement striping, payment of
streetlighting bills, normal traffic sign maintenance, joint sealing and Ajoint
maintenance. The administration of this new maintenance escrow
shall be in a similar manner to the development escrow.
C. The maintenance escrow must be replaced by a single successor
(builder, agent or bank) as long as all City requirements are met. The
City will review and approve any such replacement escrows. This new
maintenance escrow will assure the City that it has a fund dedicated for
the specific purpose of correcting damage to the public infrastructure
that occurs during the building construction and that all stakeholders
(developer, builders, banks and City) are aware that this fund will be
used to correct such damage. The escrow agreement and financial
surety shall be in the same form as prescribed in Section 405.110(A)
through (D) and as approved by the City Attorney. The maintenance
escrow agreement and financial surety shall not expire until ninety-five
percent (95%) of the buildings have been completed with occupancy
approved. The escrow agreement shall clearly indicate that the
developer/builder will be required to post additional financial surety
should deficiencies arise that would cost more to repair than what is
held in the maintenance escrow fund. With the construction of the final
five percent (5%) of the buildings not covered by the maintenance
escrow, the builders and contractors are not released from damage that
is caused by their construction activities. Maintenance escrows shall be
set up on a per-plat basis, and the amount of the maintenance escrow
funds shall be as follows:
1. Streets. Ten percent (10%) of the previously approved cost
estimate from the development escrow.
Section
405.115
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.115
100:879
Section 405.120. Inspection Of Improvements. [Ord. No. 6496,
9-13-2018]
[Note: Existing escrow agreements will follow the protocol in place when
the agreement was signed.]
2. Erosion Control. A new estimate shall be provided for the cost of
any grading, vegetation or erosion control that may be necessary
during the period that lots are vacant (prior to a building permit
being issued). Vegetative growth is defined in Section
405.070(G)(3).
3. Sidewalks. Ten percent (10%) of the previously approved cost
estimate from the development escrow for sidewalks not tied to a
lot (example includes common ground areas or entrances adjacent
to other property).
4. Streetlights And Street Signs. Ten percent (10%) of the previously
approved cost estimate for lights and signs not tied to a lot
(example includes common ground areas or entrances adjacent to
other property).
5. Detention/Retention Basin. This pertains to if a builder is
constructing homes within a subdivision, and if the builder is not
the developer. The escrow holder needs to acknowledge that the
basin is in compliance prior to establishment of this escrow. This
shall be done by means of an inspection from the City Engineer. A
new estimate shall be provided for bringing the basin into
compliance, which may include potential cleanout of said basin. Asbuilts
will be required prior to release of the maintenance escrow.
6. Water quality items (BMPs) will be escrowed with the stormwater
management and best management practices facilities
maintenance agreements and not be part of this maintenance
escrow. This pertains to if a builder is constructing homes within a
subdivision, and if the builder is not the developer. A new estimate
will be provided to maintain existing water quality features or the
construction of such features if it will be done once the homes are
built out.
D. Once all ordinance requirements have been satisfied and deficiencies
corrected, the builder or developer may request release of the
maintenance escrow. The Engineering Department shall certify to the
City Council that all ordinance requirements have been complied with
and cause an item to be placed on the Council's consent calendar to
formally release the escrow.
E. The City reserves the right to not approve the use of this maintenance
escrow in subdivisions where severe deficiencies in the public
infrastructure exist with no clear method of resolving those
deficiencies.
Section
405.115
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.120
100:880
A. General Inspection Requirements.
1. Prior to starting any of the work covered by the permitted work and
after approval thereof, the applicant shall make arrangements to
provide for inspection of the permitted work, sufficient in the
opinion of the City Engineer and/or his/her designee, to assure
compliance with the plans and specifications as approved.
2. The City Engineer and/or his/her designee shall make all necessary
inspections of City infrastructure, escrow items or infrastructure
located on the approved plans. This does not relieve the developer
from any necessary inspections or testing requirements that are
still required by said developer.
3. Twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be given to the City Engineer's
office regarding any requested inspection.
B. The City shall certify that the project is complete in accordance with the
following process:
1. Once the improvements or utilities have been constructed or
installed, the developer is responsible for obtaining necessary
inspections by requesting such inspection in writing to the
Department of Public Works. Following a satisfactory inspection
and receipt by the Department of Public Works of verification from
the appropriate inspecting authority that all improvements are
constructed or installed in accordance with the approved plans, the
Department of Public Works will then review all documents to
verify that each category of improvement or utility work is
constructed or installed and, if so, will recommend release of the
development escrow for that category and notify the necessary
entities of said approval for release.
2. The Department of Public Works will issue a construction
inspection report listing all deficiencies within thirty (30) days of
receipt of a written request to approve or inspect improvements
subject to the following requirements:
a. All inspections will be made within thirty (30) working days
after the receipt of a written request for inspection. This time
frame represents the normal maximum time span required
from receipt of written request to signing the construction
inspection approval memorandum or the construction
inspection report. Inspections may be delayed by workload,
weather and ground conditions, especially during the winter
when a complete inspection cannot be accomplished. A
construction inspection approval memorandum will not be
issued where deficiencies exist. Without a construction
approval memorandum, the Department of Public Works will
not recommend release of escrow. When deficiencies exist, the
Department of Public Works will provide a construction
inspection report to the developer.
Section
405.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.120
100:881
Section 405.125. through Section 405.127. (Reserved)
b. If deficiencies listed in a construction inspection report are
corrected within sixty (60) days of the date of the construction
inspection report, the Department of Public Works will not
conduct any additional inspections other than to verify the
correction of the deficiencies. If the deficiencies listed in a
construction inspection report are corrected between sixty
(60) days and ninety (90) days, the Department of Public Works
will not conduct any additional inspections other than to verify
the correction of the deficiencies or discover additional major
deficiencies. If deficiencies listed in a construction inspection
report are not corrected until more than ninety (90) days' time
after the date of the construction inspection report, the site is
subject to reinspection, and any deficiencies may be added
requiring correction.
3. As-built plans shall serve as certification by the developer's
engineer that improvements have been installed.
4. The Department of Public Works shall assure that all
documentation and certifications required by the City of O'Fallon
have been received in complete and acceptable form prior to
release of any escrow monies.
5. Escrow release shall be in accordance with the type of escrow that
is being held. The process is described under each of the
appropriate Sections in Sections 405.111 through 405.115.
Section
405.120
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.125
100:882
ARTICLE V
Development Standards
Section 405.130. Initial Considerations. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
In the City Council's consideration of applications for plat approval, the
standards set forth in this Article shall be considered minimum
requirements.
Section 405.140. through Section 405.170. (Reserved)
Section 405.180. Utility Easement. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
A. Utility Easement Requirements.
1. Utility Easements. Utility easements shall be provided and be at
least ten (10) feet wide [five (5) feet on each side of the lot line]
along rear, front and side lot lines. Easements of adequate width
shall be provided for open drainage channels and rear yard swales,
where required. Easements five (5) feet in width may be allowed for
underground cable installations. Telephone and electric power
lines shall be located underground, except in large lot subdivisions
where all of the lots are twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet
or larger in size, and then the developer will have the option of
underground or overhead utility lines.
2. Utility/Roadway Easements. A minimum of a ten-foot utility/
roadway easement shall be required adjacent to all City, County
and State rights-of-way. Such utility/roadway easements shall also
include working space to work on such utility and/or roadway.
3. All underground public utility installations, including lines for
streetlighting systems, which traverse privately owned property,
shall be protected by easements granted by the developer to the
appropriate public utility and reasonably approved by the public
utility. Such easements shall be so located as to not interfere with
the use of any lot or other part of the subdivision. The size of, and
restrictions pertaining to, such easements shall be in accordance
with the legally adopted or reasonable standards and the
specifications of the agency having jurisdiction over the utility lines
and subdivision and shall be indicated on the record plat submitted
for approval.
4. Where a cut or fill for a street extends beyond the limits of the
right-of-way, the developer shall provide a slope easement as
determined by the City Engineer and/or his/her designee to be of
sufficient area and limits to permit the construction and
maintenance of the slope.
5. Stormwater easements and drainage rights-of-way may be required
by the City of O'Fallon if necessary for proper drainage within or
Section
405.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.180
100:883
Section 405.190. (Reserved)
Section 405.200. Street Name Signs And Street Names. [Ord. No.
6496, 9-13-2018]
Section 405.210. Construction Requirements. [Ord. No. 6496,
9-13-2018]
through a subdivision. Whenever a stream or surface drainage
course conveying a minimum of one and one-half (1.5) cfs in a
fifteen-year, twenty-minute storm is located in or planned for an
area proposed for a subdivision, the developer shall provide a
minimum ten-foot-wide easement or wider as determined by the
City Engineer and/or his/her designee to be adequate in area to
contain facilities, to control flooding or erosion along said stream
or surface drainage course and protect the facility from blockages.
Said easements shall be shown on the record plat with the
following language: This easement is for emergency or access
purposes; however, regular yard maintenance would fall on the
property owner.
A. Street name signs meeting the requirements of the City of O'Fallon
shall be erected by the subdivider at all intersections.
B. Stop signs, yield signs, etc., non-illuminated, non-electric, reflectorized
shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
and be provided by the developer as determined by the City of O'Fallon.
C. Whenever a new street is constructed along the approximate alignment
or extension of an existing street, its name shall be the same as that of
the existing one.
D. Whenever a cul-de-sac street serves not more than three (3) lots, the
name of the intersecting street shall apply to the cul-de-sac.
E. To avoid duplication and confusion, the proposed names of all streets
shall be approved by St. Charles County prior to preliminary plat
approval and such names being assigned or used.
A. Public Street Construction. Streets shall be graded to full width of the
right-of-way and fully constructed of asphaltic concrete or Portland
cement concrete pavements in accordance with the St. Louis County
Department of Transportation Standard Drawings, latest revision, and
the St. Louis County Standard Specifications for Highway Construction,
Divisions 200 through 1000, latest revision, except as modified by the
City of O'Fallon's codes or ordinances.
1. Those publications listed above shall be adopted in whole with the
following exceptions:
a. Standard drawing numbers: C203.66-C203.70, C604, C614,
and C725-C732 drawings are not adopted.
Section
405.180
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.210
100:884
b. All references to "St. Louis County" in any form shall be
replaced with "City of O'Fallon" where appropriate.
c. All references to "department" shall mean the "Public Works
Department of the City of O'Fallon" where appropriate.
d. The standard details for construction of pavements shall follow
those standards established by the ordinances of the City. The
ordinances of the City of O'Fallon supersede and take
precedence over the St. Louis County Standard Specifications
for Highway Construction and standard details.
e. Construction Staking. All construction staking shall be
provided by the contractor unless otherwise indicated by the
City Engineer.
2. The following additional modifications shall be included and prevail
over the adopted publications:
a. All concrete used for public infrastructure (streets, sidewalks,
trails and curbs) in the City of O'Fallon shall be approved by
the Eastern Missouri Pavement Consortium (EMPC) and meet
requirements specified in City Ordinance No. 6335 approved
on April 13, 2017. This includes roadways that are being
developed and intended to become public roadways upon
dedication and acceptance by the City.
b. Per City Ordinance No. 6335 approved on April 13, 2017,
underdrains shall be required and installed per Exhibit A in
Appendix D of the O'Fallon City Municipal Code [Section
405.390(A)(5)]. Underdrains are required to be installed at all
inlets. If a roadway has an open-type drainage system,
underdrains are to be installed every five hundred (500) feet.
c. A representative sample of proposed limestone, calcitic
dolomite or other mineral referred to as "limestone" that is
used for coarse aggregate for concrete shall undergo
appropriate testing, by an independent third-party testing
agency to determine and verify that the coarse aggregate to be
utilized does not exhibit, and is not susceptible to, Alkali-
Carbonate Reaction (ACR). Said third-party testing agency or
agencies will need to be a City-approved agency that is
experienced in performing the necessary tests.
d. For ACR testing, the testing performed shall include ASTM
C295, ASTM C586 and ASTM C1105. The agency performing
these tests must be informed prior to testing to look
specifically for the potential of ACR, and the reports generated
from the testing shall specifically address the potential of ACR
in the text. This testing shall be performed for each ledge
within a quarry that is planned to be used for concrete
pavement within the City of O'Fallon.
Section
405.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.210
100:885
e. The following requirements pertain to the ASTM C295 test. For
the first two (2) years of this requirement, the tests shall be
made within six (6) months of the planned use in concrete.
After the first two (2) years of testing within a quarry, the City
Engineer may allow the interval between tests to go up to one
(1) year if there is convincing evidence to show this is
warranted. The petrograph test shall be performed by a
petrographer experienced in identifying ACR-prone dolomitic
limestone or calcitic dolomite. The reports of the testing noted
herein shall be submitted to the City with the concrete mix
design submittal.
f. The following requirements pertain to the ASTM C586 and
ASTM C1105 tests. These test reports shall be required to be
submitted to the City beginning on August 1, 2017. The period
of time from approval of this Chapter to when the reporting is
required to be submitted allows time for the tests to be
completed. For the first two (2) years of this requirement being
in place, these tests shall be made within twelve (12) months of
the planned use in concrete pavement. After the first three (3)
years of testing within a quarry, the City Engineer may allow
the interval between tests to go up to two (2) years if there is
convincing evidence to show this is warranted.
g. In lieu of performing the above testing, Meramec Gravel can be
utilized for coarse aggregate in Portland cement concrete
pavement. The coarse aggregate shall be Meramec gravel
meeting Missouri Department of Transportation current
"Missouri Standard Specifications for Highway Construction,"
Section 100.5.1.5, Gradation "D."
h. All coarse and fine aggregate material utilized for Portland
cement concrete pavement shall have been inspected and
approved by the Missouri Department of Transportation
(MoDOT) for said use. If MoDOT inspection is not available, a
third-party testing agency that is experienced in performing
the necessary test will need to be approved by the City. The
delivery ticket shall be marked to indicate that the rock has
been tested and meets MoDOT specifications.
i. Coarse aggregate utilized for Portland cement concrete
pavement shall only be used from rock ledges that have been
inspected and accepted by MoDOT for said use. If MoDOT
inspection is not available, a third-party testing agency that is
experienced in performing the necessary test will need to be
approved by the City.
j. A complete copy of the results of the above-referenced testing,
as well as mix design submittal information, MoDOT
certifications and other associated certifications required per
this Chapter and per the St. Louis County Standard
Section
405.210
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.210
100:886
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction shall be
submitted to the City a minimum of seven (7) days prior to
the placement of the concrete. The City must be in agreement
with said test results, mix designs and certifications prior to
the placement of any concrete.
k. For all granular base material deliveries, the delivery ticket
must be annotated or signed by the rock supplier to indicate
that the granular base material meets the Missouri
Department of Transportation (MoDOT) requirements for Type
5 aggregate for base. This ticket must be submitted to the City
for recordkeeping purposes at the time of delivery. Any
deliveries made without the proper delivery tickets, including
signature, will not be accepted for use. In lieu of a signature on
the delivery ticket a separate product certification sheet with a
signature of the company's quality control manager may be
provided to go with the delivery tickets. The product
certification sheet must be current, dated to within four (4)
weeks of the date of delivery and also list the project name or
job site location.
3. The minimum concrete pavement thickness shall be six (6) inches
thick. On minor residential streets, the transverse joints are not
required to have load transfer devices. All other higher
classifications of streets will be required to have load transfer
devices in the transverse joints.
B. Approval Of Subgrade And Base (Subbase). The City Engineer and/or
his/her designee shall approve the subgrade before any base is placed
thereon and shall approve the base before concrete or surface course is
placed. The subgrade and base shall be so constructed that it will be
uniform in density throughout.
1. All subbase shall conform to a modified MoDOT Type 5 base (five
(5) inches thick) and/or as approved by the EMPC. The modified
MoDOT Type 5 rock shall meet all the requirements of MoDOT
Type 5 Rock and also be required to have no more than ten percent
(10%) fines passing a No. 200 sieve. All gradations for this type of
rock shall be submitted to the City and/or the EMPC for approval
prior to use.
2. In all fill areas in the roadways, soil tests shall be submitted and
approved by the City Engineer for each foot of fill and at least one
(1) test and an average of one (1) test within every two hundred
fifty (250) feet.
3. No traffic will be allowed on new concrete pavement until it has
cured for seven (7) days and it reaches three thousand five hundred
(3,500) psi. Concrete pavement shall not be approved unless it
reaches required strength within twenty-eight (28) days.
Section
405.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.210
100:887
4. Prior to placement of aggregate base material on subgrade and
prior to placement of pavement on base material, the subgrade and
base must be proof-rolled with a fully loaded (ten-ton load) tandem
truck or equivalent tire vehicle with one (1) pass down each driving
lane no faster than three (3) miles per hour. If soft spots are
detected, or pumping, rutting or heaving occurs greater than one
(1) inch at the subgrade, the roadbed shall be considered
unsatisfactory, and the soil in these areas shall be remediated to
the depth indicated by the contractor's testing firm and approved
by a representative of the City Engineer.
5. Subgrade and base beneath pavements shall be compacted to St.
Louis County Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction. The moisture range shall be determined by the
Standard or Modified Proctor Density Method AASHTO T-99 and
within -2)/+4 percentage points of the optimum moisture content.
6. The entire width and length will conform to line, grade and cross
section shown on the plans or as established by the engineer. If any
settling or washing occurs, or where hauling results in ruts or other
objectionable irregularities, the contractor shall improve the
subgrade or base to the satisfaction of the City before the
pavement is placed. Additional rolling or methods to verify
compaction shall be at the discretion of the City Engineer.
Tolerance allowed on all lines, grades and cross sections shall be
plus or minus four-one-hundredths (+0.04) feet.
7. Delivery tickets for all granular base material shall be submitted to
the City as specified in City Ordinance No. 6335 approved on April
13, 2017.
C. Utility Work Prior To Base Construction. No base course work may
proceed on any street until all utility excavations (storm and sanitary
sewers, water, gas, electric, etc.) have been properly backfilled with
granular material, crushed stone or gravel mechanically tamped in teninch
lifts. Utilities installed after subgrade preparation shall be bored.
Compaction requirements shall follow St. Louis County standards.
D. Outside (beyond) the pavement limits, excavations shall be jetted with
water and allowed to set for a length of time satisfactory to the City
Engineer.
1. Jetting. Granular materials and earth materials associated with
new construction beyond the pavement may be jetted, taking care
to avoid damage to newly laid sewers. The jetting shall be
performed with a probe route on not greater than seven-and-onehalf-
foot centers with the jetting probe centered over and parallel
with the direction of the pipe. Trench widths greater than ten (10)
feet will require multiple probes every seven-and-one-half-foot
centers.
Section
405.210
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.210
100:888
a. Depth. Trench backfill less than eight (8) feet in depth shall be
probed to a depth extending to half the depth of the trench
backfill, but not less than three (3) feet. Trench backfill greater
than eight (8) feet in depth shall be probed to half the depth of
the trench backfill but not greater than eight (8) feet.
b. Equipment. The jetting probe shall be a metal pipe with an
exterior diameter of one and one-half (1.5) to two (2) inches.
c. Method. Jetting shall be performed from the low surface
topographic point and proceed toward the high point, and from
the bottom of the trench backfill towards the surface. The
flooding of each jetting probe shall be started slowly allowing
slow saturation of the soil. Water is not allowed to flow away
from the ditch without first saturating the trench.
d. Surface Bridging. The contractor shall identify the locations of
the surface bridging (the tendency for the upper backfill crust
to arch over the trench rather than collapse and consolidate
during the jetting process). The contractor shall break down
the bridged areas using an appropriate method such as wheels
or bucket of a backhoe. When the surface crust is collapsed,
the void shall be backfilled with the same material used as
trench backfill and rejetted. Compaction of the materials
within the sunken/jetted area shall be compacted such that no
further surface subsidence occurs.
E. Required Joint Details In Concrete Streets. Construction joints shall be
required in all concrete roadways as a normal requirement. St. Louis
County Department of Transportation standards shall apply.
Additionally:
1. The developer's engineer shall identify on the record plat any lot
for which special precautions should be taken to prevent damage to
any structure caused by the forces commonly known as "street
creep." The developer's engineer shall also recommend any special
construction technique required to counter the forces.
F. Material Testing And Frequency. Materials for construction shall be
tested and inspected per the appropriate ASTM code or at the City
Engineer's discretion. The developer's engineer shall perform the
following quality control guidelines:
1. Concrete.
a. Cylinders/Compressive Strength. One (1) set of four (4)
cylinders within the first fifty (50) cubic yards and one (1) set
per one hundred (100) cubic yards thereafter. One (1) cylinder
must be tested at seven (7) days, one (1) at fourteen (14) days
and two (2) at twenty-eight (28) days. If the first cylinder does
not meet specifications at twenty-eight (28) days, then the
second cylinder must be held and tested at day fifty-six (56).
Section
405.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.210
100:889
b. Percent Air And Temperature. First truck batch each day and
two (2) thereafter until a consistency is encountered. Once a
consistency is encountered, then tests will be performed in
conjunction with the concrete cylinders.
c. Slump. First truck batch each day and two (2) thereafter until a
consistency is encountered. Once a consistency is
encountered, then tests will be performed in conjunction with
the concrete cylinders.
d. If concrete is batched from more than one (1) plant, then the
aforementioned guidelines will be applicable to each plant.
2. Subgrade And Base.
a. Proof roll as described in Section 405.210(B).
b. One (1) compaction test per two hundred fifty (250) feet of
mainline paving, three (3) tests per intersection, five (5) tests
within culs-de-sac and one (1) test per repair slab.
c. Gradation test for subbase material.
3. Asphalt.
a. One (1) set of compaction tests per two hundred fifty (250) feet
of mainline. One (1) set includes three (3) tests across the
paved lane at the same station.
b. One (1) bulk density test per paving operation.
4. Site Grading.
a. Within City Right-Of-Way. Material is to be placed in eight-inch
to twelve-inch loose lifts and compacted per the approved
compaction requirements. One (1) compaction test will be
performed every two hundred fifty (250) feet along the center
line for each lift.
b. Outside Of City Right-Of-Way. Material is to be placed in eightinch
to twelve-inch loose lifts and compacted per the approved
compaction requirements. One (1) compaction test will be
performed at two-foot vertical intervals and approximately
every one thousand (1,000) cubic yards.
5. Quality Control Reports.
a. Daily. Descriptive daily reports are required for each day a
representative is present on site from the quality control
company (soil testing firm). At a minimum, the daily report
should include representative on site, date, materials
observed, activities performed, weather, recommendations or
concerns made and to whom.
Section
405.210
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.210
100:890
b. Proctor Reports. Must have a valid Proctor value prior to
testing on site. At a minimum, the Proctor curve provided must
include sample location and must have five (5) density points
(values) and moisture (values) listed on the document,
optimum moisture content, maximum dry density, zero air
voids curve and assumed specific gravity, natural moisture
content, Proctor type and procedure, liquid limit, plastic limit.
c. Compaction Report. At a minimum, the compaction reports will
include elevation of test and rod depth, station/specific
location, Proctor type, optimum moisture content, maximum
lab dry density, in place moisture content, in place dry density,
percent compaction, does/does not comply with specification
requirements, specification requirements, material type,
weather, date. If a drawing is needed to show location of the
tests, the drawing must be professionally done or at least on
sheet copy of the plans. No hand drawings will be accepted.
d. Concrete Report. At a minimum, the field concrete report will
include location of concrete placed, representative on site,
date, weather, concrete supplier, ticket and truck number, time
truck arrived on site, time concrete poured, air temperature,
concrete temperature, mix type, strength requirement, water
added, slump (actual and required), air content (actual and
required), number of cylinders cast, overnight temperature,
overnight storage temperature, date received at lab. At a
minimum, the laboratory concrete field report will include age
(days) of test, test date, cylinder diameter, cylinder area, load
(pounds), compressive strength (psi), does/does not comply
with specification requirements.
6. Equipment Calibration. The developer's contractors and
subcontractors must have their equipment calibrated by the
following minimum standards:
a. Air meter: weekly.
b. Cylinder compression: annually by independent calibration
service.
c. Batch scales: monthly.
d. Nuclear testing devices: every six (6) months.
e. Proctor equipment: every six (6) months.
f. Slump cone: monthly.
G. Specifications For Construction Of Driveway Entrances. All driveway
entrances constructed within the public right-of-way in the City of
O'Fallon shall meet the following specifications and conform to site plan
requirements. A permit shall be obtained through the Engineering
Section
405.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.210
100:891
Department, for any driveway widening and/or modifications to the
driveway apron, within the City street right-of-way. A permit will not
be needed if the construction is part of another City-permitted
development:
1. All driveway entrances shall be built to grade;
2. If a culvert is necessary in the opinion of the Engineering
Department, no culvert smaller than twelve (12) inches in diameter
shall be installed, and no culvert shorter than sixteen (16) feet shall
be installed; a larger culvert shall be installed wherever, in the
opinion of the Engineering Department, it is necessary.
3. No driveway entrances shall be constructed or built or partially
constructed or built within two (2) feet from the side or rear
property lines.
Exceptions:
a. Existing entrances that are already closer than two (2) feet
from the property line.
b. Multifamily dwellings.
c. City staff may allow minor alterations in special circumstances.
4. All driveway entrances shall be six (6) inches in depth for
residential driveways and a minimum of seven (7) inches in depth
for commercial driveways from the edge of the road pavement to
the property line.
a. For commercial driveways, for new concrete entrances at
existing pavement and curbing, saw cut at one (1) foot and
install tie bars, five-eighths-inch diameter, eighteen (18) inches
long, at twelve-inch centers along all saw-cut edges. New tie
bars shall be placed in drilled holes with non-shrink grout or
epoxy. The bars, where existing, shall be cleaned and
straightened for incorporation in the new concrete.
b. For commercial driveways, the new driveway edge up against
existing street pavement shall match the street pavement
thickness. All street pavement removed and replaced shall be
the same thickness. After the gutter line or the edge of street
pavement line, it shall then flare back to the seven-inch
minimum depth within a two-foot length.
5. All driveway approaches constructed in conjunction with a
sidewalk shall give the appearance that the sidewalk is continuous.
That portion of the driveway approach that doubles as a sidewalk
shall have a one-and-one-half-percent maximum cross slope the
same as the abutting sidewalk, meeting ADA requirements.
Section
405.210
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.210
100:892
Section 405.220. Monuments Required. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
Section 405.230. Public Storm Sewers And Other Drainage
Appurtenances. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
a. If the existing sidewalk adjacent to the driveway is over one
and one-half percent (1.5%) in cross slope, then the first panel
of sidewalk immediately adjacent to the driveway shall be
removed and replaced as a transition section.
b. An exception to this requirement is when a sidewalk does not
exist nor is not planned to be built.
6. Expansion joints in the driveway approach area shall be two (2)
inches wide and full depth at the back of curb. In all cases if the
driveway approach depth exceeds the minimum six-inch thickness,
the joint material shall extend the full depth of pavement, no
concrete to concrete interface.
7. The expansion joint between the driveway and garage floor shall be
a minimum of two (2) inches and full depth of slab.
A. As part of public street construction, sufficient permanent and
distinguished monuments shall be accurately placed throughout the
subdivision so that street alignment may be traced with accuracy. Such
monuments shall be in the form of iron pins not less than one-half (1/2)
inch in diameter and three (3) feet long driven into the earth, or spikes
not less than six (6) inches long driven into the pavement, or of
something equal. Such monuments shall be installed by the subdivider
as soon as reasonably possible. The location of such monuments shall
be indicated on the final plat and shall be placed in accordance with the
following requirements:
1. Street Points. Monuments shall be set at the intersection of all
streets and the beginning and end of all curves along street center
lines.
2. Curb Marks. Curbs shall be permanently marked at the beginning
and end of all curves and at the prolongation of all lot side lines.
A. In addition to the installation of curbs or gutters along the streets as
required by this Chapter, storm sewers shall be required. Such systems
will be equipped with adequate basins, inlets and outlets and shall be
constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions in the
specifications. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and
independent of the sanitary sewer system. The plans and specifications
for the disposing of stormwater shall be approved by the City Engineer
and/or his/her designee.
B. General. All construction details and specifications pertaining to
stormwater drainage shall be in accordance with the Metropolitan St.
Louis Sewer District (MSD) Standard Construction Specifications for
Section
405.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.230
100:893
Sewers and Drainage Facilities, latest version, and the City of O'Fallon's
requirements, unless otherwise noted herein. A registered engineer's
seal is required on all drainage plans submitted for approval.
C. Design Criteria. Unless otherwise specified below or in other City of
O'Fallon requirements, all engineering design shall adhere to the
Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District (MSD) Rules and Regulations and
Engineering Design Requirements for Sanitary Sewer and Stormwater
Drainage Facilities, latest revision.
1. Chapter 5 (Flood Plain Requirements) is not being adopted. For all
floodplain requirements, see Chapter 415 of the City Code.103
2. All references to "District" in any form shall be replaced with "City
of O'Fallon" where appropriate.
3. All stormwater design is to be by the Rational Method, except that
in certain large developments, the use of other methods of analysis
such as the Unit Hydrograph will be considered for stormwater
design. However, prior approval must be obtained from the City
Engineer and/or his/her designee at the preliminary design stage,
where use of the Unit Hydrograph or other methods of analysis are
requested.
4. Runoff factors shall be per the MSD requirements.
D. Drainage Structures. All structures shall be designed for HS20-44
loading.
1. Bridges. Bridges shall be designed for the 100-year storm
frequency and provide two (2) feet of freeboard between the
bottom of superstructure and high water elevations.
2. Culverts.
a. Crossroad culverts, not at low points, shall be designed on a
storm frequency of fifteen (15) years with entrance control and
two (2) feet of freeboard at the shoulder line.
b. Culverts, at or near low points in floodplains, shall be designed
on a storm frequency of one hundred (100) years with entrance
control and two (2) feet of freeboard at the shoulder line.
c. Culverts, at or near low points not in floodplains, shall be
designed on a storm frequency of fifty (50) years with entrance
control and two (2) feet of freeboard at the shoulder line.
3. Roadways. Whenever a watercourse is proposed or exists within
proximity of and is approximately parallel to an existing or
proposed roadway, the low shoulder elevation of the roadway shall
be established from the high water elevation with one (1) foot of
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 415, Flood Hazard Prevention Code.
Section
405.230
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.230
100:894
freeboard in non-floodplain areas and two (2) feet of freeboard in
floodplain areas.
4. Street Inlets. In certain cases, where steep grades or other unusual
conditions are encountered, a grated trough may be required in
lieu of multiple inlet structures upstream in order to eliminate
excessive bypass.
5. Pipes.
a. Pipes within the public right-of-way or easement shall be
reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) ASTM C-76, Class III, and a
minimum of twelve (12) inches diameter. Design calculations
may be submitted allowing a lower class of RCP.
b. The use of high-density polyethylene (HDPE) shall be allowed
following Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District (MSD)
requirements.
c. The use of polypropylene (PP) shall be allowed following
Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District (MSD) requirements.
d. The use of corrugated steel pipe should only be considered
when all options for reinforced concrete pipe are deemed not
feasible. Corrugated steel shall be M-36, minimum sixteengauge
asphalt polymer, or aluminized coating, a minimum of
eighteen (18) CSP, will be allowed with these conditions. This
pipe material may be used for private driveway culverts or
private road culverts, as the maintenance shall be with the
property owner, even though the pipe is in the right-of-way.
e. Additional general pipe requirements.
(1) The City Engineer and/or his/her designee shall review the
proposed project for suitability.
(2) Standard concrete drainage structures and flared end
sections will be used in the installation process.
(3) Installation shall be in accordance with ASTM D-2321 and/
or manufacturer's recommendation, whichever is more
stringent.
f. The required stormwater hydraulics shall be submitted with all
types of pipes.
g. Pipe reduction will not be allowed.
h. In situations where storm pipe cover is less than three (3) feet,
calculations will be required to determine the class or gauge of
pipe.
i. All concrete pipe shall be installed with O-ring rubber-type
gaskets per MSD Standard Construction Specifications.
Section
405.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.230
100:895
Connections at all structures are to be made with rubber,
watertight A-lock joints or approved equals.
j. Pipes normally should be sized using the partial flow design;
however, under special circumstances, full flow design will be
allowed, provided hydraulic grade line information is shown
indicating adequate freeboard. This additional information will
be supplied for the two-, fifteen-, twenty-five-, and 100-year
storms.
k. Freeboard requirements will be two (2) feet from the inlet sill
or manhole top.
E. Plans And Calculations.
1. General. Plans shall be any scale from one (1) inch equals ten (10)
feet through one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet so long as
the scale is an increment of ten (10) feet. Plans shall be prepared
on exhibits nominally twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36)
inches. All calculations submitted shall be in accordance with
Section 405.100 and shall include the following information:
a. Site Drainage Map. A drainage map is required and should be
developed from a base reproduction of the site plan or grading
plan. Plans and calculation shall be prepared in accordance to
the checklist pertinent for the type of development (See
section Title IV Notes: Notes and Appendixes, Appendix C for
application and checklist for compliance with this Section).
b. Supplemental Drainage Map. A supplemental map may be
required and should be developed from a portion of U.S.G.S.
Quadrangie Map. This map must include the site boundary and
the watershed tributary to the project area.
c. Surface Drainage. The following information shall be provided
by the developer:
(1) No sheet flow over one (1) cfs will be allowed over terraces
with slopes that are and/or greater than five (5) feet in
height. Berms and/or swales shall be provided to collect
the flow at the top of the terrace and carry it to a drainage
structure. Total accumulation inside berm and/or swales
shall be a maximum of three (3) cubic feet per second.
(2) Excluding existing creeks and swales not being modified
by the proposed development, the developer's engineer
shall provide critical cross sections, profiles and hydraulic
computations for ditches and swales with flows in excess
of one (1) cfs and creeks with flows in excess of three (3)
cfs.
Section
405.230
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.230
100:896
(3) Overland Flow Swale. All emergency/overland flow swales
shall be designed on the plans. At all low points on streets,
the flow-line elevation of the swale at the right-of-way line
shall not exceed eight (8) inches higher than the top of the
curb inlet (at said low point). The alternative to this depth
is to install a larger storm pipe, capable of handling the
100-year twenty-minute storm.
d. Location Of Drainage Structures. The lateral location of all
drainage structures shall be shown by street center line
stationing and perpendicular offset distance, and in large lot
subdivisions, by referencing to rear lot line, in addition to the
following requirements:
(1) Inlets shall be appropriately sized and spaced, taking into
consideration by pass, depth of flow and width of spread of
flow in gutters.
(2) For inlets in vertical sag curves, the center of the main
chambers shall be placed within one (1) foot of the exact
mathematical low point.
(3) All manholes shall be located outside of the proposed
roadway pavements.
(4) Inlets shall be located as follows:
(a) Sump design shall be in accordance to the City of
O'Fallon's adopted street standards.
(b) Location of area inlets in roadway ditches shall be
compatible with ultimate improvements at an
elevation compatible with the shoulders and
sidewalks.
(5) Bypass shall be minimized at inlet structures and shall be
shown on the hydraulic computations and site drainage
map. No greater than one (1) cfs of stormwater shall be
allowed to cross an intersection.
(6) Where termination of pavement occurs, erosion protection
in the form of asphalt curb, gutters, additional structures,
paving and/or revetment may be required.
(7) Data required on plans and/or profiles shall include:
(a) Type of drainage structure (single, double, grated,
etc.).
(b) Flow line and top elevations.
(c) "Q" in upstream gutter line or drainage swale.
Section
405.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.230
100:897
(d) The hydraulic grade line of the structure may be
shown on the plan, profile or computation sheets.
(e) Attach hydraulic computations.
(f) Label all pipe runs as public or private. For detention
basins, the flared end section and pipe leading up to
the next upstream structure shall be labeled as
private. The outfall structure and section of pipe down
to the next structure shall be labeled as private. Pipe
runs crossing non-City-maintained roadways shall be
labeled as private.
(8) For non-standard structures (for example, cast-in-place or
severe modifications to standard structures), construction
details shall be included on the plan sheets.
e. Pipes.
(1) The following information shall be shown on the plans and/
or profiles:
(a) Location and length of pipes;
(b) Grade;
(c) Alignment; and
(d) Curve data for radius pipes.
Note: On intake structures, such as flared end section
or headwalls, entrance control shall be applied. Twofoot
minimum freeboard is required based on the
fifteen-year, twenty-minute storm. Check for
inundation upstream. Toe walls are required to be two
(2) feet deep on headwalls upstream, three (3) feet
deep on headwalls downstream.
(2) Outfall termination shall conform to the following:
(a) All outfall pipes shall be concrete and have a
reinforced concrete headwall or flared end section
with cutoff wall and revetment to protect from scour.
(b) If discharge is at a property line, discharge easements
will be acquired on affected adjacent properties prior
to approval of the City Engineer and/or his/her
designee. A guarantee will be required for future
extension of the outfall to the property line. Open
trenching of roadway pavements will normally be
permitted on minor residential streets only.
Note: Road closings will not be permitted without
approval of the City Engineer. Contractors will be
Section
405.230
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.230
100:898
Section 405.240. Stormwater Detention. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
required to maintain one (1) lane open to traffic at
all times or to devise and implement a detour plan
approved by the City Engineer.
A. Policy. It is the policy of the City of O'Fallon to protect and promote the
public health, safety and general welfare. The criteria for stormwater
detention will:
1. Reduce the possibility of damage to public and private property;
2. Reduce the erosion of land and creek channels;
3. Assist in the attainment and maintenance of water quality
standards; and
4. Preserve and enhance the environmental quality of the
watercourses in the City. This criteria provides uniform procedures
for designing and checking the design of storm drainage detention
systems.
B. General Guidelines.
1. Applicability. This Chapter shall apply to all development within the
corporate limits of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri. Residential
developments having a total area of less than five (5) acres and
commercial or industrial developments having a total area of less
than one (1) acre may be given a waiver by the City in accordance
with Article V of this Chapter subject to the following conditions:
a. The City retains the right to require detention storage in all
cases in which the proposed development will generate excess
runoff that adversely affects the carrying capacity of the
receiving watercourse.
b. Developments less than one (1) acre with less than thirty
percent (30%) of the area paved and developments generating
less than one (1) cubic foot per second per acre (cfs/acre)
increased runoff shall not be required to provide detention
storage unless the condition in Subsection (B)(1)(a) above is
applicable.
c. This Chapter shall apply for all newly platted areas and new
developments proposed after August 17, 1987. All
developments that have an approved preliminary plan by the
Planning and Zoning Commission at the time of the approval of
this Chapter will not have to conform to this Chapter.
2. Affidavit Of Disclosure Of Property Interest. The effective acreage
for a site is not limited to a fractional part of the total. If a project is
developed in phases or small plats, the total acreage of the project
site must be considered. At the time the owner of any development
Section
405.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.240
100:899
submits a preliminary plat or preliminary plan, the owner shall
also identify to the City all contiguous property or property in the
watershed that he/she has interest in.
3. Method Of Evaluation. The storage capacity and discharge rate
shall be based upon the calculated volume and peak flow of the
stormwater runoff, respectively. The calculations for sites having an
area of one hundred (100) acres or less shall be made using either
the Soil Conservation Service Method or the Rational Method. If
the site is larger than one hundred (100) acres, then the engineer
shall use the Soil Conservation Service Method. If another method
is desired to be used, the engineer shall submit a proposed method
of evaluation for the calculations for review and approval. The
permitted discharge rate of stormwater runoff shall be determined
by calculating the rate of runoff for the site's pre- and postdevelopment
conditions. The engineer shall determine the most
critical storm looking at three (3) different time periods:
a. The time of concentration;
b. A one-hour storm; and
c. A twenty-four-hour storm.
4. Detention Of Differential Runoff. All new developments shall
provide a stormwater detention facility that insures that the rate of
flow of stormwater runoff discharge from the site after
development for a two-year, fifteen-year, twenty-five-year, and
100-year, twenty-minute storm, unless given a waiver by the City in
accordance with Article V of this Chapter. Data shall be submitted
for the two-, fifteen-, twenty-five-, and 100-year frequency twentyminute
storms.
a. The maximum ponding elevation shall be calculated based on a
routing of the design storm (100-year, twenty-minute)
assuming the lowest outlet is blocked with the water ponded to
its maximum elevation. A minimum of one (1) foot of freeboard
shall be provided from the top of the basin to the maximum
ponding elevation.
5. Flows From Upstream Areas. Flows from upstream areas outside
the site should be based upon the assumption that those areas are
fully developed under forecast land use patterns. The required
storage volume will be based upon the site only, with flows from
upstream areas being bypassed or discharged via overflow
spillways or other devices for the 100-year storm.
6. Facilities In Floodplains. If detention storage is provided within a
floodplain, only the net increase in storage volume above that
which naturally existed on the floodplain shall be credited to the
development. No credit will be granted for volumes below the
elevation of the base flood at that location unless compensatory
Section
405.240
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.240
100:900
storage is also provided. Where encroachments in the existing
floodplain fill the valley storage areas, an equal amount of
detention volume shall be provided.
7. Land Credit For Detention Facilities. The number of units/lots shall
be based on the total area of the tract to be developed. All areas to
be used as detention facilities shall be included in this total area.
C. Design Criteria.
1. General Requirements. The design shall be accomplished under the
direction of a Missouri registered professional engineer. The design
shall also be based on land use in the tributary area as zoned,
actually developed or indicated by an adopted future land use plan,
whichever basis produces the greatest runoff.
2. Other References. Other agencies have criteria and regulations
pertaining to drainage systems which may complement this
criteria. When conflicts are encountered, the most rigorous criteria
shall govern.
a. FEMA: floodplain regulations and implementing ordinances
adopted by municipalities. Drainage systems designed within
the limits of the designated 100-year floodplain on the
principal stream shall be designed to convey the flood as
defined by applicable published floodplain information studies.
For areas located in FIRM Zone "A" outside the detailed study,
the developer shall prepare studies and calculations
establishing the floodplain, elevation and width. These
calculations shall be submitted to the reviewing agencies for
approval.
b. Missouri Department Of Natural Resources. Rules and
regulations of the Dam and Reservoir Safety Council shall
apply to those Missouri structures classified as dams
thereunder.
3. Stormwater Runoff. The design criteria used in determining the
amount of runoff shall be the same as set out in Section 405.230 of
this Chapter.
4. Hydraulic Considerations For Detention Storage.
a. Principal spillways: Shall be designed to meet the following
requirements:
(1) The principal spillway shall be designed to function
without requiring attendance or operation of any kind or
requiring use of equipment or tools.
(2) All discharge from the detention facility when inflow is
equal to or less than the 100-year inflow shall be via the
principal spillway(s).
Section
405.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.240
100:901
(3) The design shall allow for discharge of at least eighty
percent (80%) of the detention storage volume within
twenty-four (24) hours after the peak or center of mass of
the inflow has entered the detention basin. On basins less
than one hundred (100) acres, this shall not apply.
(4) The design discharge rate via the spillway shall
continuously increase with increasing head and shall have
hydraulic characteristics similar to weirs, orifices or pipes.
b. Emergency Spillways. The emergency spillway shall be
provided to pass a 100-year storm without damaging any
property and, where applicable, designed to DNR dam safety
requirements. Overland flow route will be required to be
depicted on the plan for emergency spillways.
c. Outlet Works. Detention facilities shall have an outlet works
consisting of valves, gates, pipes and other devices as
necessary to completely drain the facility in seventy-two (72)
hours or less when required for maintenance or inspection on
normally wet basins.
d. Sediment Storage. Public detention facilities shall be designed
to provide for five (5) years of sediment accumulation
calculated by using Figure 1 in Appendix D.104 All other
detention facilities shall provide storage for two (2) years of
sediment accumulation by using Figure 1, except for those
using roofs of buildings, paved parking areas or other facilities
designed to preclude the deposition or accumulation of
sediment. Sediment storage volume shall be in addition to the
volume required for temporary storage of stormwater to
properly size the detention facility on normally wet basins.
e. Erosion Control. Principal spillways and outlet works shall be
designed to prevent erosion and, if necessary, equipped with
energy-dissipating devices to slow the water to normal velocity
as called out in Section 405.230(E)(1)(c) of this Chapter.
Special measures shall be taken by the developer to not permit
sediment from filling the proposed detention basin during all
construction of the proposed development unless a design is
provided and approved to use the detention basin as a
temporary silt basin until such time as the stormwater
improvements are completed and the site vegetated.
f. Public Detention Facilities. As a general rule, detention
facilities shall be private facilities. When determined that a
facility shall be a public facility, the owner shall dedicate the
detention facility and easements with the recording of the
record plat, except:
104. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this Chapter.
Section
405.240
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.240
100:902
(1) When multipurpose wet facilities are planned or are
suitable for use for private aquatic recreation or for
aesthetic enhancement of the owner's property.
(2) When multipurpose dry facilities incorporate surface
recreational improvements.
(3) Any other means of dedication shall require
acknowledgement and acceptance by ordinance from the
City Council.
g. Private Detention Facilities. Shall be designed requiring the
same criteria as the public detention facilities. The amount of
easement shall be equal to the land occupied by the facility,
plus a twenty-foot-wide strip around the perimeter of the
highest elevation attained by the design storage volume, plus
an access easement twenty (20) feet in width between the
facility and the public street. This easement shall be shown as
common ground and be dedicated to the trustees of the
subdivision or owner of the multifamily, commercial or
industrial property for the purpose of maintenance of the
stormwater detention facility, and shall not be part of a
residential lot. The easements as described above shall also be
dedicated to the City for emergency access or periodic
inspection. The following items shall be addressed:
(1) A plan for perpetual maintenance and designating
responsibility for the maintenance shall be provided for its
continuing performance to the standards established by
these criteria.
(2) Underground detention facilities shall also have the abovementioned
easements provided. Easements shall be
labeled properly on the record plat or by separate
document.
h. Plan Requirements. The plan requirements shall be the same
as set out in Section 405.230 of this Chapter with the following
additions:
(1) Elevation-area-capacity curves for the detention facility,
including notation of the storage volumes allocated to
runoff and permanent residual water storage for other
uses (wet basins only).
(2) Inflow hydrograph (detention volumes for Rational
Method) for the two-, fifteen-, twenty-five-, and 100-year
recurrence interval design storms.
(3) Stage-discharge rating curves for each spillway and for
combined spillway discharges.
Section
405.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.240
100:903
(4) Routing curves for the two-year and all greater criteria
recurrence interval design storms with time plotted as the
abscissa and the following plotted as ordinates (this item is
not required for the Rational Method):
(a) Cumulative inflow volume.
(b) Cumulative discharge.
(c) Stage elevation.
(5) A ten-foot minimum depth for all retention (wet detention)
basins shall be required (per DNR recommendation for
healthy aquatic environment). This will be required until
the five-percent escrow release has been established.
(6) All storm sewer pipes shall be labeled as either "public" or
"private" on the storm sewer profile sheets. The transition
structure from public to private shall also be labeled
accordingly. Pipes are not allowed to have said transition
outside of a structure.
(7) For all underground detention facilities, a manhole (or
similar accessible structure) shall be provided both
upstream and downstream [within ten (10) feet or as
approved by the City], for access. Access lids shall be
labeled with the words "underground basin" or similar on
each structure. Labels shall be cast into the lid and be of
the same material that is required under storm sewer
design.
(8) No planting of trees or extensive landscaping shall be
permitted over the top of the underground detention
facility, within the limits of the encompassing easement.
D. Construction Alternates. The developer shall build as part of his/her
development a detention facility as required by this Section unless the
following Subsections apply:
1. If requested by the developer or by the City of O'Fallon, the City, at
its option, may waive the construction of a detention facility as for
the development. The developer shall seek approval from the City
Engineer for the basin to be waived. If the waiver is granted, the
developer shall pay an amount equal to the cost of detention for the
site as determined by the unit cost as published and updated by St.
Louis County. This money is to be used in a stormwater fund for
future City stormwater projects. A contractor's bid may be
submitted in lieu of using the published data although the bid must
be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer prior to
acceptance. This option may only be considered if the requirements
set out in Subsection (B) above are applicable.
Section
405.240
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.240
100:904
2. Off-Site/Regional Detention. All detention facilities shall be on the
individual site being developed. The exception to this requirement
is if there is either a regional detention facility identified that
accounts for the subject property being developed, or if the subject
property is a lot within a subdivision plat that accounts for
detention. In any case, if the off-site or regional detention facility
does not fully account for the City's requirements at the time of
development, then supplemental detention may be needed.
a. On-site detention will be required whenever increased runoff
from the proposed development creates a hazard downstream.
b. Supplemental detention may be provided by means of
modifications to the off-site or regional basin if feasible. If it is
not feasible, then supplemental detention on site shall be
provided.
c. If the off-site/regional detention facility is existing at the time
of development, then the developer of the subject property
shall provide approval for use of the detention facility (that also
addresses maintenance responsibility) for said facility, prior to
approval.
E. Inspection, Maintenance And Acceptance By The City Of O'Fallon.
1. The City Engineer and/or his/her designee shall inspect or cause to
be inspected all stormwater detention facilities constructed within
the City of O'Fallon, Missouri. Through such inspections the City
Engineer and/or his/her designee shall ensure that the facilities
under construction are being constructed in accordance with the
approved plans for such development.
2. Each owner of the property being developed or has been
developed, whose property has caused the increase in runoff that
has necessitated the need for detention, has the responsibility and
duty to properly operate and maintain any stormwater
management system and/or detention facility, which has not been
accepted for maintenance by the City. The responsibility of
maintenance of the system and subdivision projects shall remain
with the developer until such time as the stormwater management
system escrow for such development has been released and turned
over to the homeowners' association or property owner(s) of
record. If there is no active homeowners' association, all properties
listed as part of the subdivision and/or development will become
responsible for maintenance. This will include all underground
detention facilities.
3. Maintenance responsibility shall remain with the property owner(s)
whose said property or development necessitated the need for
detention. Regardless of ownership of said basin, should the
developer, owner(s), association, or other entity responsible for
maintenance choose to sell, abandon, or otherwise vacate their
Section
405.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.240
100:905
interest or ownership of the basin, this will in no way eliminate
their maintenance responsibility of said basin unless they have
provided for perpetual future maintenance separately. Said
maintenance plan as referenced in Subsection (C)(4)(g)(1) above
shall be submitted to the City for approval.
4. All such privately owned and maintained stormwater systems and/
or detention facilities shall be subject to periodic inspections by the
City Engineer and/or his/her designee. After an inspection by the
City Engineer and/or his/her designee, he/she determines whether
or not the conditions of the privately owned stormwater system
and/or detention facilities are safe and operating and functioning
per the approved plans.
a. For underground detention facilities, the owner(s) shall be
required to submit an annual maintenance report to the City
Engineer verifying its condition and that it is operating and
functioning per the approved plans. Said inspection shall be
performed by a competent professional who is experienced in
this type of work.
5. If the privately owned stormwater systems and/or detention facility
is found to be deficient and in need of compliance measures or
maintenance, the property owner(s) will be notified and correction
of such requested. Any corrections will be the responsibility as
identified in Subsection (E)(3) above. Any cost incurred by the City,
as a result of the City Engineer's actions, shall be assessed against
the owner(s) of the system. Initially, the stormwater funds as set up
in Subsection (D)(2) above may be used to pay for any such
emergency authorized by the City.
6. After notification is provided to the owner(s) of any deficiencies
discovered from an inspection of a privately owned stormwater
system and/or detention facility, the owner(s) shall have thirty (30)
days or other time frame mutually agreed to between the City and
the owner(s) to correct the deficiencies. The City shall then conduct
a subsequent inspection to ensure completion of the repairs. If
repairs are not undertaken or not found to be done properly, then
enforcement procedures following this Section shall be followed.
7. If, after inspection by the City, the condition of a privately owned
stormwater system and/or detention facility presents an immediate
danger to the public health or safety, because of an unsafe
condition or improper maintenance, the City shall take such action
as may be necessary to protect the public and make the facility
safe. Any cost incurred by the City, as a result of the City Engineer's
actions, shall be assessed against the owner(s) of the system.
a. No modifications shall be made to any privately owned
stormwater system and/or detention facility, without a permit
or other approval from the City.
Section
405.240
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.240
100:906
Section 405.245. Stormwater Quality Management And Illicit
Discharge Control. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
8. Native Vegetation/Natural Basins. Should the owner(s) of a
privately owned stormwater system and/or detention facility want
to alter original construction to convert the system to provide
increased water quality benefits and have a more natural
appearance, such alternatives must be submitted by permit process
to the City Engineer or his/her designee for review of detention
facility functionality and approval.
a. Conversion examples include, but are not limited to, native
grasses, wildflowers, removal of concrete swales, or alteration
of outfall structures.
b. If approved, the owner(s) shall prepare and submit a
maintenance schedule for the conversion. Modifications will be
subject to inspection during conversion and continue after
acceptance.
c. If approved, converted areas shall be excluded from mowing
requirements as stated in Section 220.100, Weeds, but an
alternative mowing/maintenance schedule shall be submitted
and followed.
(1) Annual mowing will be required in efforts to prevent the
vegetation from becoming excessive and basins from
getting overgrown. All conversion-permitted basins shall
be mowed by November 1 of each year. Failure to meet this
requirement will result in enforcement in accordance with
Section 220.100.
d. Maintenance of such systems will continue to be the
responsibility of the property owner(s) as stated in Subsection
(E)(2) through (7).
e. Under no circumstances does the altercation from a detention
facility to a native vegetation area waive the requirements for
detention.
9. Upon acceptance of public detention facilities by the City Council,
the stormwater detention facility may be dedicated to the City for
perpetual maintenance. Any such system shall include adequate
perpetual access and sufficient area for maintenance by the City
personnel and vehicles.
A. Purpose And Intent. The purpose of this Section is to provide for the
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of O'Fallon
through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm
drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by
Federal and State law. This Section establishes methods for controlling
the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer
Section
405.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.245
100:907
system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The
objectives of this Section are:
1. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
2. To prohibit illicit connections and illicit discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4).
3. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this Section.
B. Applicability. This Section shall apply to all water entering the storm
drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands
unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
C. Responsibility For Administration. The City of O'Fallon shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this Section. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon the City Administrator may be
delegated by the City Administrator to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City.
D. Severability. The provisions of this Section are hereby declared to be
severable. If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this
Section or the application thereof to any person, establishment or
circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the
other provisions or application of this Section.
E. Ultimate Responsibility. The standards set forth herein and
promulgated pursuant to this Section are minimum standards;
therefore, this Section does not intend nor imply that compliance by any
person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution nor
unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
F. Discharge Prohibitions.
1. Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges. No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or
watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to,
pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards,
other than stormwater.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
a. The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this Section: water line flushing or
other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn
watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater,
Section
405.245
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.245
100:908
groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated
pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains, sump
pumps (not including active groundwater dewatering systems),
crawl space pumps, air-conditioning condensation, springs,
non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat
or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically
less than one (1) PPM chlorine), firefighting activities and any
other water source not containing pollutants.
b. Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
c. Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the
time of the test.
d. The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered
under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection
Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver or Missouri Department
of Natural Resources (MDNR) and other applicable laws and
regulations and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
2. Prohibition Of Illicit Connections.
a. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
b. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under law or practices applicable
or prevailing at the time of connection.
c. A person is considered to be in violation of this Section if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows
such a connection to continue.
G. Suspension Of MS4 Access.
1. Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations. The
City of O'Fallon may, with appropriate notice, suspend MS4
discharge access to a person in order to prevent an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of
persons or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of
the United States or to minimize danger to persons.
Section
405.245
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.245
100:909
2. Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge. Any
discharge to the MS4 in violation of this Section may result in
termination of MS4 access. If such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge, the City shall notify the violator of the
proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition
or request a hearing before the City Council, but must suspend the
illicit discharge until after the reconsideration and hearing are
held.
3. A person commits an offense, if the person reinstates MS4 access
to premises suspended or terminated pursuant to this Section
without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
H. Industrial Or Construction Activity Discharges. Any person subject to
an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge
permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the City of O'Fallon prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
I. Monitoring Of Discharges.
1. Applicability. This Section applies to all facilities that have
stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.
2. Access To Facilities And Records.
a. Facility operators shall provide to the City of O'Fallon copies of
records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES
permit to discharge stormwater.
b. Upon consent of the property owner, the City of O'Fallon may
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition in by the
discharger at its own expense; however, such equipment shall
remain the property of the City of O'Fallon. All devices used to
measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to
ensure their accuracy. No person shall damage such equipment
or alter such equipment so that proper results cannot be
obtained.
c. If the City of O'Fallon has been refused access to any part of
the premises from which stormwater is discharged or if the
property owner is not available to give consent to access the
premises, the City may, upon demonstrating probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this Section or a need
to inspect and/or sample to verify compliance with this Section
or any order issued hereunder, seek issuance of an
administrative search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
Section
405.245
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.245
100:910
J. Requirement To Prevent, Control And Reduce Stormwater Pollutants By
The Use Of Best Management Practices (BMPs). The City of O'Fallon
will adopt requirements identifying best management practices (BMPs)
for any activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system or
waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or
industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through
the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any
person responsible for a property or premises, which is or may be the
source of an illicit discharge, will be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to
prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4). Compliance with all terms and conditions of
a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be
deemed compliance with the provisions of this Section. These BMPs
shall be part of a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPP) as
necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
K. Watercourse Protection. Every person owning property through which
a watercourse passes or such person's lessee shall keep and maintain
that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris,
excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
L. Notification Of Spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as
soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation or responsible
for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of
any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may
result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater,
the storm drain system or waters of the United States, said person shall
take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and
cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous
materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the
event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify
the City in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next
business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the City of O'Fallon within three
(3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited
materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the
owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years.
Section
405.245
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.245
100:911
M. Enforcement.
1. Notice Of Violation. Whenever the City Administrator finds that a
person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of
this Section, the City Administrator may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice
and order may require without limitation:
a. The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
b. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
c. That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease
and desist;
d. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property; and
e. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
The City Administrator may order that such work be completed
within a reasonable time from the date of the notice of
violation.
2. If the property owner fails to abate the violation and/or restore the
affected property within the time prescribed following notice or
appeal, the work may be done by the City or a contractor
designated by the City Administrator and the expense in
accordance with the City's procedures for abatement of a nuisance.
The property owner shall be responsible for all costs of such work.
N. Appeal Of Notice Of Violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation
may appeal the determination and order of the City Administrator. The
notice of appeal must be received within thirty (30) days from the date
of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the City Council
or its designee shall take place within thirty (30) days from the date of
receipt of the notice of appeal. Any aggrieved party shall then be
entitled to judicial review in accordance with the provisions of the
Missouri Administrative Procedures Act.
O. Injunctive And Other Relief. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of
this Section. If a person has violated or continues to violate the
provisions of this Section, the authorized enforcement agency may
petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the
person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation. In addition, the authorized enforcement agency may utilize
any remedy, at law or in equity, in order to enforce the provisions of this
Section. The City may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and other
Section
405.245
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.245
100:912
Section 405.247. Stormwater Quality — Best Management
Practices. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
expenses associated with enforcement of this Chapter, including
sampling and monitoring expenses.
P. Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance. In addition to the enforcement
processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to
exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Section is a threat to
public health, safety and welfare and is declared and deemed a
nuisance and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
Q. Prosecution For Violations. Any person that has violated or continues to
violate this Section shall be liable to prosecution to the fullest extent of
the law and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine in an amount not
to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per charge and/or
imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days per
charge.
R. Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this Section are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable Federal,
State or local law, and it is within the discretion of the City to seek
cumulative remedies.
A. Purpose And Intent. Two (2) consequences of construction and
development are increased runoff created by the changed properties of
ground surface and the rate of discharge of this increased runoff. These
are both of great relevance to stormwater. The natural condition of the
land before development is in relative balance with the natural capacity
of the receiving creeks. Normally, the undeveloped conditions provide
greater permeability and longer times of concentration. By modification
of the ground surface from the irregular, pervious and vegetationcovered,
the areas are changed to more impervious, more quickly
drained and, in some cases, denuded of vegetation. It is the policy of the
City to protect and promote the public health, safety and general
welfare. The management of stormwater will reduce the erosion on land
and creek channels, will reduce the possibility of damage to public and
private property, and will assist in the attainment and maintenance of
water quality standards, and will preserve the environmental quality of
the watercourses in the City.
B. Requirements — Creek Bank Setback.
1. Development along natural watercourses shall have residential lot
lines, commercial or industrial improvements, parking areas and
driveways set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the top
of the existing stream bank. This is not meant to prevent access
across creeks. Except as otherwise provided herein or as allowed
by the City, the section of land between a natural watercourse and
Section
405.245
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.247
100:913
lot lines shall be designated as common ground and drainage
easement to be maintained by the trustees or owners' association
of the subdivision within all types of developments. Only for nonresidential
subdivisions in lieu of the common ground requirement,
the section of land between the natural watercourse and twentyfive
(25) feet from the top of bank can be:
a. Private property with an easement dedicated to the trustees or
owners' association requiring maintenance of the areas as the
responsibility of the trustees or owners' association;
b. Private property subject to a conservation easement in favor of
an organization or land trust dedicated to environmental
protection or land preservation such as Trailnet, Inc., the Open
Space Council for the St. Louis Region or similar organization;
c. Set aside in a stream bank mitigation program approved by the
United States Army Corps of Engineers under the provisions of
the Clean Water Act.
2. All developments shall maintain a setback minimum of fifty (50)
feet from the top of the existing bank to any building structure
requiring a construction permit that necessitates excavation or also
requires a foundation. Commercial and industrial areas shall have
creek areas dedicated as drainage easements. Notwithstanding the
foregoing setback requirements, an applicant may obtain a
variance to develop within the stream buffer area from the City,
provided the applicant is able to demonstrate that the water quality
and stream morphology will not be adversely affected or adequate
mitigation is provided to offset such adverse effects. Mitigation
may include, but not be limited to, the following:
a. Installing additional erosion and sediment control;
b. If the stream has the potential for lateral movement, installing
stream stabilization practices within the stream;
c. For those sites where vegetation does not exist, establishing
vegetation; and/or
d. Additional tree planting.
C. Post-Construction — Water Quality. In order to preserve the quality of
water in natural streams, it is important to provide a mechanism to
remove contaminants on the site prior to water entering the natural
watercourse. Typically called post-construction BMPs (best
management practices), these methods identify a critical water quality
volume that will need to receive a treatment to remove certain
contaminants. These improvements, whether structural or nonstructural,
will remain in place after the construction is completed. The
concepts introduced in the following Subsections are taken from the
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume 2, August 2001.
Section
405.247
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.247
100:914
Nothing in the following Subsections shall change or replace any of the
City's detention ordinances.
1. Water Quality Volume (WQv).
a. The water quality volume (denoted as the WQv) is the storage
needed to capture and treat the runoff from ninety percent
(90%) of the recorded daily rainfall events. In numerical terms,
it is equivalent to one and fourteen hundredths (1.14) inches of
rainfall multiplied by the volumetric runoff coefficient (Rv) and
site area. The WQv is directly related to the amount of
impervious cover created at a site. A minimum WQv of twotenths
(0.2) inches per acre shall be met at all sites.
b. Redevelopment projects can appeal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission to reduce or eliminate WQv if it can be shown that
there are stormwater enhancements being provided.
2. As a basis for determining water quality treatment volume, the
following assumptions may be made:
a. The water quality volume WQv for off-site areas is not required.
The following equations are used to determine the storage
volume, WQv (in acre/feet of storage):
WQv = [(P)(Rv)(A)]/12
P = 1.14 inches of rainfall
Where:
WQv = Water quality volume (in acre-feet)
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009 (I) where I is percent impervious
cover
A = Area in acres
b. Measuring Impervious Cover. The measured area of a site plan
that does not have vegetative or permeable cover shall be
considered total impervious cover.
c. Multiple Drainage Areas. When a project contains or is divided
by multiple drainage areas, the WQv volume shall be
addressed for each drainage area.
d. Off-Site Drainage Areas. The WQv shall be based on the
impervious cover of the proposed site. Off-site existing
impervious areas may be excluded from the calculation of the
water quality volume requirements.
e. BMP Treatment. The final WQv shall be treated by an
acceptable BMP(s) from the list presented in this Chapter.
Section
405.247
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.247
100:915
f. Extended Detention For Water Quality Volume. The water
quality requirements can be met by providing a twenty-fourhour
draw down of a portion of the water quality volume (WQv)
in conjunction with a stormwater pond or wetland system.
D. Acceptable Urban BMP Options.
1. This Subsection sets forth five (5) acceptable groups of BMPs that
can be used to meet the water quality volume criteria (WQv). The
design and selection of these BMPs should comply with the Georgia
Stormwater Management Manual as prepared by the State of
Georgia.
2. Where the City's criteria or requirements are more stringent, then
they shall govern. Adapting to local Missouri environment and
natural conditions should be expected but shall be as approved by
the City or a higher authority.
The acceptable BMP designs are assigned into five (5) general
categories for stormwater quality control (WQv):
a. BMP Group 1 stormwater ponds.
b. BMP Group 2 stormwater wetlands.
c. BMP Group 3 infiltration practices.
d. BMP Group 4 filtering practices.
e. BMP Group 5 open channel practices.
3. See Section 1.3 of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual
for additional BMP options. Section 3 of the Georgia manual has
detailed descriptions of each control.
4. To be considered an effective BMP for stand-alone treatment of
WQv, a design shall be capable of:
a. Capturing and treating the required water quality volume
(WQv).
b. Removing eighty percent (80%) of the TSS.
5. A combination of BMPs and/or credits is normally required at most
development sites to meet all three (3) stormwater sizing criteria.
a. BMP Group 1. Stormwater Ponds. Practices that have a
combination of permanent pool, extended detention or shallow
wetland equivalent to the entire WQvs include:
(1) P-1 micropool extended detention pond.
(2) P-2 wet pond.
(3) P-3 wet extended detention pond.
Section
405.247
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.247
100:916
(4) P-4 multiple pond system.
(5) P-5 pocket pond.
b. BMP Group 2. Stormwater Wetlands.
(1) Practices that include significant shallow wetland areas to
treat urban stormwater but often may also incorporate
small permanent pools and/or extended detention storage
to achieve the full WQv include (Modification of existing
wetland areas will require a Corps 404 permit):
(a) W-1 shallow wetland.
(b) W-2 ED shallow wetland.
(c) W-3 pond/wetland system.
(d) W-4 pocket wetland.
(2) Wetlands shall not be used for control of water quantity
(i.e., the flood protection volume).
c. BMP Group 3. Infiltration Practices.
(1) Practices that capture and temporarily store the WQv
before allowing it to infiltrate into the soil over a two-day
period include:
(a) I-1 infiltration trench.
(b) I-2 infiltration basin.
(2) Infiltration practices will be allowed on sites where it is
proven that infiltration will work. Percolation rates shall be
determined for proper use.
d. BMP Group 4. Filtering Practices.
(1) Practices that capture and temporarily store the WQv and
pass it through a filter bed of sand, organic matter, soil or
other media are considered to be filtering practices.
Filtered runoff may be collected and returned to the
conveyance system. Design variants include:
(a) F-1 surface sand filter.
(b) F-2 underground sand filter.
(c) F-3 perimeter sand filter.
(d) F-4 organic filter.
(e) F-5 pocket sand filter.
(f) F-6 bio retention*.
Section
405.247
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.247
100:917
Section 405.250. Sanitary Sewers. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
(g) F-7 proprietary filtering system.
*May also be used for infiltration.
(2) A maintenance agreement and maintenance schedule shall
be required.
e. BMP Group 5. Open Channel Practices.
(1) Vegetated open channels that are explicitly designed to
capture and treat the full WQv within the dry or wet cells
formed by check dams or other means include:
(a) Dry swale.
(b) Wet swale.
(c) Filter strips.
(2) Open channel practices shall be designed with the proper
plantings. Wet swales shall be designed to drain out over
time.
A. All buildings, structures and uses of land in the incorporated area of the
City of O'Fallon shall hereafter be required with an adequate, safe and
sanitary disposal system for all human disposal of sewage or other
liquidated wastes and shall conform to the methods outlined herein:
1. Where a public sanitary sewer main is reasonably accessible, in the
opinion of the City, the developer shall provide the subdivision with
a complete sanitary sewer system connected with such sewer main,
including a lateral connection for each lot. Such systems and
connections shall comply with the regulations of the Missouri State
Board of Health and Missouri Department of Natural Resources,
City of O'Fallon and the Duckett Creek Sewer District (where
applicable).
a. Sanitary sewer systems outside the City of O'Fallon service
area shall be reviewed and approved by the appropriate sewer
district servicing the area. Approval letters shall be forwarded
to the City of O'Fallon Engineering Department for service
areas within the municipal boundaries.
b. All sanitary sewer laterals shall be Schedule 40 PVC material.
The wye shall be installed at the same standard as the main.
2. It shall be the responsibility of the developer/applicant to comply
with all requirements of the City of O'Fallon per Chapter 700, and/
or Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District (MSD), latest revision.
3. Verification of the service shall be provided at the time of
submission of the preliminary plat.
Section
405.247
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.250
100:918
4. Where no sewers are accessible and no plans for a sewer system
have been prepared and approved, or where the topography
restricts the use of reasonable gravity sewer mains, the developer
shall provide a written engineering alternatives report, signed/
sealed by a Missouri professional engineer, evaluating all of the
options to service sewer for the site. This report should evaluate
both gravity and mechanical options, costs, and maintenance
responsibilities of each option, and provide pros and cons on each.
Staff will review options and make recommendations for this
development, and ultimately agree to one (1) or more of the
solutions.
5. Review By The City's Sewer Consultant. The City's sewer
consultant may be engaged to review the engineering alternatives
report. The sewer consultant's report regarding the analysis will be
forwarded as part of the petitioner's application to the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
6. Should a mechanical system be the approved alternative, the
developer shall either install a sewage collection and disposal
system in accordance with the requirements of Subsection (A)(2)
above or individual disposal devices may be installed on each lot
within the subdivision, provided that no individual disposal device
should be permitted unless the lots to be served have sufficient
area to allow adequate soil absorption for on-site sewage disposal.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may modify lot area
requirements in relation to soil conditions and other pertinent facts
and findings in any particular subdivision. All such individual
devices and systems shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the regulations and requirements of the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources.
a. The City's sewer consultant may be engaged to review any
technical design report or documents pertaining to any final
mechanical system. Said consultant shall provide
recommendations to the City for the final design to be built
with the development.
b. Any plan for a mechanical system shall be presented to
Planning and Zoning, with the development. A concept level
study will be required at the area plan or preliminary plat
stage.
c. Any mechanical system shall be built in accordance to the
City's requirements in order to provide a reliable system to the
public.
7. For lots with individual water systems and sanitary sewage disposal
systems, the applicant shall adhere to St. Charles County
requirements regarding the minimum lot size.
Section
405.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.260
100:919
Section 405.260. Water Supply. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
Section 405.270. Gas, Wire Or Cable Utilities. [Ord. No. 6496,
9-13-2018]
A. Where a public water supply main is reasonably accessible, in the
opinion of the City, the subdivision shall be provided with a complete
water distribution system adequate to serve the area being platted,
including a connection for each lot and appropriately spaced fire
hydrants whose locations shall be reviewed and approved by the
appropriate fire protection district. The water system shall be designed
and constructed per the American Water Works Association (AWWA)
standards and guidelines and approved by the City of O'Fallon, per
Chapter 700.105
1. Water systems outside the City of O'Fallon service area shall be
reviewed and approved by the appropriate water district servicing
the area. Approval letters shall be forwarded to the City of O'Fallon
Engineering Department for service areas within the municipal
boundaries.
2. Where proposed developments are adjacent to municipal
boundaries in the City water district and where fire flow demands
are deficient, or where the area is served with no looped system,
the developer may be required to connect to the outside agency's
water system.
a. If required, the proposed connection will be recommended to
the City Council as part of the Planning and Zoning review and
approval of the proposed development.
b. Any hydraulic analysis shall require the City's model to be
updated. The City's water consultant shall be engaged to
review any technical design report or documents pertaining to
any final system layout and to update the model.
B. For lots with individual water systems and sanitary sewage disposal
systems, the applicant shall adhere to St. Charles County requirements
regarding the minimum lot size.
A. All lines for gas, telephone, electrical, television and other services
distributed by wire or cable shall be placed underground throughout a
development. Overhead lines may be permitted by the Planning and
Zoning Commission where it is determined that such lines will not
impair the health, safety, general welfare, design, appearance and
character of the subdivision and only where such overhead lines are
brought to the perimeter of the subdivision. This Section shall not be
construed to prohibit the construction of aboveground or surface
equipment associated with an underground distribution system, such as
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 700, Public Utilities.
Section
405.260
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.270
100:920
Section 405.275. Terraced And Vertical Retaining Walls. [Ord. No.
6496, 9-13-2018]
(but not limited to) surface-mounted transformers, power terminal
pedestals, meters and meter boxes, concealed wires, streetlights and
streetlight poles.
B. Utility lines shall be installed prior to occupancy permits being issued
on a particular phase. Utilities wishing to install utility lines after
occupancy permits have been issued on a particular phase shall be
required to obtain a permit from the City for their excavation.
C. The City strongly prefers simultaneous ditching whenever feasible.
A. A permit is required for all retaining walls that are over forty-eight (48)
inches tall in height, measured from the top of the base to the top of the
wall or for walls that support a surcharge load or that alter the
channelized drainage of any lot or drainage area. For retaining walls
requiring a permit, as-built plans are to be prepared by a certified
licensed engineer when required by the Engineering Department.
B. Retaining walls shall not be placed any closer to another retaining wall
as recommended by a geotechnical engineer or by a ratio of a minimum
of two (2) feet horizontal for every one (1) foot of vertical height of wall.
C. Retaining walls in the front yard shall not exceed a height of four (4)
feet and shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the front
property line or outside the utility easement, whichever is greater. This
requirement can be varied by the Planning and Zoning Commission or
the Board of Adjustment.
D. Retaining walls in the side or rear yard shall not be built within two (2)
feet from the property line. Retaining walls in side or rear yards over
forty-eight (48) inches will not be allowed in public utility easements.
E. Retaining walls will not be allowed in public rights-of-way without
written approval from the City Engineer and/or his/her designee.
F. A retaining wall may exceed four (4) feet in height if it has been
designed and engineered by a licensed engineer; however, any wall
shall not exceed six (6) feet in height without a fence or guard on top.
G. Any retaining wall more than thirty (30) inches tall which supports a
walking surface that is within two (2) feet of the wall will require a
guard on the retaining wall. The guard shall be constructed per the
current edition of the International Building Code (IBC) or the
International Residential Code (IRC), whichever is applicable.
H. Any resident who constructs a retaining wall within a public utility
easement shall be financially responsible for the removal or
reconstruction of the retaining wall, should the easement be needed,
Section
405.270
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.275
100:921
Section 405.280. through Section 405.290. (Reserved)
Section 405.300. Large Lot (R1-A Single-Family Suburban
Residential District) Residential Subdivisions. [Ord. No. 6496,
9-13-2018]
per Missouri law. Refer to the record plat of the subdivision for
easement locations and sizes.
I. Any construction of a retaining wall requiring a permit shall include a
drainage plan which provides for drainage around or away from the
retaining wall and to be contained on site or drains to a City-approved
location. Stormwater will not be allowed to flow over the retaining wall.
J. Retaining walls that alter the channelized drainage of any lot or
drainage area shall not be constructed without prior approval and
permitting from the City of O'Fallon Engineering Department
regardless of the height of the wall.
K. Any person who wishes to construct a retaining wall that requires
engineering shall submit signed and sealed engineering plans and
calculations for the retaining wall and a site plan showing the location
of the retaining wall to the City of O'Fallon Building and Code
Enforcement Division for review. Upon approval, a building permit will
be issued.
L. For additional requirements see Chapter 500.106
A. The following is a list of exemptions in this Chapter for subdivisions
zoned R1-A; all other requirements of this Chapter must be met:
1. Culs-de-sac and dead-end streets of reasonable length [normally
not over eight hundred (800) feet] may be approved where
necessitated by topography or where, in the opinion of the Planning
and Zoning Commission, they are appropriate for the type of
development contemplated.
a. Curb and gutter are not required; flat-bottom open drainage
ditches, approved by the City Engineer and/or his/her
designee, shall be provided in lieu of curb and gutter.
b. Sidewalks are not required except in situations where deemed
appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or
the City Council in order to provide direct access for
pedestrians to recreational areas, common ground, schools,
churches, shopping areas, pedestrianways and multipurpose
trails linking adjoining streets and neighborhoods.
106. Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the City offices.
Section
405.275
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.300
100:922
Section 405.310. (Reserved)
Section 405.320. Streetlights. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
c. Streetlights shall be required at all entrances and intersections
and shall be provided at a maximum five-hundred-foot
separation.
d. With the approval of the City Engineer and/or his/her designee,
the maximum grade of a minor residential street can be
increased to fifteen percent (15%) for short stretches of
pavement. A short stretch of pavement is defined as being less
than one hundred fifty (150) lineal feet not counting the curve
and separated by approximately three hundred (300) lineal
feet of grades at ten percent (10%) or less.
e. With adequate parking on driveways, pavement width can be
reduced to twenty-foot width with three-foot rock shoulders on
each side. No on-street parking would be allowed in this
design. Adequate parking is defined as four (4) for more
parking spaces on each driveway not counting the garage.
B. If residents of a large lot subdivision desire to install any of the above
improvements, such installation shall be solely at the expense of
property owners of said subdivision. The City of O'Fallon has no
responsibility or obligation to provide such improvement or to share in
such provision. The developer of a large lot subdivision shall include
language to this effect in recorded restrictions as a condition of record
plat approval.
A. Streetlights shall be provided in all subdivisions, except as stated under
large lot residential subdivisions, Section 405.300. All streetlights shall
have underground wiring and meet minimum specifications of the
electric utility company serving the area of the proposed subdivision.
Streetlights shall be placed at all intersections and in all culs-de-sac. A
maximum of three hundred (300) feet separation shall be required, or in
special cases a longer separation may be approved by the City Engineer
and/or his/her designee. Streetlights shall be installed and functional
prior to occupancy of structures within the subdivision.
B. New Public Streetlight Installations.
1. Within the City limits, there are multiple electric providers. The
intent is still to have consistent streetlighting City-wide even
though requirements may differ slightly.
a. In Ameren Missouri's territory, streetlights shall be installed by
the developer in a manner that meets the specifications and
rates for "Service Classification No. 6 (M) Street and Outdoor
Area Lighting — Customer Owned" for unmetered service,
seventy-one-watt minimum (LED-Light Emitting Diode) —
Section
405.300
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.320
100:923
standard at the energy and maintenance rate (if applicable,
otherwise energy only). The City Engineer shall prepare more
specific details for this specification. After inspection and
acceptance by the City, the lighting facilities will be maintained
and operated by the City. With the developer incurring the
full cost of the light installations and connections, streetlight
billing in new subdivisions shall be turned over to the City
for payment once lights are turned on. Connection fees will
be paid to the City by the developer with the City being
responsible for payment of the connection fee to the utility
company when the lights are ready to be turned on. The City
will provide written direction to the electric company to add
new lights to the City's bill. During the period when an escrow
for streetlighting is in place, escrowed funds may be used for
any maintenance expenses incurred or to be incurred by the
City. The standard post top luminaries for the City shall be
either the Early American style or the Colonial style.
b. In Cuivre River Electric Cooperative's territory, streetlights
must be similar in style and installation to the lights noted in
Subsection (B)(3) and installed according to Cuivre River
Electric Cooperative's requirements. Until a rate is
established, for a City-owned post-top light, the installation will
be a company-owned light. When a new rate is established for
City-owned streetlights similar to Ameren UE's customerowned
rate, streetlight installations shall be made in a manner
that closely follows Subsection (B)(3).
2. All proposed streetlights shall have bulbs that are light-emitting
diode (LED) technology, assuming the electric district has the
current technology available. Any existing bulb shall be replaced
with an LED counterpart when the existing bulb is no longer
functional.
3. All specifications and requirements for the installations of
streetlights shall adhere to the City of O'Fallon Specifications for
the Installation of Streetlights Policy, latest edition. This manual is
available on the City of O'Fallon Engineering website or can be
available by contacting the Engineering Department.
4. After inspection and acceptance by the City, the lighting facilities
will be owned, maintained and operated by the City. With the
developer incurring the full cost of the light installations and
connections, streetlight billing in new subdivisions shall be turned
over to the City for payment once lights are turned on. Connection
fees will be paid to the City by the developer with the City being
responsible for payment of the connection fee to the utility
company when the lights are ready to be turned on. The City will
provide written direction to the electric company to add new lights
to the City's bill.
Section
405.320
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.320
100:924
5. For any cellular or telecommunications devices that are to be
placed on a streetlight, the owner of the cellular or
telecommunications devices shall assume all electric costs for the
light. If the City is already paying for the electric costs, then that
electricity fee will remain with the City until all cellular or
telecommunication devices are installed and ready to be turned on.
a. Said streetlight shall remain operational per the City
requirements. Continuous and proper function of the
streetlight will be required as a condition of approval for
shared use on the pole. Failure to meet this requirement could
result in the required removal of the equipment.
b. Planning and Zoning Commission approval may be required
prior to construction. The applicant shall contact the Director
of Planning and Development for the process.
c. A separate permit through the City will be required for plan
approval and prior to construction. An agreement may also be
required as part of the terms and conditions of connecting to
the pole.
C. New Private Streetlight Installations. (Streetlights not owned by the
City and typically where a Homeowners' Association or private land
owner is the customer.)
1. As an alternative to public-provided streetlights, the subdivision
may opt to have private streetlights (non-City owned/maintained)
installed. Should this option be utilized, the private streetlighting
plan must be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission
with the development.
2. Lighting on private streets and other areas will not be paid for by
the City.
3. The City Attorney and Department of Public Works must approve
the language in the covenants and restrictions that provides for the
perpetual payment of streetlighting expenses by the homeowners'
association, in a manner that ensures the lights will always be
privately owned, and not revert to City-owned lights in the future.
4. The specifications for the private lights as provided for in this
Subsection shall be equal to or better than the City lighting
standards, including the LED requirement, with the exception of
the disconnect as required by the utility company. All proposed
streetlights shall have bulbs that are light-emitting diode (LED)
technology, assuming the electric district has the current
technology available. Any existing bulb shall be replaced with an
LED counterpart when the existing bulb is no longer functional.
D. This Section pertains to lights on City streets only which are designed
to be dedicated to the City for public use. Lighting on private streets
Section
405.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.320
100:925
Section 405.330. through Section 405.360. (Reserved)
Section 405.370. General Street Design Standards. [Ord. No. 6496,
9-13-2018]
and other areas will not be paid for by the City and, therefore, this
Section is not applicable to those installations.
A. The design of streets shall be designed in accordance with the latest
edition of the Saint Louis County Transportation Design Criteria for the
Preparation of Improvement Plans and the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (MUTCD) except as modified by the City of O'Fallon.
Designs shall also incorporate the Traffic Management Policy as
adopted by the City of O'Fallon. All streets shall be constructed to St.
Louis County Highway Standards except as modified by the City of
O'Fallon.
B. Minimum design requirements shall be as detailed in the table below.
Standard
Detail
Number
ROW
Width
Pavement
Width
Lane
Width
Number
of Drive
Lanes
Utility
Easement
Design
Speed
Arterial C203.64 84 63 12 5 10 40
Collector
(urban)
C203.71 60 39 12 3 10 35
Collector
(residential)
C203.84 60 38 n/a 2 10 25
Minor
residential/
Local
Access
C203.82 50 26** n/a 2 10 25*
NOTES:
* Can be varied with City Engineer's approval. Minimum posted speed
shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
** Minimum concrete pavement thickness shall be six (6) inches thick.
These requirements may be varied by other City ordinances.
Narrower pavement widths can be approved following Subsection (C) of
this Section.
Parkway options can be provided with the City Engineer's approval.
C. The above standards are to be considered minimum standards.
Variations in the above standards can be made if supported by the
Director of Planning and City Engineer and further approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission. Changes must provide for the health,
safety and welfare of the community.
Section
405.320
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.370
100:926
Section 405.380. (Reserved)
Section 405.390. Required Subdivision Design And Improvement
Standards — Street Standards. [Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018]
1. Reduced pavement widths shall be considered along with a
package of enhanced landscaping, enhanced pedestrian facilities
and other community improvements. A traffic study that includes a
parking analysis will be required for projects requesting reduced
pavement widths. The City's Planning Department will maintain a
list of cross sections along with the circumstances that make the
reduced width cross section suitable for the situation.
D. Center medians can be utilized where left-turn lanes are not required.
A. General Standards.
1. Street design shall attempt to preserve existing topography as
nearly as possible. Streets shall intersect, as nearly as possible, at
right angles. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than one
hundred twenty-five (125) feet are prohibited.
2. Streets will not be approved which are subject to flooding or
frequent inundation.
3. The system of streets designated for the subdivision, except in
unusual cases, must connect with any streets already dedicated in
adjacent subdivisions; and where no adjacent connections are
platted, must in general be the reasonable projection of streets into
adjacent tracts and must, except in unusual cases, continue to the
boundaries of the tract subdivided, so that other subdivisions may
connect therewith.
4. The City Engineer may require a street to be dedicated to public
use in order to provide circulation.
5. Underdrains shall be required and installed per Exhibit A in
Appendix D.107
B. The following standards shall apply to all streets:
Maximum
Grade
(percent)
Minimum
Grade
(percent)
Radius of
Curve
(center)
Corner
Radii
Arterial 5% 2%* 400 50
Collector 8% 2%* 350 50
Residential
collector
10%** 2%* 200 37
107. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this Chapter.
Section
405.370
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.390
100:927
Maximum
Grade
(percent)
Minimum
Grade
(percent)
Radius of
Curve
(center)
Corner
Radii
Minor
residential
10% 2%* 150* 37
Cul-de-sac 10% 2%* 150* 37
NOTES:
* Can be varied with City Engineer's approval
** Some streets within large lot subdivisions may be higher per
Section 405.300.
These standards are minimum standards.
C. Cul-de-sac and Stub Streets (Dead-End Streets to Be Extended in The
Future).
1. In subdivisions with no through streets where the distance to the
through street exceeds one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet, a
fifty-five-foot pavement radius and a sixty-seven-foot right-of-way
radius will be required on at least one (1) cul-de-sac in order to
facilitate school bus circulation.
2. Cul-de-sac and dead-end streets of reasonable length may be
approved where necessitated by topography or where, in the
opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, they are
appropriate for the type of development contemplated.
3. All culs-de-sac shall have a minimum right-of-way radius of fiftyfour
(54) feet and a pavement radius of forty-two (42) feet. It is
advisable to contact the School District and Fire Department for
the minimum radius of the culs-de-sac for a proposed development
prior to submitting plans to the City.
4. Stub streets over two hundred fifty (250) feet in length shall have a
minimum temporary turnaround pavement radius of forty (40) feet,
covered by a temporary turnaround easement to remain until the
road is extended and platted. In lieu of turnarounds, the Planning
and Zoning Commission may approve a "T"- or "Y"- shaped paved
space on streets which are less than two hundred fifty (250) feet in
length and are planned to be extended in the future.
5. All stub streets must provide three (3) standard specification,
"Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices," end of roadway
markers mounted on two-pound "U" channel sign posts. Each
marker shall consist of an eighteen-inch diamond reflectorized red
panel. The bottom of each panel shall be mounted a minimum of
four (4) feet above the elevation of the permanent surface and
installed at the terminus of pavement.
Section
405.390
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.390
100:928
D. Alleys. Alleys, when platted, shall be designated as private. The width,
depth and type of pavement shall meet the intended use. The minimum
pavement width shall be sixteen (16) feet. Reduced pavement widths
can be considered with the same requirements as contained in Section
405.370 for roadways. At a minimum, the pavement shall be six (6)
inches of Portland cement concrete. The minimum horizontal radius
shall be forty (40) feet at the center line of the alley. The intersection of
the alley pavement with the public pavement shall have a minimum
thirty-seven-foot radius at the edge of the alley pavement. Alleys shall:
1. Be designated and signed for one-way traffic;
2. Have a minimum five-foot-wide easement strip placed adjacent to
the right side of the alley easement designated for street
maintenance and trash receptacle placement;
3. Be designated and signed to prohibit on-street parking; and
4. Be designated and signed as private streets in accordance with
Section 400.264 of this Code.
E. Commercial/Industrial Streets. Commercial/industrial streets shall
have the following design standards:
1. Commercial and industrial streets including culs-de-sac shall have
a minimum right-of-way width of sixty (60) feet with thirty-nine (39)
feet of pavement. The pavement in culs-de-sac shall be fifty-five
(55) feet in radius with a right-of-way of sixty-seven-foot-wide
radius.
2. Commercial and industrial arterial streets shall have a minimum
right-of-way of eighty-four (84) feet.
3. Sidewalks are required on both sides of commercial streets.
Industrial streets may have a sidewalk on one (1) side of the street
if required by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
F. Sidewalks And Multipurpose Trails.
1. Sidewalks are required on both sides of all public and private
streets except for:
a. Single-family residential subdivisions with an average lot size
between one-half (1/2) acre and one (1) acre shall have
sidewalks installed on one (1) side of the street.
b. Single-family residential subdivisions with a minimum lot size
one (1) acre or larger shall not have sidewalks required.
c. Private alleys shall not have sidewalks required.
d. A sidewalk is not required on the side of the street where a
multipurpose trail is required in lieu of a sidewalk.
Section
405.390
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.390
100:929
e. Cul-de-sac streets shall have sidewalks installed on both sides
of the street with the sidewalk terminating at the radius of the
turnaround.
2. Sidewalks may be required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and/or the City Council on one (1) or both sides of the
streets exempted above in order to provide direct access for
pedestrians to recreational areas, common ground, schools,
churches, shopping areas, pedestrianways and multipurpose trails
linking adjoining streets and neighborhoods. The Planning and
Zoning Commission and/or the City Council may limit the
requirement of sidewalks to one (1) side of the street in
commercial, office and high-tech developments that are deemed to
likely experience lesser amounts of pedestrian traffic.
3. Sidewalk Construction Requirements.
a. Sidewalks shall have a minimum pavement width of six (6) feet
for arterial and of five (5) feet for collector streets and four (4)
feet for all other streets. Sidewalks constructed immediately
behind the curb shall be a minimum of one (1) foot wider than
said widths.
b. Sidewalks shall have a lateral slope of 1 1/2% with a tolerance
of plus or minus 1/2%.
c. Sidewalks shall be placed within the street right-of-way, one (1)
foot away from the property line.
d. Sidewalks shall be constructed of a minimum of four (4) inches
of Portland cement concrete on a compacted rock leveling
course with an average thickness of two (2) inches, except in
driveways where it shall be a minimum of six (6) inches of
Portland cement concrete on a compacted rock base with a
minimum thickness of four (4) inches.
e. For any sidewalks that are through a driveway apron, refer to
Section 405.210 for further requirements.
f. Accessible curb ramps shall be installed at all street
intersections according to Federal regulations. The width of
the sidewalk shall extend through the curb ramp.
4. Multipurpose Trails. Multipurpose trails shall be required in lieu of
sidewalks where deemed appropriate according to the bike and
trail plans approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/
or the City Council, Multipurpose trails shall have a minimum
pavement width of ten (10) feet and shall be constructed of a
minimum of three (3) inches of asphaltic concrete on a compacted
rock base with a minimum thickness of four (4) inches. Concrete
may be used in lieu of asphalt for construction of trails, and shall
adhere to the design requirements of Subsection (F)(3) above.
Section
405.390
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.390
100:930
Section 405.400. through Section 405.490. (Reserved)
Multipurpose trails shall be placed within a minimum twelve-footwide
trail easement. Accessible curb ramps shall be installed at all
street intersections according to Federal regulations. In residential
areas, wider-than-normal sidewalks or paths may be utilized as
a developer- or builder-selected optional enhancement for the
community, but these sidewalks or paths will not be considered
multipurpose trails unless they are ten (10) feet wide. The width of
the trail shall extend through the curb ramp.
5. Required fee in lieu of sidewalk or multipurpose trail installation. If
it is determined by the City Engineer that it would be in the best
interest of the City to postpone the installation of sidewalks and/or
multipurpose trails, the adjacent property owner shall be required
to make a cash contribution to the City (or other applicable
government agency) in lieu of the sidewalk and/or multipurpose
trail installation. Said fee shall be calculated as a fixed amount per
lineal foot based on the estimated cost as of the date that escrows
are established. Typically, this estimate shall be made by the
owner's agent and submitted to the City for review and approval. At
a time to be determined by the City, the City will be required to
install sidewalks and/or multipurpose trails on this property. Once
the sidewalk or multipurpose trail fee is paid for on a particular
property, this lot shall no longer be required to provide a sidewalk
or multipurpose trail. The fees collected herein shall be recorded as
revenue in the City's Street and Road Improvement Fund.
Section
405.390
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.400
100:931

ARTICLE VI
Penalty
Section 405.500. Penalties For Violations. [Ord. No. 6496,
9-13-2018]
A. General. Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply
with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards
established, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
B. Corrective Actions. Nothing contained within this Chapter shall prevent
the City of O'Fallon from other actions against violators. All such costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
C. Any person who violates this Section shall be subjected, upon
conviction, to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or to
imprisonment in the St. Charles County Jail for up to ninety (90) days,
or both such fine and imprisonment.
D. Stop Work Order. The City Administrator or his designee shall have the
right to issue a stop work order on any property or any project not
following the requirements of this Section. Failure to comply with a stop
work order shall be a separate violation of the City's Codes of
Ordinances.
E. Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this Section are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable Federal,
State or local law and it is within the discretion of the City to seek
cumulative remedies.
Section
405.500
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.500
100:933
Chapter 406
EXCAVATION AND WORK AFFECTING RIGHT-OF-WAY,
UTILITY LINES OR OTHER PUBLIC INTERESTS
Section
405.500
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
405.500
100:934
ARTICLE I
General
Section 406.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 5376 § 1, 9-25-2008; Ord.
No. 6506, 10-11-2018]
The following terms shall have the following meanings unless otherwise
defined by context:
CITY ADMINISTRATOR — The manager or administrator of the City or such
other person designated by the City to hear appeals as provided in Section
406.050(B).
CITY FACILITIES — Any facilities located within the public rights-of-way
and owned by the City.
EMERGENCY RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") WORK — Includes, but is not
limited to, ROW work made necessary by exigent circumstances to repair,
control, stabilize, rectify or correct an unexpected or unplanned outage, cut,
rupture, leak or any other failure of a facility when such failure results or
could result in danger to the public or a material delay or hindrance to the
provision of service.
ENGINEER — The City's Engineer or such other person designated to
administer and enforce this Chapter.
EXCAVATION — Any operation in which earth, rock or other material in or
on the ground is moved, removed or otherwise displaced by means of any
tools, equipment or explosives and includes, without limitation, backfilling,
grading, trenching, digging, ditching, drilling, well-drilling, auguring,
boring, tunneling, scraping, cable or pipe plowing, plowing-in, pulling-in,
ripping, driving and demolition of structures, except that, the use of
mechanized tools and equipment to break and remove pavement and
masonry down only to the depth of such pavement or masonry, the use of
high-velocity air to disintegrate and suction to remove earth, rock and other
materials and the tilling of soil for agricultural or seeding purposes shall
not be deemed excavation. Backfilling or moving earth on the ground in
connection with other excavation operations at the same site shall not be
deemed separate instances of excavation.
FACILITIES — A network or system or any part thereof used for providing
or delivering a service and consisting of one (1) or more lines, pipes,
wires, cables, fibers, conduit facilities, cabinets, poles, vaults, pedestals,
boxes, appliances, antennas, transmitters, radios, towers, gates, meters,
appurtenances or other equipment.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, limited liability corporation or
partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, organization,
corporation or other entity or any lawful successor thereto or transferee
thereof.
PERSON(S) HAVING FACILITIES WITHIN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY — Any
person having ownership or control of facilities located within the rights-ofway.
Section
406.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.010
100:935
POTHOLE — The practice of digging a test hole to expose underground
utilities to ascertain the horizontal location, vertical depth, size or type
of underground utility, with as little disturbance to the actual utility as
possible. Methods include hand digging, water (or hydro) excavating, air, or
vacuum extraction.
PRECONSTRUCTION MEETING — Meeting between the City and the ROW
user, before construction begins, to discuss the ROW work as outlined on
the City-issued permit.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") PERMIT — A permit granted by the City to a
ROW user for ROW work.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") USER — A person or authorized contractor
performing ROW work within the rights-of-way. A ROW user shall not
include ordinary vehicular or pedestrian use.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") WORK — Action by a ROW user to:
RIGHTS-OF-WAY OR ROW —
Install, change, replace, relocate, remove, maintain or repair facilities
within the rights-of-way; or
1.
To conduct work of any kind within or adjacent to the rights-of-way that
results in an excavation, obstruction, disruption, damage or physical
invasion or impact of any kind to the rights-of-way or the use thereof.
The routine inspection of facilities shall not be considered ROW work
unless the inspection requires the conduct of any of the activities or
actions noted herein.
2.
Unless otherwise restricted herein, the surface, the air space above the
surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway,
lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, parkway,
waterway or sidewalk in which the City now or hereafter holds any
interest which, consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated,
may be used for the purpose of installing and maintaining facilities.
Rights-of-way shall not include:
City facilities or the City's property other than ROW, such as Cityowned
or operated buildings, parks or other similar property;
a.
Airwaves used for cellular, non-wire telecommunications or
broadcast services;
b.
c. Easements obtained by ROW users on private property;
d. Railroad rights-of-way or ground used or acquired for railroads; or
Facilities owned and used by the City for the transmission of one
(1) or more services.
e.
1.
No reference herein to "rights-of-way" shall be deemed to be a
representation or guarantee by the City that its interest or other right
2.
Section
406.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.010
100:936
SERVICE — Providing or delivering an economic good or an article of
commerce, including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable television,
Internet, open video systems, video services, alarm systems, steam,
electricity, water, telegraph, data transmission, petroleum pipelines,
sanitary or stormwater sewer or any similar or related service, to one (1) or
more persons located within or outside of the City by use of facilities located
within the rights-of-way.
WITHIN — Along, under, over or across rights-of-way.
to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit its use for the
delivery of service.
Section
406.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.010
100:937

ARTICLE II
Right-Of-Way
Section 406.020. Right-Of-Way ("ROW") Permits. [Ord. No. 5376
§ 1, 9-25-2008; Ord. No. 6252 § 1, 9-8-2016; Ord. No. 6506,
10-11-2018]
A. Application Requirements.
1. Any person desiring to perform ROW work must first apply for and
obtain a ROW permit in addition to any other building permit,
license, easement, franchise or authorization required by law. In
the event of a need for emergency ROW work, the person
conducting the work shall as soon as practicable notify the City of
the location of the work and shall apply for the required ROW
permit as soon as practicable following the commencement of the
work, not to exceed the third business day thereafter. The Engineer
may design and issue general permits for emergency ROW work for
several different locations or throughout the City.
2. An application for a ROW permit shall be submitted to the
Engineer. The Engineer may design and make available standard
forms for such applications, requiring such information as allowed
by law and as the Engineer determines in his or her discretion to be
necessary and consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and to
accomplish the purposes of this Chapter. Each application shall at a
minimum contain the following information for the proposed ROW
work, unless otherwise waived by the Engineer:
a. The name, address and telephone number of a representative
whom the City may notify or contact at any time [i.e., twentyfour
(24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week] concerning
the work;
b. If different from the applicant, the name, address and
telephone number of the person or entity owning or operating
the facilities in the ROW for which the proposed work is to be
performed;
c. A description of the proposed work, including a conceptual
master plan and an engineering site plan or other technical
drawing or depiction showing the nature, dimensions, location
and description of the applicant's proposed work or facilities,
their proximity to other facilities that may be affected by the
proposed work and the number of street crossings and their
locations and dimensions, if applicable;
(1) If there are areas of established landscaping, irrigation,
lighting, or other unusual items that are in the path of
excavation, then detailed photographs of these items shall
Section
406.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.020
100:939
be included. Letters from the owners of these facilities
may be needed if they are to be altered in any way.
d. Projected commencement and termination dates and
anticipated duration of the work or, if such dates are unknown,
a representation that the applicant shall provide the Engineer
with reasonable advance notice of such dates once they are
determined;
e. Copies of any required certificates of insurance or
performance and maintenance bonds, as outlined in this
Chapter.
3. The information required by the application may be submitted in
the form maintained by the applicant, provided it is responsive to
the application's requirements and the applicant shall be allowed a
reasonable amount of time to complete the application based on
the amount of data or information requested or required.
4. Each such application shall be accompanied by the following
payments:
a. An application fee approved by the City to cover the cost of
processing the application.
b. A deposit for attending the pre-construction meeting. Said fee
will be returned upon verification of attendance of the meeting.
c. An escrow or bond shall be submitted to the City for
restoration purposes.
d. Any other amounts due to the City from the applicant,
including, but not limited to, prior delinquent fees, costs and
any loss, damage or expense suffered by the City because of
the applicant's prior work in the rights-of-way or for any
emergency actions taken by the City, but the Engineer may
modify this requirement to the extent the Engineer determines
any such fees to be in good-faith dispute.
e. Failure to submit a permit application may result in triple the
permit fees being applied. Emergency ROW work is exempt
from this condition.
5. Applicants shall participate in any joint planning, construction and
advance notification of such work, including coordination and
consolidation of any excavation of or disturbance to the rights-ofway
as directed by the Engineer. When deemed necessary to
accomplish the goals of this Section and to the extent permitted by
law, the City reserves the right, when feasible and reasonable, to
require the sharing of facilities by ROW users. Applicants shall
cooperate with each other and other ROW users and the City for
Section
406.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.020
100:940
the best, most efficient, least intrusive, most aesthetic and least
obtrusive use of the rights-of-way.
6. The Engineer may establish procedures allowing applicants to
ascertain whether existing capacity may be available from other
persons utilizing the rights-of-way along the intended path of any
proposed work. The Engineer shall also maintain indexes of all
ROW permits issued, both by the ROW user and by the affected
rights-of-way.
B. Application Review And Determination.
1. The Engineer shall promptly review each completed application for
a ROW permit and shall grant or deny all such applications as
provided herein within thirty-one (31) days of receipt thereof.
Unless the application is denied, the Engineer shall issue a ROW
permit upon determining that the applicant:
a. Has submitted all necessary information;
b. Has paid the appropriate fees, deposits, and escrow; and
c. Is in full compliance with this Chapter and all other City
ordinances.
The Engineer may establish procedures for bulk processing of
applications and periodic payment of fees to avoid excessive
processing and accounting costs.
2. It is the intention of the City that interference with, damage to,
excavation or disruption of or the placement of facilities within the
City's rights-of-way should be minimized and limited in scope to the
extent allowed by law to achieve the purposes of this Chapter.
When reasonable and necessary to accomplish such purposes, the
Engineer may require as alternatives to the proposed ROW work
either less disruptive methods or different locations for facilities,
provided that any required alternative:
a. Shall not result in a decline of service quality; and
b. Shall be competitively neutral and non-discriminatory.
The Engineer shall justify to the applicant that the required
alternative is reasonable and necessary.
3. Upon receipt of an application, the Engineer shall determine
whether any portion of the rights-of-way will be affected by the
proposed work and whether the interference, disruption or
placement of facilities will be more than minor in nature. In
determining whether the proposed work is more than minor in
nature, the Engineer shall consider the nature and scope of the
work, its location and duration and its effect on the rights-of-way,
the use thereof and neighboring properties.
Section
406.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.020
100:941
a. If the applicant can show to the Engineer's reasonable
satisfaction that the work involves no interference, disruption,
excavation or damage to or only minor interference with the
rights-of-way or that the work does not involve the placement
of facilities or involves time-sensitive maintenance, then the
Engineer shall promptly grant the ROW permit.
b. If the Engineer determines that the effect on the rights-of-way
will be more than minor in nature and no exemption under the
above Subsection (B)(3)(a) or any other provision of this
Section applies, the Engineer shall schedule and coordinate
the work and grant the ROW permit accordingly. When
reasonable and necessary to accomplish the purposes of this
Chapter, the Engineer may postpone issuance of a ROW permit
and may give public notice of the application in an attempt to
identify whether other person(s) intend to do work in the same
area within a reasonable period of time, so that all ROW work
in the area can be coordinated. Due regard shall be accorded
applicants that are required by any law, rule, regulation,
license or franchise to provide service to the area defined in
the application.
(1) For larger excavation projects, total linear footage per
permit shall be limited to two thousand (2,000) linear feet
and/or twenty (20) open cut/hole areas. ROW work shall be
broken up into separate permits to comply with these
requirements. Permits may be suspended by the City until
the adjacent permits are completed in full, or at least to
the point where the restoration work is complete.
4. Each ROW permit issued by the Engineer shall include:
a. Projected commencement and termination dates or, if such
dates are unknown at the time the permit is issued, a provision
requiring the ROW user to provide the Engineer with
reasonable advance notice of such dates once they are
determined;
b. Length of affected rights-of-way, number of road crossings and
identification and description of any pavement or curb cuts
included in the work;
(1) Any proposed road closings or work up against a road
requiring narrowing of the road shall include a detailed
traffic management plan, in accordance with the Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
c. Information regarding scheduling and coordination of work, if
necessary;
d. The location of any of the applicant's facilities, both those
proposed and existing, and the location of any known facilities
Section
406.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.020
100:942
owned by another person that may be affected by the proposed
work;
e. An acknowledgment and representation by the applicant to
comply with the terms and conditions of the ROW permit and
this Chapter; and
f. Such conditions and requirements as are deemed reasonably
necessary by the Engineer to protect structures and other
facilities in the rights-of-way from damage, to restore such
rights-of-way and any structures or facilities, to ensure the
reasonable continuity and sight lines of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic and to protect property values, the aesthetics
of adjoining properties and neighborhoods and the public
health, safety and welfare.
5. The Engineer may deny an application, if denial is deemed to be in
the public interest, for the following reasons:
a. Delinquent fees, costs or expenses owed by the applicant or
the ROW user for which the work is to be performed;
b. Failure to provide information required by the application or
this Chapter;
c. Unresolved violations of the provisions of this Chapter or other
pertinent and applicable City ordinances by the applicant or
ROW user for which the work is to be performed;
d. Failure to return the ROW to its previous condition under
previously issued ROW permits or after prior excavations by
the applicant or ROW user;
e. For reasons of environmental, historic or cultural sensitivity as
defined by applicable Federal, State or local law;
f. Refusal to comply with alternative ROW work methods,
locations or other reasonable conditions required by the
Engineer; and
g. For any other reason to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, provided that such denial does not fall within the
exclusive authority of the Missouri Public Service Commission
or interfere with a ROW user's right of eminent domain of
private property and, provided further, that such denial is
imposed on a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory
basis. In accordance with the foregoing, any wireless
telecommunications towers and facilities to be constructed
within the ROW shall at a minimum meet the height, visibility,
lighting, and fall line limitations and requirements of Article
XVIII (Regulations for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities)
of Chapter 400, Zoning Code, as applicable to the zoning
Section
406.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.020
100:943
district in which the towers and facilities would be located.
Similarly, other utility facilities to be constructed within the
ROW shall at a minimum meet the standards of Article XIX
(Utility Facilities Permits and Regulations) of Chapter 400,
Zoning Code, as applicable to the zoning district in which the
facilities would be located.
C. Permit Revocation And Ordinance Violations.
1. The Engineer may revoke a ROW permit without fee refund after
notice and an opportunity to cure, but only in the event of a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of the permit or this
Chapter. Prior to revocation the Engineer shall provide written
notice to the ROW user identifying any substantial breach and
allowing a reasonable period of time not longer than thirty (30)
days to cure the problem, which cure period may be immediate if
certain activities must be stopped to protect the public safety. The
cure period shall be extended by the Engineer on good cause
shown by the ROW user. A substantial breach includes, but is not
limited to, the following:
a. A material violation of a provision of the ROW permit or this
Chapter;
b. An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the
ROW permit or this Chapter or the perpetration or attempt to
perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the City or its residents;
c. A material misrepresentation of fact in the ROW permit
application;
d. A failure to complete ROW work by the date specified in the
ROW permit, unless an extension is obtained or unless the
failure to complete the work is due to reasons beyond the ROW
user's control; and
e. A failure to correct, upon reasonable notice and opportunity to
cure as specified by the Engineer, work that does not conform
to applicable national safety ordinances, industry construction
standards, this Chapter or any other applicable ordinances,
provided that City standards are no more stringent than those
of a national safety ordinance.
2. Any breach of the terms and conditions of a ROW permit shall also
be deemed a violation of this Chapter, and in lieu of revocation the
Engineer may initiate prosecution of the ROW user for such
violation.
D. Exceptions. Projects with a construction plan approved by the City are
not required to obtain a separate ROW permit for any work contained in
the construction plan approval. City-sponsored capital improvement
projects, requiring utility adjustments, are not required to obtain a
Section
406.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.020
100:944
Section 406.030. Work In The Rights-Of-Way. [Ord. No. 5376 § 1,
9-25-2008; Ord. No. 6506, 10-11-2018]
separate ROW permit for any directly associated adjustments or new
facilities.
A. Jurisdiction, Inspection And Stop Work Orders.
1. All facilities and ROW work shall be subject to inspection by the
City and the supervision of all Federal, State and local authorities
having jurisdiction in such matters to ensure compliance with all
applicable laws, ordinances, departmental rules and regulations
and the ROW permit.
2. The Engineer shall have full access to all portions of the ROW work
and may issue stop work orders and corrective orders to prevent
unauthorized work or substandard work as established in
Subsection (G) hereof. Such orders:
a. May be delivered personally or by certified mail to the
address(es) listed on the application for the ROW permit or the
person in charge of the construction site at the time of
delivery;
b. Shall state that substandard work or work not authorized by
the ROW permit is being carried out, summarize the
substandard or unauthorized work and provide a period of no
longer than thirty (30) days to cure the problem, which cure
period may be immediate if certain activities must be stopped
to protect the public safety; and
c. May be enforced by equitable action in the Circuit Court of St.
Charles County, Missouri, and in such case the person
responsible for the substandard or unauthorized work shall be
liable for all costs and expenses incurred by the City in
enforcing such orders, including reasonable attorneys' fees, in
addition to any and all penalties established in this Chapter.
B. Underground Facilities.
1. In conjunction with the City's long-standing policy favoring
underground construction, no person may erect, construct or
install new poles or other facilities above the surface of the rightsof-
way without the written permission of the City, unless the City's
authority has been preempted by State or Federal law. Such
permission may be granted through a ROW permit when other
similar facilities exist above ground or when conditions are such
that underground construction is impossible or impractical, as
determined by the City, and when in the City's judgment the
aboveground construction has minimal aesthetic impact on the
area where the construction is proposed.
Section
406.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.030
100:945
2. During installation of facilities and to the extent authorized by law,
existing underground conduits shall be used whenever feasible and
permitted by the owner thereof.
3. In the case of new construction or property development, the
developer or property owner shall give reasonable written notice to
other potential ROW users of the particular date on which open
trenching will be available for installation of facilities. All such
users shall cooperate to the extent possible to expedite the
installation of facilities while minimizing disruption to the ROW.
C. Aboveground Facilities.
1. The Engineer may designate certain locations or facilities in the
ROW to be excluded from use by the applicant for its facilities,
including, but not limited to:
a. Ornamental or similar specially designed street lights;
b. Designated historic areas;
c. Facilities, equipment, structures or locations that do not have
electrical service adequate or appropriate for the proposed
facilities or cannot safely bear the weight or wind loading
thereof;
d. Facilities, equipment, structures or locations that in the
reasonable judgment of the Engineer are incompatible with the
proposed facilities or would be rendered unsafe or unstable by
the installation; and
e. Facilities, equipment, structures or locations that have been
designated or planned for other use or are not otherwise
available for use by the applicant due to engineering,
technological, proprietary, legal or other limitations or
restrictions.
2. Aboveground facilities shall be a neutral color and shall not be
bright, reflective or metallic. Black, gray and tan shall be
considered neutral colors, as shall any color that blends with the
surrounding dominant color and helps to camouflage the facilities.
Facilities shall be located in such a manner as to reduce or
eliminate their visibility. A sightproof landscape screen may be
required for any authorized aboveground facilities taller than three
(3) feet in height or covering in excess of four (4) square feet in
size. Such screening shall be sufficient to reasonably conceal the
facility. A landscape plan identifying the size and species of
landscaping materials shall be approved by the Engineer prior to
installation of any facility requiring landscape screening. The
person having facilities within the ROW shall be responsible for the
installation, repair or replacement of screening materials.
Alternative screening or concealment may be approved by the
Section
406.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.030
100:946
Engineer to the extent it meets or exceeds the purposes of these
requirements.
3. Aboveground facilities shall be constructed and maintained in such
a manner so as not to emit any unnecessary or intrusive noise and
shall comply with all other applicable regulations and standards
established by the City or State or Federal law.
4. If the application of this Subsection excludes locations for
aboveground facilities to the extent that the exclusion conflicts
with the reasonable requirements of the applicant, the Engineer
shall cooperate in good faith with the applicant to attempt to find
suitable alternatives, but such alternatives may exceed the cost
increase limitation established by Section 406.020(B)(2), and the
City shall not be required to incur any financial cost or to acquire
new locations for the applicant.
D. Relocation Of Equipment And Facilities.
1. In the event of an emergency or where construction equipment or
facilities create or are contributing to an imminent danger to
health, safety or property, the City may, to the extent allowed by
law, remove, re-lay or relocate such construction equipment, or the
pertinent parts of such facilities, without charge to the City for
such action or for restoration or repair. The City shall attempt to
notify the person having facilities within the ROW prior to taking
such action, but the inability to do so shall not prevent same.
Thereafter, the City shall notify the person having facilities within
the ROW as soon as practicable.
2. At the City's direction, all facilities shall be moved underground
and the cost shall be solely the obligation of the person having
facilities within the ROW (or as otherwise allowed or required by
law).
3. At the City's direction, a person having facilities within the ROW
shall protect, support, disconnect, relocate or remove facilities, at
its own cost and expense, when necessary to accommodate the
construction, improvement, expansion, relocation or maintenance
of streets or other public works or to protect the ROW or the public
health, safety or welfare.
4. A person having facilities within the ROW shall, on the reasonable
request of any person and after reasonable advance written notice,
protect, support, disconnect, relocate or remove facilities to
accommodate such person, and the actual cost, reasonably
incurred, of such actions shall be paid by the person requesting
such action. The person having facilities within the ROW taking
such action may require such payment in advance.
Section
406.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.030
100:947
5. Rather than relocate facilities as requested or directed, a ROW
user may abandon the facilities if approved by the City as provided
in Subsection (F) of this Section.
6. No action hereunder shall be deemed a taking of property, and no
person shall be entitled to any compensation therefor. No location
of any facilities within the rights-of-way shall be a vested interest.
E. Property Repair And Alterations.
1. During any ROW work, the person doing the work shall protect
from damage any and all existing structures and property
belonging to the City and any other person. Any and all rights-ofway,
public property or private property disturbed or damaged
during the work shall be repaired or replaced by the person doing
the work or the person on whose behalf the work is being done, and
such person shall immediately notify the owner of the fact of any
damaged property. Such repair or replacement shall be completed
within a reasonable time specified by the Engineer and to the
Engineer's satisfaction.
a. Excavated areas shall be compacted to avoid settling of the
excavated areas. Clean soil backfill shall be used in the pits and
clean topsoil near the surface to prepare for proper turf
restoration, as outlined below.
(1) Any disturbance on private property or neatly manicured
road rights-of-way shall require sod to be placed on the
excavated areas in similar condition. If sections of sod can
be removed and replaced in good condition, then that is
acceptable. Watering of the sod to ensure survival will be
required for a minimum of twenty-one (21) days after
placement or replacement.
(2) Any other disturbance on road rights-of-way or nonmaintained
private property shall require seed and straw
to be placed and watered for a minimum of twenty-one
(21) days after placement, to ensure a good stand of grass
has resulted.
(3) If work occurs when normal seed and sod is not available
or outside of normal growing seasons (November 1 to April
1), then temporary seed will be used (i.e., annual rye,
winter wheat, etc.) until the growing season resumes.
b. Any disturbed area that contains landscaping, hardscaping,
mulch, rocks, boulders, shrubbery, flowers, trees, statues, art,
irrigation systems, lighting, and other items shall ensure that
these are neatly labeled and moved out of the way to the best
extent possible prior to work. Restoration includes repairing
and/or replacing these items to the same condition before work
began. The ROW user shall take whatever means necessary to
Section
406.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.030
100:948
document the condition of these items before construction
begins. Coordination with the owners of these items may be
needed to verify their condition before and after construction.
(1) The ROW user may need to hire a third-party professional
to mark, repair, replace, or test irrigation, lighting, and
other similar items, to verify their condition.
2. Any alteration to the existing sidewalks/trails, curb ramps, streets
and curbs, water mains, sewer or drainage system or to any City,
State or other public structures or facilities in the rights-of-way
required on account of the construction, installation, repair or
maintenance of facilities within the rights-of-way shall be made at
the sole cost and expense of the owner of such facilities.
a. Driving, parking, placement of outriggers, or other impacts to,
under, and over sidewalks or curb ramps is strictly prohibited.
If there is absolutely no access to the facility without crossing
the sidewalk/curb ramp, then the City shall inspect the
sidewalk/curb ramp before construction begins and after
construction finishes. Any damage or change in slope such that
the facility would be made out of ADA compliance will result in
the person being required to remove and replace the damaged
facilities.
F. Removal, Abandonment, Transfer and Relocation of Facilities.
1. If a person having facilities within the ROW installs the facilities
within the ROW without having complied with the requirements of
this Chapter, or abandons the facilities, the City may require the
removal of the facilities, remove the facilities at the expense of the
person having facilities within the ROW or require the transfer of
the facilities as provided herein.
2. If the City requires removal of the facilities, the person shall obtain
a ROW permit and shall abide by all requirements of this Chapter.
The liability, indemnity, insurance and bonding requirements
required herein shall continue in full force and effect during and
after the period of removal and restoration and until full
compliance by the person with the terms and conditions of the
ROW permit and the requirements of this Chapter.
3. If the person fails to remove the facilities after having been
directed to do so, the City may, to the extent permitted by law, have
the removal done at the person's expense. Alternatively, the City
may permit the abandonment, without removal, of the facilities if
the Engineer determines that abandonment is not likely to prevent
or significantly impair the future use, repair, excavation,
maintenance or construction of the ROW.
4. If the person fails to remove the facilities after having been
directed to do so, the City may, to the extent permitted by law,
Section
406.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.030
100:949
decide that the ownership of the facilities should be transferred
to the City or to such person as directed by the City. In either
case the owner of the facilities shall submit a written instrument,
satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to the City, or to such
person as directed by the City, ownership of the facilities. The
City may sell, assign or transfer all or part of the facilities so
transferred.
5. The City shall not remove or seek to possess or transfer the
facilities until thirty (30) days have passed following written notice
by the Engineer to the person having facilities within the ROW of
the City's intent to so act. The Engineer may choose not to act on
good cause shown by the person having facilities within the ROW.
G. Standards For ROW Work.
1. Except for emergency ROW work as provided in Section
406.020(A)(1), ROW work shall be performed only upon issuance
and in accordance with the requirements of a ROW permit.
a. At all times during the work, ROW permits shall be
conspicuously displayed or made available upon demand at the
work site and shall be available for inspection.
b. All projects shall require a preconstruction meeting between
the City and ROW user. This meeting may be waived if the ROW
user has demonstrated considerable compliance with past
projects and ordinances; however, it will be the responsibility
of the ROW user to still contact the City to initiate said meeting
and obtain a determination.
2. If at any time it appears that the duration or scope of the ROW work
is or will become materially different from that allowed by the ROW
permit, the ROW user shall inform the Engineer. The Engineer may
issue a waiver, an extension or a revised ROW permit or require
that the ROW user reapply for a ROW permit in accordance with all
requirements of this Chapter.
3. ROW users shall not open or encumber more of the rights-of-way
than is reasonably necessary to complete the ROW work in the
most expeditious manner or allow excavations to remain open
longer than is necessary to complete the work.
4. All ROW work that affects vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be
properly signed, barricaded and otherwise protected at the ROW
user's expense. The ROW user shall be responsible for providing
adequate traffic control in accordance with the Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) to the area surrounding the work
as determined by the Engineer.
5. The ROW user shall perform the ROW work at such times that will
allow the least interference with the normal flow of traffic and the
Section
406.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.030
100:950
peace and quiet of the neighborhood as permitted by the Engineer.
Unless otherwise provided by the Engineer in the permit, nonemergency
ROW work on arterial and collector streets may not be
accomplished during the hours of 7:00 A.M. to 8:30 A.M. and 4:00
P.M. to 6:00 P.M. in order to minimize disruption of traffic flow.
6. The ROW user shall notify the City no less than three (3) working
days in advance of any ROW work that would require any street
closure or would reduce traffic flow to less than two (2) lanes of
moving traffic for more than four (4) hours. Except in the event of
emergency ROW work, no such closure shall take place without
notice and prior authorization from the City.
7. All ROW work shall be in accordance with all applicable Sections of
the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, the National
Electrical Safety Code and other Federal, State or local laws and
regulations that may apply, including, without limitation, local
health, safety, construction and zoning ordinances and laws and
accepted industry practices, all as hereafter may be amended or
adopted. In the event of a conflict among ordinances and
standards, the most stringent ordinance or standard shall apply
(except insofar as that ordinance or standard, if followed, would
result in facilities that could not meet requirements of Federal,
State or local law).
8. All facilities shall be installed and located to cause minimum
interference with the rights and convenience of property owners
and other ROW users, and the City facilities shall not be placed
where they will disrupt or interfere with other facilities or public
improvements or obstruct or hinder in any manner the various
utilities serving the residents and businesses in the City or public
improvements.
a. Any installations of utilities in areas of crossing of a City-owned
facility will require potholing of the City-owned facility to avoid
damage.
b. For horizontal directional drilling operations with a bore path
that parallels a City-owned facility within four (4) feet,
potholing shall be required at the beginning and end of the
bore and every fifty (50) feet along the route.
c. For horizontal directional drilling operations with a bore path
that parallels a City-owned facility within six (6) feet, potholing
should be required at the beginning and end of the bore and
every two hundred (200) feet along the route.
d. Backhoe excavation should not be allowed within two (2) feet
of existing facilities.
e. If potholing is impractical due to utility conflicts as specified
above, then the City-owned storm and sanitary line shall be
Section
406.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.030
100:951
TVed after construction to confirm no damage was performed
before being released from the job.
f. If the ROW user failed to pothole as specified and damage is
done, then the ROW user is responsible for all damage and
restoration incurred, including any reimbursement to the City
for expenses the City has incurred due to emergency
mobilization and/or repair.
9. All facilities shall be of good and durable quality.
10. All ROW work shall be conducted in accordance with good
engineering practices performed by experienced and properly
trained personnel so as not to endanger any person or property or
to unreasonably interfere in any manner with the rights-of-way or
legal rights of any property owner, including the City, or
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
11. All safety practices required by law shall be used during ROW
work, including commonly accepted methods and devices to
prevent failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage,
injury or nuisance to the public.
12. Any contractor or subcontractor of a ROW user must be properly
licensed under laws of the State and all applicable local ordinances,
and each contractor or subcontractor shall have the same
obligations with respect to its work as a ROW user would have
pursuant to this Chapter. A ROW user:
a. Must ensure that contractors, subcontractors and all
employees performing ROW work are trained and experienced;
b. Shall be responsible for ensuring that all work is performed
consistent with the ROW permit and applicable law;
c. Shall be fully responsible for all acts or omissions of
contractors or subcontractors;
d. Shall be responsible for promptly correcting acts or omissions
by any contractor or subcontractor; and
e. Shall implement a quality control program to ensure that the
work is properly performed.
13. A ROW user shall not place or cause to be placed any sort of signs,
advertisements or other extraneous markings on the facilities or in
the ROW, whether relating to the ROW user or any other person,
except such necessary minimal markings approved by the City as
necessary to identify the facilities for service, repair, maintenance
or emergency purposes or as may be otherwise required to be
affixed by applicable law or regulation.
Section
406.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.030
100:952
14. Unless otherwise approved in writing by the City, a ROW user shall
not remove, cut or damage any trees or their roots within the ROW.
15. Street crossings will be bored unless otherwise permitted by the
Engineer.
H. Any person performing ROW work shall provide written notice to all
property owners within one hundred eighty-five (185) feet of the site at
least forty-eight (48) hours prior to any installation, replacement or
expansion of its facilities. Notice shall include a reasonably detailed
description of work to be done, the location of work and the time and
duration of the work. Notifications shall be in the form of door hangers
or letters. Additional changeable message boards may be needed
depending on the scope of the project or as directed by the City
Engineer or his/her designee.
I. Restoring And Maintaining The Rights-Of-Way.
1. To complete any ROW work, the ROW user shall restore the ROW
and surrounding areas, including, but not limited to, any pavement,
foundation, concrete slabs or curbs, screening, landscaping or
vegetation, to like prior condition and shall comply with other
reasonable conditions of the Engineer. Restoration of the ROW
shall be completed within the dates specified in the ROW permit
unless the Engineer issues a waiver, extension or a new or revised
ROW permit.
2. It shall be the duty of any person making an excavation in the ROW
to backfill such excavations and restore the surface in accordance
with the City's minimum prescribed standards for such surfaces or
the following standards as determined by the Engineer:
a. If the excavations are made in the improved portion of the
ROW, twelve (12) inches of granular backfill will be placed over
exposed facilities and controlled low-strength material
(CLSM), also known as "flowable fill," will fill the hole within
eight (8) inches of the finished surface for concrete pavements.
There will be a plastic membrane placed between the rock
base and the CLSM to prevent the material from bleeding into
the rock base. The remaining eight (8) inches will be restored
by placing a concrete mix that is approved under Section
405.210.
(1) For excavations on concrete streets or sidewalks, all
removals shall be made joint-to-joint, and the minimum
thickness of replaced concrete shall be either to match
existing thickness or seven (7) inches, whichever is
greater.
b. If the excavations are made in the improved portion of an
asphalt or combination street, twelve (12) inches of granular
backfill will be placed over exposed facilities, and CLSM will fill
Section
406.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.030
100:953
the hole within nine (9) inches of the finished surface. There
will be a plastic membrane placed between the rock base and
the CLSM to prevent the material from bleeding into the rock
base. The remaining nine (9) inches will be restored by placing
a six-inch-thick, concrete mix that is approved under Section
405.210 under a three-inch asphalt concrete lift of type C mix
to meet existing grades.
(1) Where utility crossings occur on City-owned asphalt
streets, the asphalt will be required to be milled and
overlaid a distance of ten (10) feet both on either side of
the utility (basic patching as defined by saw cutting and
repair of the immediate trench area along the road is not
allowed). Butt joints will be required at each tiein point.
c. Driveway entrances shall be constructed in accordance with
Section 405.210(G).
d. Spoil piles shall be placed on sheeting and covered when not in
use to minimize disturbance and contamination to the existing
turf.
e. Streets, sidewalks, driveways and parking lots shall be cleaned
at the end of each working day. If disturbed areas are
susceptible to runoff traveling onto a paved surface, then
siltation control may be required. If the City is required to
clean up the paved areas, then a mobilization fee of four
hundred dollars ($400.00) will be charged to the ROW user for
each occurrence.
3. If a ROW user fails to restore the ROW within the dates specified
either by the ROW permit or any extension thereof as granted by
the Engineer, the City may take the following actions:
a. The City may perform site restoration. The City may also opt to
perform site restoration regardless of any failure by the ROW
user, in which case the ROW permit, or any amendment or
revision thereto; shall note such option. In either event, if the
City performs the site restoration, the cost of the restoration
shall be paid for out of the bond or escrow, and then the ROW
user shall be responsible for reimbursing the City's reasonable
actual restoration costs within thirty (30) days of invoice, if the
reimbursement exceeds the bond or escrow amount.
b. The City may stop work on other aspects of the permit until
more sufficient restoration is performed.
c. The City may deny issuing any additional permits to the ROW
user and/or person(s) having facilities within the rights-of-way
until more sufficient restoration is performed.
Section
406.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.030
100:954
Section 406.040. Escrow-Bonds — Insurance — Surety —
Indemnification — Penalties. [Ord. No. 5376 § 1, 9-25-2008; Ord.
No. 6506, 10-11-2018]
4. Every ROW user to whom a ROW permit has been granted shall
guarantee for a period of one (1) year the restoration of the ROW in
the area where the ROW user conducted excavation. Said period
shall commence at the date of closeout of the permit. During this
period the ROW user shall, upon notification from the Engineer,
correct all restoration work to the extent necessary as required by
the Engineer. Said work shall be completed within a reasonable
time, not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of the
Engineer's notice unless otherwise permitted by the Engineer. If a
ROW user fails to restore the ROW within the time specified, the
City may perform the work, and the ROW user shall be responsible
for reimbursing the City's reasonable actual restoration costs
within thirty (30) days of invoice. The Engineer may extend the
cure period on good cause shown.
5. A ROW user shall not be relieved of the obligation to complete the
necessary right-of-way restoration and maintenance because of the
existence of any performance bond required by this Chapter.
A. Escrow, Performance and Maintenance Bonds.
1. Prior to any ROW work a ROW user shall establish a performance
and maintenance bond in an amount of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) to ensure the restoration and protection of the rightsof-
way.
a. The bond shall continue in full force and effect for a period of
twenty-four (24) months following completion of the work.
b. The Engineer shall have the authority to extend the
maintenance bond period for up to an additional twenty-four
(24) months.
c. The Engineer may waive this requirement when the work
involves no or only minor disruption or damage to the rights-ofway.
d. The Engineer may waive this requirement when the ROW user
(typically a utility company) has twenty-five million dollars
($25,000,000.00) in net assets and does not have a history of
non-compliance with State and local regulations.
2. If a ROW user fails to complete the ROW work in a safe, timely and
competent manner or if the completed restorative work fails
without remediation within the time period for the bond (as
determined by the Engineer), then after notice and a reasonable
opportunity to cure there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally
from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss
Section
406.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.040
100:955
suffered by the City as a result, including the full amount of any
compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment
of any property of the ROW user and the cost of completing work
within or restoring the rights-of-way, plus a reasonable allowance
for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. The City may
also recover against the bond any amount recoverable against a
security fund or letter of credit where such amount exceeds that
available under a security fund or letter of credit.
3. Upon completion of ROW work to the satisfaction of the Engineer
and upon lapse of the bond period, including any extension by the
Engineer, the City shall release the bond.
4. The bond shall be issued by a surety with an "A" or better rating of
insurance in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition,
shall be subject to the approval of the City's attorney and shall
contain the following endorsement:
"This bond may not be canceled or allowed to lapse until sixty
(60) days after receipt by the City, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent
to cancel or not to renew."
5. In lieu of the bond required herein, the ROW user may establish in
the City's favor such other security as the Engineer may determine
to be commensurate with the noted bonding requirements,
including, but not limited to, an annual bond to be maintained in
the minimum amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
Escrow may also be deposited with the City The escrow must be in
the form of cash, check or wire transfer to the City of O'Fallon.
B. Insurance.
1. All ROW users shall maintain, for the duration of any ROW work
and, when applicable, for as long as the ROW user has facilities
within the rights-of-way, at least the following liability insurance
coverage: workers' compensation and employer liability insurance
to meet all requirements of Missouri law and commercial general
liability insurance with respect to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the facilities and the conduct of the ROW user's
business in the City in the minimum amounts of:
a. Commercial General Liability Insurance. The Vendor shall
carry public and property damage insurance which shall
include bodily injury and accidental death to any person and
subject at the minimum limits set forth below:
Liability Limits
$1,000,000.00 per occurrence
$3,000,000.00 general aggregate
Section
406.040
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.040
100:956
Liability Limits
$3,000,000.00 products/completed operations aggregate.
Additional insured status must be provided to the City and
confirmed by copy of such endorsement.
An umbrella/excess liability policy can be used to attain the
required limits.
b. Commercial Automobile Liability Insurance. The vendor shall
maintain commercial automobile liability insurance coverage
in the amounts not less than the minimum limits set forth
below:
Bodily Injury and Property Damage
$3,000,000.00 combined single liability limit
An umbrella/excess liability policy can be used to attain the
required limits.
c. These insurance requirements shall not be construed to limit
the liability of any person or to impose any liability on the City
or to waive any sovereign immunity.
2. All insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified to do business
in the State of Missouri with an "A" or better rating of insurance by
Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition, and in a form
approved by the City.
3. All insurance policies shall be submitted with the permit
application for review by the City, and a ROW user having facilities
within the rights-of-way shall keep on file with the City current
certificates of insurance.
4. All general liability insurance policies shall name the City, its
officers, boards, board members, commissions, commissioners,
agents and employees as additional insureds and shall further
provide that any cancellation or reduction in coverage shall not be
effective unless thirty (30) days' prior written notice thereof has
been given to the Engineer. A ROW user shall not cancel any
required insurance policy without submission of proof that it has
obtained alternative insurance that complies with this Chapter.
5. The Engineer may exempt in writing from these insurance
requirements any self-insured ROW user, provided that the ROW
user demonstrates to the Engineer's satisfaction that the ROW
user's self-insurance plan is commensurate with said requirements
and that the ROW user has sufficient resources to meet all potential
risks, liabilities and obligations contemplated by the requirements
of this Chapter. The Engineer may require a security fund or letter
of credit as a condition to a self-insured's exemption. The Engineer
Section
406.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.040
100:957
may waive this requirement when the ROW user (typically a utility
company) has twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) in net
assets and does not have a history of non-compliance with
applicable regulatory law.
C. Indemnification.
1. Any ROW user granted a ROW permit and any person having
facilities within the rights-of-way, as partial consideration for the
privilege granted, shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
hold harmless and defend the City, its officials, boards, board
members, commissions, commissioners, agents and employees
against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings and
judgments for damages or equitable relief arising out of:
a. Any ROW work, including, but not limited to, the construction,
maintenance, repair or replacement of the facilities;
b. The operation of its facilities;
c. Failure to secure consents from landowners; or
d. Any actions taken or omissions made by the person pursuant to
the authority of this Chapter.
2. The foregoing indemnity provisions include, but are not limited to,
the City's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against
any such claim, suit or proceeding prior to the person assuming
such defense. The City shall notify a person of claims and suits
within seven (7) business days of its actual knowledge of the
existence of such claim, suit or proceeding. Once a person assumes
such defense, the City may at its option continue to participate in
the defense at its own expense.
3. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
Chapter, the City shall not be so indemnified or reimbursed in
relation to any amounts attributable to:
a. The City's own negligence, willful misconduct, intentional or
criminal acts; or
b. The City acting in a proprietary capacity to deliver service(s)
within the City.
4. Recovery by the City of any amounts under insurance, a
performance bond or otherwise does not limit a person's duty to
indemnify the City in any way; nor shall such recovery relieve a
person of amounts owed to the City or in any respect prevent the
City from exercising any other right or remedy it may have.
D. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, upon
conviction by the City's Municipal Court, be punished by a fine not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to
Section
406.040
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.040
100:958
Section 406.050. Dispute Resolutions, Appeals And Arbitration.
[Ord. No. 5376 § 1, 9-25-2008; Ord. No. 6506, 10-11-2018]
exceed ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each
day the violation continues may be charged as a separate offense.
A. The Engineer shall make a final determination as to any matter
concerning the grant, denial or revocation of a ROW permit as provided
in this Chapter. On the request of an applicant or a ROW user and
within a reasonable period of time, the Engineer also shall make a final
determination as to any other issue relating to the use of the ROW, the
imposition of any fee or the application of any provision of this Chapter;
provided, however, that this review shall not apply to matters being
prosecuted in the Municipal Court. Any final determination of the
Engineer shall be subject to review as provided herein.
B. Any person aggrieved by a final determination of the Engineer may
appeal in writing to the City Administrator within five (5) business days
thereof. The appeal shall assert specific grounds for review, and the
City Administrator shall render a decision on the appeal within fifteen
(15) business days of receipt affirming, reversing or modifying the
determination of the Engineer. The City Administrator may extend this
time period for the purpose of any investigation or hearing deemed
necessary. A decision affirming the Engineer's determination shall be in
writing and supported by findings establishing the reasonableness of
the decision.
C. Any person aggrieved by the final determination of the City
Administrator may file a petition for review pursuant to Chapter 536,
RSMo., as amended, in the Circuit Court of the County of St. Charles.
Such petition shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the City
Administrator's final determination.
D. Arbitration and Mediation.
1. On agreement of the parties and in addition to any other remedies,
any final decision of the City Administrator may be submitted to
mediation or binding arbitration.
2. In the event of mediation, the City Administrator and the applicant
or ROW user shall agree to a mediator. The costs and fees of the
mediator shall be borne equally by the parties, and each party shall
pay its own costs, disbursements and attorney fees.
3. In the event of arbitration, the City Administrator and the applicant
or ROW user shall agree to a single arbitrator. The costs and fees of
the arbitrator shall be borne equally by the parties. If the parties
cannot agree on an arbitrator, the matter shall be resolved by a
three-person arbitration panel consisting of one (1) arbitrator
selected by the City Administrator, one (1) arbitrator selected by
the applicant or ROW user and one (1) person selected by the other
Section
406.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.050
100:959
Section 406.060. Miscellaneous. [Ord. No. 5376 § 1, 9-25-2008;
Ord. No. 6506, 10-11-2018]
Section 406.070. Small Wireless Facility Deployment. [Ord. No.
6523, 12-13-2018]
two (2) arbitrators, in which case each party shall bear the expense
of its own arbitrator and shall jointly and equally bear with the
other party the expense of the third arbitrator and of the
arbitration. Each party shall also pay its own costs, disbursements
and attorney fees.
A. At the discretion of the Engineer, after the completion of ROW work the
ROW user shall provide to the City as-built drawings, maps or other
comparable records as determined by the Engineer, drawn to scale and
certified to the City as reasonably depicting the location of all facilities
constructed pursuant to the ROW permit. Such records may be
provided to the Engineer in the form maintained by the ROW user, but
when available to the ROW user, shall be submitted in automated
formats that are compatible with City systems, as determined by the
Engineer, or in hard copy otherwise.
B. Upon failure of a ROW user to commence, pursue or complete any ROW
work required by law or by the provisions of this Chapter to be done in
any street within the time prescribed and to the reasonable satisfaction
of the City, the City may, at its option, after thirty (30) days' notice cause
such work to be done, and the ROW user shall pay to the City the cost
thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the City to the ROW user
within thirty (30) days after receipt of such itemized report.
C. Upon ten (10) days' written notice and with the supervision of the City
or as otherwise provided by law, a ROW user shall have the authority to
trim trees that overhang rights-of-way of the City so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with its facilities, at its
own expense subject to the supervision and direction of the City.
Nothing in this Subsection shall authorize the trimming of trees on
private property without permission of the property owner. All cut
materials shall be properly disposed.
D. During ROW work by a ROW user the City shall have the right to install
and to thereafter maintain at its own cost in any excavation to or other
applicable disturbance of the ROW any parallel facilities of its own that
do not unreasonably interfere with the operations of other facilities.
E. Nothing in this Chapter shall be in preference or hindrance to the right
of the City and any board, authority, commission or public service
corporation of the City to use or occupy the rights-of-way or to perform
or carry on any public works or public improvements of any description.
A. Title and Intent.108 This Section shall be known and may be cited as the
"Small Wireless Facility Deployment Code," and it is intended to
Section
406.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.070
100:960
encourage and streamline the deployment of small wireless facilities in
the City and to help ensure that robust and dependable wireless radiobased
communication services and networks are available throughout
the City, consistent with State and Federal law, including Sections
67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo. (while in effect), and Sections 67.1830 to
67.1846, RSMo. The provisions of other sections of Chapter 406 shall
apply to small wireless deployments except to the extent inconsistent
with this Section 406.070.
B. Definitions.109 As used in this Section, the following terms shall mean:
ANTENNA — Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of
wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES — Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization
or the City's amendments to such codes enacted to prevent physical
property damage or reasonably foreseeable injury to persons to the
extent not inconsistent with Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo. (while
in effect).
APPLICANT — Any person who submits an application and is a wireless
provider.
APPLICATION — A request submitted by an applicant to the City for a
permit to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless
support structure, or to approve the installation, modification, or
replacement of a utility pole.
AUTHORITY OR CITY — The City of O'Fallon.
AUTHORITY POLE — A utility pole owned, managed, or operated by or
on behalf of the City, but such term shall not include municipal electric
utility distribution poles.
AUTHORITY WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A wireless support
structure owned, managed, or operated by or on behalf of the City.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION — To install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace small wireless facilities on or immediately adjacent
to a wireless support structure or utility pole, provided that the small
wireless facility antenna is located on the wireless support structure or
utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — The set of equipment and network
components, including wires, cables, and associated facilities used by a
cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5); a telecommunications
carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(51); a provider of information
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24); or a wireless services
provider; to provide communications services, including cable service,
as SS SCS HCS HB 1991 7 defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6);
108. See 67.5110, RSMo.
109. See 67.5111, RSMo.
Section
406.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.070
100:961
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53); an
information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24); wireless
communications service; or other one-way or two-way communications
service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER — A cable operator, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5); a provider of information service, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24); a telecommunications carrier, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 153(51); or a wireless provider.
DECORATIVE POLE — A City pole that is specially designed and placed
for aesthetic purposes.
FEE — A one-time, non-recurring charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A group of buildings, properties, or sites that
are either listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register,
the individual who has been delegated the authority by the Federal
agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National
Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i-v of the Nationwide
Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C, or are
otherwise located in a district made subject to special design standards
adopted by City ordinance or under State law as of January 1, 2018, or
subsequently enacted for new developments.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY — A small wireless facility that meets the
following qualifications:
PERMIT — A written authorization required by the City to perform an
action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization,
including any government authority.
RATE — A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street, sidewalk, alley, or similar property used for public
travel, but not including a Federal interstate highway, railroad right-ofway,
or private easement.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY — A wireless facility that meets both of
the following qualifications:
Is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length,
fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height; and
1.
2. Any exterior antenna no longer than eleven (11) inches;
Each wireless provider's antenna could fit within an enclosure of
no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume; and
1.
All other equipment associated with the wireless facility, whether
ground- or pole-mounted, is cumulatively no more than twenty-
2.
Section
406.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.070
100:962
TECHNICALLY FEASIBLE — By virtue of engineering or spectrum
usage, the proposed placement for a small wireless facility or its design
or site location can be implemented without a reduction in the
functionality of the small wireless facility.
UTILITY POLE — A pole or similar structure that is or may be used
in whole or in part by or for wireline communications, electric
distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function, or
for the collocation of small wireless facilities; provided, however, such
term shall not include wireless support structures, electric transmission
structures, or breakaway poles owned by the State Highways and
Transportation Commission.
WIRELESS FACILITY — Equipment at a fixed location that enables
wireless communications between user equipment and a
communications network, including equipment associated with
wireless communications and radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or
fiberoptic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration. The term
includes small wireless facilities. The term does not include:
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER — Any person, including a
person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State,
that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment
or wireless facilities but that is not a wireless services provider.
WIRELESS PROVIDER — A wireless infrastructure provider or a
wireless services provider.
eight (28) cubic feet in volume, provided that no single piece of
equipment on the utility pole shall exceed nine (9) cubic feet in
volume; and no single piece of ground-mounted equipment shall
exceed fifteen (15) cubic feet in volume, exclusive of equipment
required by an electric utility or municipal electric utility to power
the small wireless facility. The following types of associated
ancillary equipment shall not be included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, grounding equipment,
power transfer switch, cutoff switch, and vertical cable runs and
related conduit for the connection of power and other services;
The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated;
1.
Coaxial or fiber-optic cable between wireless support structures or
utility poles;
2.
Coaxial or fiber-optic cable not directly associated with a particular
small wireless facility;
3.
4. A wireline backhaul facility;
Section
406.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.070
100:963
WIRELESS SERVICES — Any services using licensed or unlicensed
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or
mobile, provided to the public using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER — A person who provides wireless
services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — An existing structure, such as
a monopole or tower, whether guyed or self-supporting, designed to
support or capable of supporting wireless facilities; an existing or
proposed billboard; an existing or proposed building; or other existing
or proposed structure capable of supporting wireless facilities, other
than a structure designed solely for the collocation of small wireless
facilities. Such term shall not include a utility pole.
WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY — A physical transmission path, all
or part of which is within the right-of-way, used for the transport of
communication data by wire from a wireless facility to a network.
C. Deployment Of Small Wireless Facilities And Associated Poles In Right-
Of-Way.110
1. The provisions of this Subsection shall only apply to activities of a
wireless provider within the right-of-way to deploy small wireless
facilities and associated utility poles.
2. Subject to the provisions of this Subsection and Sections 67.5110
to 67.5121, RSMo. (while in effect), a wireless provider may, as a
permitted use not subject to zoning review or approval, collocate
small wireless facilities and install, maintain, modify, operate, and
replace utility poles along, across, upon, and under the right-ofway,
except that the placement in the right-of-way of new or
modified utility poles in single-family residential zoning districts or
areas zoned as historic as of August 28, 2018, shall remain subject
to any applicable zoning requirements that are consistent with
Sections 67.5090 to 67.5103, RSMo., including but not limited to
requirements for underground utilities as set forth in Chapter 406.
Small wireless facilities collocated outside the right-of-way in
property not zoned primarily for single-family residential use shall
be classified as permitted uses and not subject to zoning review or
approval. Such small wireless facilities and utility poles shall be
installed and maintained as not to obstruct or hinder the usual
travel or public safety on such right-of-way or obstruct the legal use
of such right-of-way by the City, other governmental authorities or
other authorized right-of-way users.
3. A wireless provider must obtain a permit pursuant to this Chapter,
with such reasonable conditions as may be imposed by the City, for
work in a right-of-way that will involve excavation, affect traffic
110. See 67.5112, RSMo.
Section
406.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.070
100:964
patterns, obstruct traffic in the right-of-way, or materially impede
the use of a sidewalk.
4. Each new, replacement, or modified utility pole installed in the
right-of-way shall not exceed the greater of ten (10) feet in height
above the tallest existing utility pole in place as of January 1, 2019,
located within five hundred (500) feet of the new pole in the same
right-of-way, or fifty (50) feet above ground level. New small
wireless facilities in the right-of-way shall not extend more than ten
(10) feet above an existing utility pole in place as of August 28,
2018, or for small wireless facilities on a new utility pole, above the
height permitted for a new utility pole. A new, modified, or
replacement utility pole that exceeds these height limits shall be
subject to all applicable zoning requirements that apply to other
utility poles, including as set forth in this Chapter 406, to the extent
consistent with Sections 67.5090 to 67.5103, RSMo.
5. A wireless provider shall be permitted to replace decorative poles
when necessary to collocate a small wireless facility, but any
replacement pole shall reasonably conform to the design aesthetics
of the decorative pole or poles being replaced, as determined by
the Director of Planning and Development.
6. Subject to Subsection (D)(4) below, and except for facilities
excluded from evaluation for effects on historic properties under 47
CFR 1.1307(a)(4) of the Federal Communications Commission
rules, a wireless provider must use appropriate and reasonable,
technically feasible, non-discriminatory, and technologically
neutral design or concealment measures in a historic district, as
determined by the Director of Planning and Development. Any such
design or concealment measures shall not have the effect of
prohibiting any provider's technology, nor shall any such measures
be considered a part of the small wireless facility for purposes of
the size restrictions in the definition of small wireless facility.
7. Small wireless facility collocations shall not interfere with or impair
the operation of existing utility facilities, or City or third-party
attachments. A wireless provider shall repair all damage to the
right-of-way directly caused by the activities of the wireless
provider in the right-of-way and shall return the right-of-way to its
functional equivalence before the damage under the competitively
neutral, reasonable requirements and specifications of the City. If
the wireless provider fails to make the repairs required by the City
within a reasonable time after written notice, the City may make
those repairs and charge the wireless provider the reasonable,
documented cost of such repairs.
D. Permits For Poles In Right-Of-Way And Wireless Facilities In All
Locations.111
111. See 67.5113, RSMo.
Section
406.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.070
100:965
1. The provisions of this Subsection shall apply to the permitting of
small wireless facilities to be installed by or for a wireless provider
in or outside the right-of-way and to the permitting of the
installation, modification, and replacement of utility poles by a
wireless provider inside the right-of-way.
2. Wireless providers or their agents shall apply for and obtain a
permit to Chapter 406 to collocate a small wireless facility or install
a new, modified, or replacement utility pole associated with a small
wireless facility as provided in Subsection (C) above. The City shall
receive applications for, process, and issue such permits subject to
the following requirements:
a. An applicant shall not be required to perform services or
provide goods unrelated to the permit, such as in-kind
contributions to the City, including reserving fiber, conduit, or
pole space for the City;
b. An applicant shall not be required to provide more information
to obtain a permit than communications service providers that
are not wireless providers, provided that an applicant shall
include construction and engineering drawings and
information demonstrating compliance with the criteria in
Subsection (D)(2)(i) of this Section and an attestation that the
small wireless facility complies with the volumetric limitations
in the definition of "small wireless facility" in Subsection (B)
above;
c. An applicant shall not be required to place small wireless
facilities on any specific utility pole or category of poles or
require multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole;
d. There is no limit as to the placement of small wireless facilities
by minimum horizontal separation distances;
e. An applicant shall comply with reasonable, objective, and costeffective
concealment or safety requirements as provided
herein;
f. An applicant that is not a wireless services provider shall
provide evidence of agreements or plans demonstrating that
the small wireless facilities will be operational for use by a
wireless services provider within one (1) year after the permit
issuance date, unless the City and the applicant agree to
extend this period or if delay is caused by lack of commercial
power or communications transport facilities to the site and
the applicant notifies the City thereof. An applicant that is a
wireless services provider shall provide the information
required by this Subsection by attestation;
g. Within fifteen (15) days of receiving an application, the City
shall determine and notify the applicant in writing whether the
Section
406.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.070
100:966
application is complete. If an application is incomplete, the
City shall specifically identify the missing information in
writing. The processing deadline in Subsection (D)(2)(h) of
this Section shall be tolled from the time the City sends the
notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides
the missing information. That processing deadline may also be
tolled by agreement of the applicant and the City;
h. An application for collocation shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory
basis and deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within forty-five (45) days of
receipt of the application. An application for installation of a
new, modified, or replacement utility pole associated with a
small wireless facility shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory
basis and deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within sixty (60) days of
receipt of the application;
i. The City may deny a proposed collocation of a small wireless
facility or installation, modification, or replacement of a utility
pole that meets the requirements in Subsection (C)(3) above
only if the action proposed in the application could reasonably
be expected to:
(1) Materially interfere with the safe operation of traffic
control equipment or City-owned communications
equipment;
(2) Materially interfere with sight lines or clear zones for
transportation, pedestrians, or non-motorized vehicles;
(3) Materially interfere with compliance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 to 12213, or
similar Federal or State standards regarding pedestrian
access or movement;
(4) Materially obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public
safety on the right-of-way;
(5) Materially obstruct the legal use of the right-of-way by the
City, a utility, or other third party;
(6) Fail to comply with reasonable and non-discriminatory
spacing requirements of general application adopted by
ordinance or regulations promulgated by the State
Highways and Transportation Commission that concern
the location of ground-mounted equipment and new utility
poles, subject to wireless provider requests for exception
or variance;
Section
406.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.070
100:967
(7) Fail to comply with applicable codes, including nationally
recognized engineering standards for utility poles or
wireless support structures;
(8) Fail to comply with the reasonably objective and
documented aesthetics of a decorative pole and the
applicant does not agree to pay to match the applicable
decorative elements; or
(9) Fail to comply with reasonable and non-discriminatory
undergrounding requirements contained in City
ordinances as of January 1, 2018, or subsequently enacted
for new developments, that require all new utility facilities
in the area to be placed underground and prohibit the
installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval, including by
wireless provider requests for exception or variance;
j. The City shall document the complete basis for a denial in
writing, and send the documentation to the applicant with the
communication denying an application. The applicant may cure
the deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the
application within thirty (30) days of the denial without paying
an additional application fee. The City shall approve or deny
the revised application within thirty (30) days. Any subsequent
review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial;
k. Consolidated Application.
(1) An applicant may file a consolidated application and
receive a single permit for the collocation of multiple small
wireless facilities; provided, however, the denial of one (1)
or more small wireless facilities in a consolidated
application shall not delay processing of any other small
wireless facilities in the same batch; and
(2) An application may include up to twenty (20) separate
small wireless facilities, provided that they are for the
same or materially same design of small wireless facility
being collocated on the same or materially the same type
of utility pole or wireless support structure, and
geographically proximate. If the City receives individual
applications for approval of more than fifty (50) small
wireless facilities or consolidated applications for approval
of more than seventy-five (75) small wireless facilities
within a fourteen-day period, whether from a single
applicant or multiple applicants, the City may, upon its
own request, obtain an automatic thirty-day extension for
any additional collocation or replacement or installation
application submitted during that fourteen-day period or
in the fourteen-day period immediately following the prior
Section
406.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.070
100:968
fourteen-day period. The City shall promptly communicate
its request to each affected applicant. In rendering a
decision on an application for multiple small wireless
facilities, the City may approve the application as to
certain individual small wireless facilities while denying
it as to others based on applicable requirements and
standards, including those identified in this Subsection.
The City's denial of any individual small wireless facility
or subset of small wireless facilities within an application
shall not be a basis to deny the application as a whole;
l. Installation or collocation for which a permit is granted under
this Subsection shall be completed within one (1) year after the
permit issuance date unless the City and the applicant agree to
extend this period, or the applicant notifies the City that the
delay is caused by a lack of commercial power or
communications transport facilities to the site.
m. Approval of an application authorizes the applicant to:
(1) Undertake the installation or collocation; and
(2) Operate and maintain the small wireless facilities and any
associated utility pole covered by the permit for a period of
ten (10) years, which shall be renewed for equivalent
durations so long as the facilities and poles remain in
compliance with the criteria set forth in Subsection
(D)(2)(i) of this Section, unless the applicant and the City
agree to an extension term of less than ten (10) years. The
provisions of this Subsection shall be subject to the right of
the City to require, upon adequate notice and at the facility
owner's own expense, relocation of facilities as may be
needed in the interest of public safety and convenience,
and the applicant's right to terminate at any time;
n. There shall be a temporary moratorium on applications for
small wireless facilities and the collocation thereof for the
duration of a Federal or State-declared natural disaster plus a
reasonable recovery period, or for no more than thirty (30)
days in the event of a major and protracted staffing shortage
that reduces the number of personnel necessary to receive,
review, process, and approve or deny applications for the
collocation of small wireless facilities by more than fifty
percent (50%);
o. Abandoned small wireless facilities shall be removed as
provided in this Chapter 406 or an agreement, as applicable;
p. In determining whether sufficient capacity exists to
accommodate the attachment of a new small wireless facility,
the City shall take into account that any grant of access
hereunder shall be subject to a reservation to reclaim such
Section
406.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.070
100:969
space, when and if needed, to meet a core utility purpose
or documented plan projected at the time of the application
pursuant to a bona fide development plan; and
q. In emergency circumstances that result from a natural disaster
or accident, the City may require the owner or operator of a
wireless facility to immediately remove such facility if the
wireless facility is obstructing traffic or causing a hazard on
the City's roadway. In the event that the owner or operator of
the wireless facility is unable to immediately remove the
wireless facility, the City may remove the wireless facility from
the roadway or other position that renders the wireless facility
hazardous. Under these emergency circumstances, the City
shall not be liable for any damage caused by removing the
wireless facility and may charge the owner or operator of the
wireless facility the City's reasonable expenses incurred in
removing the wireless facility.
3. Work Not Requiring Permit.
a. A permit is not required for:
(1) Routine maintenance on previously permitted small
wireless facilities;
(2) The replacement of small wireless facilities with small
wireless facilities that are the same or smaller in size,
weight, and height; or
(3) The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or
replacement of micro wireless facilities that are strung on
cables between utility poles, in compliance with applicable
codes.
b. For work described in Subsection (D)(3)(a)(1) and (2) of this
Section that involves different equipment than that being
replaced, the wireless services provider shall submit a
description of such new equipment so that the City may
maintain an accurate inventory of the small wireless facilities
at that location.
4. No approval for the installation, placement, maintenance, or
operation of a small wireless facility under this Section shall be
construed to confer authorization for the provision of cable
television service, or installation, placement, maintenance, or
operation of a wireline backhaul facility or communications facility,
other than a small wireless facility, in the right-of-way.
5. A municipal electric utility shall not require an application for the
installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of
micro wireless facilities that are strung on cables between utility
poles, in compliance with applicable codes.
Section
406.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.070
100:970
E. Collocations On City Poles And Wireless Support Structures Outside Of
Right-Of-Way.112
1. This Subsection only applies to collocations on City poles and
wireless support structures that are located outside the right-ofway.
2. Subject to Subsection (E)(3) of this Section, the City shall authorize
the collocation of small wireless facilities on City wireless support
structures and poles to the same extent, if any, that it permits
access to such structures for other commercial projects or uses.
Such collocations shall be subject to reasonable and nondiscriminatory
rates, fees, and terms as provided in an agreement
between the City, or its agent, and the wireless provider in a form
approved by the City Council.
3. The City shall not enter into an exclusive agreement with a wireless
provider concerning City poles or wireless support structures,
including stadiums and enclosed arenas, unless the agreement
meets the following requirements:
a. The wireless provider provides service using a shared network
of wireless facilities that it makes available for access by other
wireless providers, on reasonable and non-discriminatory rates
and terms that shall include use of the entire shared network,
as to itself, an affiliate, or any other entity; or
b. The wireless provider allows other wireless providers to
collocate small wireless facilities, on reasonable and nondiscriminatory
rates and terms, as to itself, an affiliate, or any
other entity.
4. When determining whether a rate, fee, or term is reasonable and
non-discriminatory for the purposes of this Subsection,
consideration may be given to any relevant facts, including
alternative financial or service remuneration, characteristics of the
proposed equipment or installation, structural limitations, or other
commercial or unique features or components.
F. Collocations On City Poles Within The Right-Of-Way.113
1. The provisions of this Subsection apply to collocations on City poles
within the right-of-way by a wireless provider.
2. Neither the City nor any person owning, managing, or controlling
City poles in the right-of-way shall enter into an exclusive
arrangement with any person for the right to attach to such poles.
A person who purchases or otherwise acquires a City pole is
subject to the requirements of this Subsection.
112. See 67.5114, RSMo.
113. See 67.5115, RSMo.
Section
406.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.070
100:971
3. The City shall allow the collocation of small wireless facilities on its
poles using the process set forth in Subsection (D).
4. An application shall include engineering and construction
drawings, as well as plans and detailed cost estimates for any
make-ready work as needed, for which the applicant shall be solely
responsible.
5. Make-ready work shall be addressed as follows, unless the City (or
its successor) and applicant agree to different terms in a pole
attachment agreement:
a. The rates, fees, and terms and conditions for the make-ready
work to collocate on a City pole shall be non-discriminatory,
competitively neutral, and commercially reasonable, and shall
comply with Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo.;
b. Unless the City allows the applicant to perform any makeready
work, the City shall provide a good faith estimate for any
make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the
requested collocation by a wireless provider, including pole
replacement if necessary, within sixty (60) days after receipt of
a complete application. If applicable, make-ready work,
including any pole replacement, shall be completed by the City
within sixty (60) days of written acceptance of the good faith
estimate and advance payment by the applicant. The City may
require replacement of its pole on a non-discriminatory basis
for reasons of safety and reliability, including a demonstration
that the collocation would make the pole structurally unsound,
including, but not limited to, if the collocation would cause a
utility pole to fail a crash test; and
c. The person owning, managing, or controlling the City pole
shall not require more make-ready work than required to meet
applicable codes or industry standards. Fees for make-ready
work shall not include costs related to preexisting or prior
damage or non-compliance unless the City had determined,
prior to the filing of the application, to permanently abandon
and not repair or replace the structure. Fees for make-ready
work, including any pole replacement, shall not exceed actual
costs or the amount charged to other communications service
providers for similar work, and shall not include third-party
fees, charges, or expenses, except for amounts charged by
licensed contractors actually performing the make-ready work.
6. When a small wireless facility is located in the right-of-way of the
State highway system, equipment and facilities directly associated
with a particular small wireless facility, including coaxial and fiber
optic cable, conduit, and ground-mounted equipment, shall remain
in the utility corridor except as needed to reach a City or utility pole
Section
406.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.070
100:972
in the right-of-way but outside the utility corridor in which the
small wireless facility is collocated.
G. Rates And Fees.114
1. This Subsection governs the rates and fees to collocate small
wireless facilities on City poles and the rates and fees for the
placement of utility poles, but does not limit the City's ability to
recover specific removal costs from the attaching wireless provider
for abandoned structures. The rates to collocate on City poles shall
be non-discriminatory regardless of the services provided by the
collocating applicant.
2. The City shall not require a wireless provider to pay any rates, fees,
or compensation to the authority or other person other than what is
expressly authorized by Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo. (while
in effect), for the use and occupancy of a right-of-way, for
collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles in the right-ofway,
or for the installation, maintenance, modification, operation,
and replacement of utility poles in the right-of-way.
3. Application fees shall be as follows:
a. The total fee for any application under Subsection (D)(2) for
collocation of small wireless facilities on existing City poles
shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per small wireless
facility. An applicant filing a consolidated application under
subdivision (11) of subdivision 3 of subsection D shall pay one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per small wireless facility included
in the consolidated application; and
b. The total application fees for the installation, modification, or
replacement of a pole and the collocation of an associated
small wireless facility shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00)
per pole.
4. Collocation Charges.
a. The rate for collocation of a small wireless facility to a City pole
shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per pole per year.
b. The City shall not charge a wireless provider any fee, tax other
than a tax authorized by Subsection (G)(4)(c) below, or other
charge, or require any other form of payment or compensation,
to locate a wireless facility or wireless support structure on
privately owned property, or on a wireless support structure
not owned by the City.
c. The City shall not demand any fees, rentals, licenses, charges,
payments, or assessments from any applicant or wireless
114. See 67.5116, RSMo.
Section
406.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.070
100:973
provider for, or in any way relating to or arising from, the
construction, deployment, installation, mounting, modification,
operation, use, replacement, maintenance, or repair of small
wireless facilities or utility poles, if not allowed by Section
67.5116 RSMo. (while in effect).
H. Authority Preserved.115 Subject to the provisions of Sections 67.5110 to
67.5121, RSMo. (while in effect), and applicable Federal law, the City
shall continue to exercise zoning, land use, planning, and permitting
authority within its territorial boundaries, including with respect to
wireless support structures and utility poles, except that the City shall
not have or exercise any jurisdiction or authority over the design,
engineering, construction, installation, or operation of any small
wireless facility located in an interior structure or upon the site of any
campus, stadium, or athletic facility not owned or controlled by the City,
other than to comply with applicable codes.
I. Prior Agreements.116 This Section 406.070 shall not nullify, modify,
amend, or prohibit a mutual agreement between the City and a wireless
provider made prior to August 28, 2018, but an agreement that does not
fully comply with Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo. (while in effect),
shall apply only to small wireless facilities and utility poles that were
installed or approved for installation before August 28, 2018, subject to
any termination provisions in the agreement. Such an agreement shall
not be renewed, extended, or made to apply to any small wireless
facility or utility pole installed or approved for installation after August
28, 2018, unless it is modified to fully comply with Sections 67.5110 to
67.5121 RSMo. (while in effect). In the absence of an agreement, and
until such a compliant agreement or ordinance is entered or adopted,
small wireless facilities and utility poles that become operational or
were constructed before August 28, 2018, may remain installed and be
operated under the requirements of Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121,
RSMo. (while in effect).
J. Indemnification, Insurance, And Bonding Requirements.117
1. A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City and its
elected and appointed officers and employees harmless against any
damage or personal injury caused by the negligence of the wireless
provider or its employees, agents, or contractors, including but not
limited to reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the City.
2. A wireless provider shall have in effect insurance coverage
consistent with this Subsection, or demonstrate a comparable selfinsurance
program, all in accordance with Section 406.040. A selfinsured
wireless provider does not need to name the City or its
officers and employees as additional insured. A wireless provider
115. See 67.5118, RSMo.
116. See 67.5119, RSMo.
117. See 67.5121, RSMo.
Section
406.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.070
100:974
shall furnish proof of insurance, if applicable, prior to the effective
date of any permit issued for a small wireless facility.
3. The bonding requirements of Section 406.040 shall apply to small
wireless facilities. The purpose of such bonds shall be to:
a. Provide for the removal of abandoned or improperly
maintained small wireless facilities, including those that an
authority determines need to be removed to protect public
health, safety, or welfare;
b. Restore the right-of-way in connection with removals under
Section 67.5113, RSMo.;
c. Recoup rates or fees that have not been paid by a wireless
provider in over twelve (12) months, so long as the wireless
provider has received reasonable notice from the City of any
non-compliance listed above and been given an opportunity to
cure;
d. Bonding requirements shall not exceed one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per small wireless facility. For
wireless providers with multiple small wireless facilities within
the City, the total bond amount across all facilities shall not
exceed seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00), which
amount may be combined into one bond instrument.
4. Applicants that have at least twenty-five million dollars
($25,000,000.00) in assets in the State and do not have a history of
permitting non-compliance within the City shall, under Section
67.1830, RSMo., be exempt from the insurance and bonding
requirements otherwise authorized by this Section.
5. Any contractor, subcontractor, or wireless infrastructure provider
shall be under contract with a wireless services provider to perform
work in the right-of-way related to small wireless facilities or utility
poles, and such entities shall be properly licensed under the laws of
the State and all applicable City ordinances. Each contracted entity
shall have the same obligations with respect to his or her work as a
wireless services provider would have under this Section, under
Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo., and other applicable laws if
the work were performed by a wireless services provider. The
wireless services provider shall be responsible for ensuring that
the work of such contracted entities is performed consistently with
the wireless services provider's permits and applicable laws
relating to the deployment of small wireless facilities and utility
poles, and responsible for promptly correcting acts or omissions by
such contracted entity.
Section
406.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.070
100:975
Section 406.080. through Section 406.100. (Reserved)
K. Expiration.118 Section 406.070 shall expire at such time that Sections
67.5110 to 67.5122, RSMo., expire, except that for small wireless
facilities already permitted or collocated on City poles prior to such
date, the rate set forth in Subsection (G) for collocation of small
wireless facilities on City poles shall remain effective for the duration of
the permit authorizing the collocation.
118. See 67.5122, RSMo.
Section
406.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.080
100:976
ARTICLE III
Excavations Affecting Public Utilities
Section 406.110. Notification Center. [Ord. No. 5376 § 1, 9-25-2008;
Ord. No. 6506, 10-11-2018]
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any excavation or to direct
the performance of any excavation within the corporate limits of the City of
O'Fallon without first having contacted the notification center established
pursuant to Sections 319.010 through 319.050, RSMo., and having given
the center at least forty-eight (48) hours to contact the member utilities for
appropriate marking of utility lines, cable or facilities.
Section 406.120. Public Utilities — Generally. [Ord. No. 5376 § 1,
9-25-2008; Ord. No. 6506, 10-11-2018]
Section 406.130. Excavation Near Pipelines. [Ord. No. 5376 § 1,
9-25-2008; Ord. No. 6506, 10-11-2018]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any excavation or to
direct the performance of any excavation within the corporate limits of
the City of O'Fallon which shall in any way disturb, move, cut or damage
any public utility line, cable or facility.
B. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any publicly owned or
regulated utility which is repairing or replacing any of its own facilities
which does not affect other utilities, lines or facilities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any excavation or to
direct the performance of any excavation within the corporate limits of
the City of O'Fallon within an area designated as a utility or pipeline
easement for a hazardous pipeline without having first obtained a
permit from the Engineering Department. Any permit required
pursuant to this Section shall be requested from the Engineering
Department at least three (3) working days, but not more than ten (10)
working days, before performing any excavation.
B. All other provisions of the code must be met, including Sections
400.250 and 405.015.
Section
406.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
406.130
100:977
Chapter 410
SIGNAGE REGULATIONS
Section
406.130
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
406.130
100:978
ARTICLE I
General Provisions and Administration
Section 410.010. Short Title. [Ord. No. 6232 § 1, 6-9-2016119]
The following Chapter shall be known and may be cited hereinafter as the
"Sign Code" of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
Section 410.020. Purpose. [Ord. No. 6232 § 1, 6-9-2016]
Section 410.030. Validity and Severability Clause. [Ord. No. 6232
§ 1, 6-9-2016]
Section 410.040. Administration. [Ord. No. 6232 § 1, 6-9-2016]
The provisions of this Chapter shall be administered by the duly appointed
designee of the Planning and Development Department, who shall be
assisted by the City's Code Enforcement Officer(s).
A. It is the intent of this Chapter to regulate and control the location,
erection, number and maintenance of signs and matters relating
thereto within the City of O'Fallon in order to promote public safety,
health and general welfare of the community, without infringing upon
the rights granted by the First Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States of America. These regulations are specifically designed
to:
1. Provide for uniform regulation and orderly development of signs
consistent with established policies and ordinances of the City;
2. Prohibit hazardous and dangerous signs; and
3. Provide a desirable and attractive living and working environment
through harmonious and uniform signage.
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this
Chapter to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of
this Chapter not specifically included in said ruling.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the
application of any provision of this Chapter to a particular land, parcel,
lot, district, use, building or structure, such ruling shall not affect the
application of said provision to any other land, parcel, lot, district, use,
building or structure not specifically included in said ruling.
119. Editor's Note: Former Chapter 410, Signage Regulations, containing Section 410.010
through 410.170, derived from Ord. No. 5022 §§ 1 — 2, 7-3-2006; Ord. No. 5418 §§ 1 — 3,
2-12-2009; Ord. No. 5805 §§ 1 — 11, 8-23-2012; Ord. No. 5923 § 1, 8-8-2013; Ord. No. 5931
§§ 2 — 5, 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 5957 §§ 1 — 2, 12-12-2013 was repealed 6-9-2016 by § 1 of
Ord. No. 6232.
Section
410.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.040
100:979

ARTICLE II
Rules and Definitions
Section 410.050. Applicability. [Ord. No. 6232 § 1, 6-9-2016]
Any and all signage used within the City limits of O'Fallon, Missouri, shall
be governed by this Chapter and all other applicable regulations of the
O'Fallon Zoning Code as well as the City's building, electrical and other
public safety ordinances. No person shall erect, relocate or alter (including
sign face changes) within the City any sign or sign structure without first
obtaining a sign permit with the exception of the following: signs which
do not require a permit, as listed in this Chapter or other City ordinance,
and the repainting, changing of parts and servicing of any structure that
constitutes maintenance of an existing sign. Any sign not specifically
provided for herein as a permitted sign or a prohibited sign shall be
designated as a permitted sign or a prohibited sign by the appointed
designee of the Planning and Development Department consistent with
Section 410.020's stated purpose, and the most closely applicable
provisions of this Chapter. If said sign is designated as a permitted sign,
then said sign shall be subject to all limitations and provisions stated herein
for a permitted sign which is most similar to said sign.
Section 410.060. Definitions. [Ord. No. 6232 § 1, 6-9-2016]
The following definitions shall be used by these regulations to assist in the
establishment of well-defined signage regulations:
ACCESSORY SIGN — A wall sign that is mounted on a building or structure
that is accessory (or secondary) to the primary building or structure on
a lot. For the purpose of this Chapter, accessory buildings or structures
may include, but are not limited to, stand-alone ATMs, stand-alone drive-up
tellers, car washes and pump island canopies.
ACTIVE SALES OFFICE — An office located within a trailer, temporary
structure or display home within a subdivision for the sole purpose of selling
homes and/or home sites within that subdivision. The office must operate at
least thirty (30) hours per week.
AUXILIARY SIGN — A wall or freestanding sign or portion thereof located
on a lot. Examples of such signs include freestanding or wallmounted
restaurant menu boards, the list of options available on an automated car
wash or similar information.
BANNER — A temporary sign of lightweight fabric, plastic or similar
material mounted on a building or pole either with or without a frame,
usually rectangular in shape, which allows slight movement by air.
BARKER — An individual, operating outside of a business's or other entity's
primary structure, who attempts to engage passersby through verbal,
physical or other contact in order to entice them into patronizing said
business or entity.
Section
410.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.060
100:981
BEACON — A light with one (1) or more beams directed into the atmosphere
or directed at one (1) or more points not on the same lot as the light source;
also any light with one (1) or more beams that rotate or move.
BILLBOARDS — Any sign which: (i) is located on a lot, (ii) is visible from any
point of the travelled ways of an interstate highway, and (iii) is not a roof
sign, pylon sign, monument sign or projecting sign.
BUILDING FACADE OR WALL — The exterior surface area of a building
(including all windows and architectural features) in a single elevation,
between finished grade and the top of the parapet wall or the line formed
where the wall meets the slope of a hip roof.
BUILDING FLOOR AREA — The amount of available floor space (measured
in square feet) contained within the building's physical structure.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign or portion thereof with a face designed
specifically to allow characters, letters, images or illustrations to be
changed or altered at will. A sign on which the only copy that changes
is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be
considered a "time and temperature" portion of a sign and not a changeable
copy sign for purposes of this Chapter.
CITY — The City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officially designated
representative of the City of O'Fallon responsible for the enforcement of
ordinances, property maintenance and zoning issues. This may include
his/her deputies or those designated by the Director of Community
Development, City Administrator and/or the City Council.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — A temporary sign erected on the premises on
which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign that provides additional guidance or
information on pedestrian or vehicular navigation through a subject
property by identifying entrances, exits and routes of travel.
DISTRICT — A geographical subdivision as defined under the O'Fallon
Zoning Code and Zoning District Map.
ELECTION SEASON — The period from sixty (60) days prior to any election
voted in by the residents of the City until two (2) weeks after that election.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN — A sign or portion thereof with a face
designed specifically to allow characters, letters or illustrations to be
changed or altered electronically at will.
ERECT — To build, construct, reconstruct, attach, hang, rehang, alter,
place, affix, enlarge, move or relocate any signage or associated structures
and components.
EXEMPT SIGN — A sign that requires no sign permit.
FLASHING SIGN — Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing
light source or gives the illusion of an intermittent or flashing light source
(by animation or any other means). Automatic changing signs such as public
Section
410.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.060
100:982
service time, temperature and date signs or electronic message signs are
not classed as flashing signs.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A self-supporting sign anchored to the ground,
resting on or supported by means of poles, stakes or any other type of base
in the ground. This type of sign includes ground signs, monument signs and
pylon signs.
FRONTAGE — The length of the subject lot along the street side. A lot
bordering more than one (1) street is considered to have a separate
frontage for each street.
GROUND LEVEL — The elevation of the ground upon which the sign and
all associated structures are placed. This elevation shall be the same as
shown on the approved grading plan, except when the sign rests upon a
berm or other area elevated above the surrounding ground. In such cases,
the elevation of the base of such berm or other area shall be considered as
the ground level.
GROUND SIGN — A self-supporting, freestanding sign not resting on, or
supported by, any solid base or similar structure, but which is supported by
a post or posts that give the overall sign a height of twelve (12) feet or less
above grade.
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance measured from the ground level
to the highest point of the sign.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign which is too small to be legible from the rightof-
way or a publicly accessible parking area.
INTERIOR SIGNS — A sign fully located within any building, arena, campus,
stadium or courtyard.
LOGO — A letter, character or symbol, registered with an independent third
party, used to represent a person, corporation or business enterprise.
LOT — A parcel, tract, plot or area of land accessible by means of a street
or other permanently reserved principal means of access. It may be a single
parcel separately described in a deed or plat which is recorded in the
office of the County Recorder of Deeds or it may include parts of or a
combination of such parcels when adjacent to one another and used as one
(1) as determined by development services.
MONUMENT SIGN — A self-supporting, freestanding sign resting on or
supported by a solid base or similar structure on a foundation in the ground.
Monument signs shall have a base that at its narrowest point is equal to at
least fifty percent (50%) of the width of the sign's sign face.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY PROJECT SIGN — A permanent ground sign located
in, on or at an apartment complex, condominium project or mobile home
development.
MULTIPLE-TENANT DEVELOPMENT — Any building or collection of
buildings constituting a unified development that are subdivided into tenant
spaces and/or have the ability to be subdivided into tenant spaces.
Section
410.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.060
100:983
NON-DURABLE SIGNS — Any sign that is intended for temporary use only,
(by way of design or materials) that is installed and used as a permanent
sign.
NON-RESIDENTIAL LAND USES — Uses inconsistent with the permitted
residential land uses in Appendix A of the O'Fallon Zoning Code.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN — A sign located on property not owned or leased by
the owner of the sign.
OWNER — A person or entity who is recorded as such on official records
and has a vested or contingent interest in the property or business in
question.
PAINTED SIGN — A sign that is painted directly on a building facade or
other permanent structure. A painted sign is considered a wall sign.
PENNANT — A sign made of fabric, plastic or similar material, often in
series and usually mounted without a frame and hung from poles and
structures to allow movement by air. Such attention-getting displays not
specifically defined as a banner are considered pennants.
PICKET SIGNS — Any temporary signs that are not affixed to any type of
building or support structure, but are instead, carried by an individual as
part of a public demonstration.
PICKETER — An individual not located within the physical confines of an
entity or business, who attempts to engage patrons or passersby through
verbal, physical or other contact in order to communicate a message.
PREMISES — An area of land with its appurtenances and buildings which,
because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit
of real estate.
PROHIBITED SIGN — A sign that is not allowed to be erected within the
corporate limits of the City.
PROJECTING SIGN — A type of wall sign that is attached to and projects
generally perpendicular from a structure or building face to a distance of
greater than eighteen (18) inches.
PYLON SIGN — A self-supporting, freestanding sign resting on or supported
by pylon(s) or post(s).
RIGHT-OF-WAY (R.O.W.) — The area of land adjacent to the paved surface of
any public roadway that has been dedicated to or is maintained by the City,
County, State or any other government agency. For purposes of enforcing
this Chapter, the limits of this area shall be presumed to be either:
RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS — Any and all signage placed within the public
rights-of-way.
1. Ten (10) feet from the curb line, or
When a sidewalk is in place, the edge of the sidewalk farthest away
from the paved surface of the public roadway, whichever is greater.
2.
Section
410.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.060
100:984
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected or constructed wholly on the roof of a
building, supported by the roof structure.
SETBACK — The minimum horizontal distance between either: the face of
curb, the edge of pavement or the right-of-way line and the sign structure
as specifiedde in this Chapter.
SIGN — Any object, devise, display, structure or part thereof, situated
outdoors, which is used to identify, display, direct or attract attention to an
object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event,
idea, belief or location by any means, including words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
SIGN AREA — The size of the sign face (panel) measured in square feet,
as defined by the calculations herein; or the area of the smallest square or
rectangle that can encompass all items of information if it is a wall sign. The
base of a monument sign is not considered part of the sign area, unless it is
incorporated as part of the sign itself.
SIGN FACE (PANEL) — The surface area of the sign structure or building
facade or wall on which items of information could be placed and/or viewed
simultaneously.
SIGN STRUCTURE — The sign and all parts associated with its
construction.
STREAMERS — See the definition for "pennant."
STREET — A paved surface contained within a public right-of-way or
easement that serves as a permanently reserved principal means of
vehicular and pedestrian access between defined properties.
TEMPORARY SIGNS — A non-permanent, sign type, intended to be used for
a short, usually fixed period of time.
TRIM — The molding, batten, capping, nailing strips, latticing and platforms
that are attached to the sign structure.
USE — The legal purpose for which a building, lot, sign or other structure
is arranged, intended, designed, occupied or maintained.
WALL SIGN — A sign mounted on a building facade or other vertical
building surface. Wall signs shall not extend beyond the edge of any wall
or other surface to which they are mounted, nor shall the front of a flushmounted
wall sign project more than eighteen (18) inches from the wall's
surface.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign placed on the internal side of a window or painted
on the inside or outside of a window as individual letters or symbols and
used for advertising purposes.
Section
410.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.060
100:985
ZONING CODE — The Zoning Code of the City of O'Fallon and the current
Zoning District Map related thereto.
Section
410.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.060
100:986
ARTICLE III
Signage Use and Design Standards
Section 410.070. Design, Illumination and Placement of Installed
Signs. [Ord. No. 6232 § 1, 6-9-2016]
A. The following standards relate to the number, design and appearance of
all signs permitted on a lot within all zoning districts unless specifically
exempted elsewhere in this Chapter:
1. Maximum number of signs. The maximum number of signs per lot
is defined as the sum of the total allowable number of freestanding
signs and the total allowable number of wall signs.
a. Freestanding signs. A maximum of one (1) freestanding sign is
allowed per lot.
b. Wall signs. [Ord. No. 6596, 8-22-2019]
(1) Single-tenant buildings. A maximum of one (1) wall sign
per facade will be allowed, except in cases where the
facade fronts onto an adjacent property that is
residentially zoned. Attached wall signs are prohibited on
any facade fronting on property that is zoned or used for
residential purposes unless it is determined by the
Planning Director that a sufficient combination of distance
and buffer exists between the residential property and the
proposed sign so that the sign will not be visible from such
residential property. A sign approved in this manner shall
not be illuminated.
(2) Multi-tenant buildings. A maximum of one (1) wall sign is
allowed on each tenant unit with a public entrance and on
any facade with a view from a roadway or parking lot. In
the case of an end-cap unit the tenant of said unit will be
allowed one (1) wall sign on the side of the building facing
the roadway or parking lot. Common walls (elevations with
no entrances or accesses) may have one (1) additional
sign. In cases where all the tenants are accessed through
one (1) common entrance, one (1) sign per tenant is
allowed, as long as the total square footage of all signage
on the facade added together does not exceed the
maximum amount of signage allowed for that facade.
Attached wall signs are prohibited on any facade fronting
to property that is zoned or used for residential purposes
unless it is determined by the Planning Director that a
sufficient combination of distance and buffer exists
between the residential property and the proposed sign so
that the sign will not be visible from such residential
property. A sign approved in this manner shall not be
illuminated.
Section
410.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.070
100:987
(3) In non-residential zoning districts, additional secondary
wall signs are permitted, provided, the separately
calculated sign areas of such secondary signage and the
primary signage shall not cumulatively exceed the
allowable wall signage found in Section
410.070(A)(3)(a)(2), (4). (Example usage - signs displaying
the occupation, service and/or product located upon the
premises).
2. Height of sign. Wall signs shall not extend beyond the limits of the
wall they are attached to. For freestanding signs, the overall sign
structure may not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. Only wall signs
and freestanding signs not exceeding eight (8) feet in height are
permitted in residential zoning districts, unless a property in a
residential zoning district is not a residential use in which case the
overall permissible sign structure may not exceed twelve (12) feet
in height. However, pylon signs up to thirty-five (35) feet in height
are permitted in the interchange sign district. Signs up to twenty
(20) feet in height may be permitted within large shopping centers
located on a site in excess of ten (10) acres or more.
Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter to the contrary, any
freestanding sign less than twelve (12) feet in height shall be a
monument sign, with the exception of ground signs as permitted by
this Chapter.
3. Sign area. "Sign area" is defined as the size of the sign face (panel)
measured in square feet as determined by the calculations herein.
The supporting structure or bracing of a sign shall not be counted
as a part of the sign area unless such structure or bracing is made a
part of the sign's message. Where a sign has two (2) display faces
(panels) back to back, the area of only one (1) face (panel) shall be
considered the sign area. Where a sign has more than one (1)
display face (panel) not back to back, the maximum area which can
be viewed simultaneously from any point shall be considered the
sign area.
a. Calculations. The maximum permitted sign area of an
individual sign is computed based on the type of sign as
follows:
(1) Freestanding signs for single-tenant buildings. The size of
the sign face shall be no greater than seventy-five one
hundreds of a percent (0.75%) of the floor area of all
primary and accessory structures on site or seventy (70)
square feet, whichever is less. A permitted ground sign
face may be at least twenty-four (24) square feet
regardless of the building's floor area or may be smaller
than twenty-four (24) square feet at the applicant's
discretion.
Section
410.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.070
100:988
(2) Freestanding signs for multiple-tenant developments.
Multiple-tenant developments shall be allowed to erect
either:
(a) A single sign of the following dimensions, and subject
to the following restrictions:
(i) The sign area shall be equal to either thirty-five
percent (35%) of the development's linear footage
along the right-of-way or one hundred fifty (150)
square feet, whichever is less.
(ii) If the sign has two (2) faces (back to back), the
panels shall have the same configuration on both
sides.
(iii) No other freestanding signs are permitted, except
as specifically called out in this Chapter.
(3) Freestanding signs for large shopping centers. A multitenant
shopping center occupying a site in excess of ten
(10) acres in size shall be permitted to have a single sign,
not exceeding twenty (20) feet in height and two hundred
twenty-five (225) feet in sign area. Signs mounted upon an
individual pole shall be prohibited.
(4) Wall signs. The maximum permitted area of a wall sign for
an individual tenant unit or building facade shall be equal
to a percentage of the square footage of the respective
tenant unit or building face. For multi-tenant buildings
with a common entrance, this percentage applies to the
allowable wall signs per facade for the structure as a
whole, therefore only one (1) such sign shall be allowed if
the maximum percent or maximum sign area square
footage is used in a single sign. The following sign area
percentages shall apply:
TABLE 1: ALLOWABLE WALL SIGN AREA
Building or
Tenant Unit
Face
(in square feet)
Percent of
Building Face
Allowed for
Signage
Maximum Sign
Area
(in square feet)
0 — 1,000 7.50% 70
1,001 — 2,500 7.25% 150
2,501 — 5000 6.00% 250
5,001 — 7,500 5.00% 325
7,501+ 4.50% 375
Section
410.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.070
100:989
(5) Accessory signs. Accessory signs are regulated in the
same manner as other wall signs. The maximum permitted
area of an individual accessory sign shall be equal to five
percent (5%) of the square footage of the accessory
building's wall or canopy facade or thirty (30) square feet,
whichever is less.
4. For purposes of traffic safety, each permitted freestanding sign
under this Section shall contain a placard that displays the
assigned numerical street address of the subject property. The
dimensions of the placard shall be a size not more than ten percent
(10%) of the allowed square footage of the sign face (for signs for
single-tenant developments) or thirty percent (30%) of the allowed
square footage of the sign face (for multi-tenant developments).
This additional square footage shall not count against the sign's
allowed square footage.
5. Illumination. All illuminated signs shall comply with all applicable
codes and regulations, including Section 400.277 of the O'Fallon
Zoning Code that refers to exterior lighting standards. In addition,
all electrical equipment and devices shall be UL listed and
approved for their proposed use.
6. Placement. Any sign erected within the City limits must be placed
in accordance with the following regulations:
a. Setbacks for freestanding signs. All freestanding signs shall be
located a minimum of ten (10) feet away from any right-of-way
line and/or property line and a minimum of three (3) feet from
the back of any curbing or sidewalk. All signs shall abide by the
regulations for visibility at corners, including visibility corners
from driveways and the street it intersects per Section
400.260(F) of the O'Fallon Zoning Code.
b. Location of wall signs. Wall signs may only be placed on a
facade that does not front on residentially zoned property. No
maximum permitted height is provided for wall signs except
that no sign shall be higher than the building wall on which it is
mounted. Signs shall not encroach upon any window, doorway
or architectural feature.
c. Placement within or on a frame. All signs designed for a preexisting
structure or frame shall be designed to fit the frame or
structure as though it were the original sign. Any portion of
any sign or unused remaining frame or structure shall be
subject to removal.
d. Additions to existing signs. No sign over four (4) square feet in
area may be attached to another sign without being designed
as an integral part of the original sign. No signs may be
attached to, or cover up, any portion of a sign's frame,
Section
410.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.070
100:990
Section 410.080. Regulations For the Use of Temporary Signs. [Ord.
No. 6232 § 1, 6-9-2016]
structure or base unless originally designed or subsequently
redesigned for that purpose.
A. Periodically, owners, lessees or other authorized persons or entities
having an interest in a property located in the non-residential zoning
districts may obtain a permit to temporarily erect additional signage on
their lot. The following rules shall apply to temporary signs.
1. Number. Once an owner, lessee or other authorized person or
entity having an interest in a property obtains a temporary sign
permit, they may display one (1) sign for each permit obtained. (In
the case of lot with multiple frontages, the applicant may display
one (1) such temporary sign per each street frontage on a single
permit, so long as each sign is facing a different street.)
2. Duration. Temporary sign permits may be obtained in any number
for any length of time provided that the applicant does not exceed
ninety (90) days of display time during any one (1) calendar year.
The start date is specified by the applicant at the time the permit is
obtained. For purposes of this limitation, the City shall consider all
temporary sign permits for the applicant and applicants related
entitles as defined in Section 100.012 of the Municipal Code; as a
result, an applicant and the applicant's related entities shall be
limited to a display time of ninety (90) days per calendar year.
3. Size. Temporary signs authorized pursuant to this Section shall not
exceed forty-eight (48) square feet in size. This includes attentiongetting
devices and signs carried by barkers. The area of streamers
and similar displays shall not be limited or included within this
maximum square footage.
4. Type. Temporary signs may be wall signs, freestanding signs,
banners or barkers. Out of the ordinary, unique attention-getting
devices, such as, but not limited to, pennants, streamers, tassels,
balloons, etc., shall be prohibited as part of or attached to the sign.
Changeable copy signs, electronic message signs or any signs
otherwise prohibited by this Chapter are not permitted.
5. Height. Freestanding temporary signs shall not exceed twelve (12)
feet in height. Signs or attention-getting devices attached to the
building shall not exceed the height of the principal structure nor
be erected upon or above the roof including when hung from poles
or other accessory structures.
6. Placement. Temporary signs may be moved within the limits of the
lot at any time during the duration of the permit, so long as each
sign complies with the following:
Section
410.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.080
100:991
Section 410.090. Supplemental Regulations For Special Use Signs.
[Ord. No. 6232 § 1, 6-9-2016]
a. Setbacks for freestanding signs. All freestanding signs must be
fully contained within the subject property; shall be located on
the subject property a minimum of five (5) feet from the rightof-
way line or property line; a minimum of three (3) feet from
the back of any curb; and shall abide by the regulations for
visibility corners including visibility corners from driveways
and the street it intersects per Section 400.260(F) of the
O'Fallon Zoning Code. The applicant will be asked to call out
the location of the sign when the permits are issued and spot
inspections may be used by staff to verify the sign is suitably
located.
b. Location of wall signs. No maximum permitted height is
provided for wall signs (including banners), except that no sign
shall be higher than the building wall on which it is mounted.
Signs shall not encroach upon any window, doorway or
architectural feature.
c. Barkers. Barkers may only operate under permission of the
owner of the site on which the event occurs or in a designated
public space (common ground, sidewalks, etc.) and may not
operate in the public right-of-way. Their activities shall not
impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic or constitute a safety
hazard. For each barker on site under the age of sixteen (16),
there shall be one (1) competent person of legal majority on
site to supervise their activities.
7. Installation and removal. Banners shall remain securely mounted
and tightly hung to two (2) posts, or by an alternative method
approved by the Administrative Officer, for the duration of time that
the banner is installed. Flag banners, such as feather and teardrop
flags must be secured by being staked into the ground. All
mounting devices (posts, stakes, etc.) shall be removed at the time
that the temporary sign is removed.
A. The sign types and sign uses in this Section are ones which, by their
design or purpose, require special regulations in addition to those for
typical wall or freestanding signs. These special signs are considered
permanent signs and require permits. The exceptions to this rule are
the subdivision construction signs and the off-premise signs; they
require permits, but are considered temporary signs.
1. Interchange sign. An interchange sign is a modified freestanding
sign that can be installed on a lot adjacent to the right-of-way of a
highway or service road. Interchange signs are to be used in place
of, not in addition to, the permitted freestanding signs allowed on
the site. Interchange signs are allowed only on non-residentially
zoned properties adjacent to the right-of-way for Interstates 70 and
Section
410.080
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.090
100:992
64 and Route 364; or fronting on East or West Terra Lane.
Properties fronting on Veteran's Memorial Parkway; Technology
Boulevard; or the outer roads adjacent to Highway 40/64 and Route
364 may be granted pole signs if they can prove, via a sight line
study, that they have visibility from I-70, I-64 or Route 364.
a. A maximum of one (1) freestanding interchange sign per lot
shall be permitted to be installed up to a maximum height of
thirty-five (35) feet.
b. The sign face shall have a clearance of at least ten (10) feet
from the surrounding ground level.
c. Interchange signs will be allowed to increase their size by
adding in fifty percent (50%) of their allowed area to their
total. A permitted interchange sign face may be at least
seventy (70) square feet regardless of the building's floor area
or may be smaller than seventy (70) square feet at the
applicant's discretion.
d. Interchange signs shall comply with all other requirements for
freestanding signs unless amended by this Chapter.
e. As part of the sign permit application, the applicant will be
required to submit a scaled drawing/rendering showing the
size of the proposed sign in relation to the surrounding
structures and topography. The drawings shall be prepared by
a licensed or registered professional (i.e., architects,
engineers).
2. Changeable copy signs. Changeable copy signs will only be allowed
as wall or freestanding signs, if they are included as part of the
permitted permanent signage. The lines of changeable copy shall
be designed as an integral part of the sign and not added to the
same pole or structure without being designed as part of the
original sign.
3. Electronic message signs. Electronic message signs will only be
allowed as wall or freestanding signs, if they are included as part of
the permitted permanent signage. The electronic message center
shall be designed as an integral part of the sign and not added to
the same pole or structure without being designed as part of the
original sign. All electronic message centers shall adhere to the
following:
a. A maximum of one (1) display shall be permitted during each
item frame. No continuous or rolling displays shall be
permitted.
b. The minimum time per display shall be five (5) seconds.
Section
410.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.090
100:993
c. The intensity of the lights used in the message board shall not
constitute a visual hazard for vehicular or pedestrian traffic
and shall comply with all requirements of Section 400.277 of
the O'Fallon Zoning Code.
4. Auxiliary signs. Auxiliary signs shall only be permitted subject to
the review and approval by the Planning and Development
Department as to whether the sign meets the definition of an
auxiliary sign. Said signs shall be calculated independently of the
maximum number of signs (Section 410.070(A)(1)). There shall be a
limit of two (2) such signs on a single lot and the total square
footage for both signs added together shall not exceed sixty (60)
square feet. Such signs shall conform to all design, location and
other applicable regulations. Auxiliary signs shall not exceed a
maximum height of eight (8) feet, if freestanding. For properties
containing drive-through service, two (2) additional signs shall be
permitted per additional service lane, not to exceed a total of four
(4). The total square footage of the four (4) signs shall not exceed
ninety (90) square feet. Such signs shall be located within ten (10)
feet of the vehicle traffic lane used in connection with the drivethrough
service. [Ord. No. 6596, 8-22-2019]
5. In MUTDD zoned areas, HTCD zoned areas and/or other specially
designated areas where different types of activities, entities or
zonings are brought together as a single "community" or
"neighborhood style" development, the owner(s) may seek
additional signage located within the limits of the development,
upon receiving the approval of a conditional use permit by the
Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Chapter 400
of the Municipal Code. The proposed size, height, configuration,
design and number of the sign(s) allowed shall be reviewed and
approved as part of the conditional use permit application. All signs
designated as community signs will have to abide by the following
conditions of approval:
a. Such signs shall abide by all other applicable provisions of this
Chapter.
b. Such signs may be located on private or public property, but
not within the right-of-way.
c. Such signs shall conform to the visibility requirements of the
City pertaining to intersections per Section 400.260(F) of the
O'Fallon Zoning Code.
d. Such signs shall not be counted toward the total allowed
signage on the subject property.
6. Common sign package — multiple-building developments. All
multiple-tenant developments containing two (2) or more buildings
on separate lots may install signs for the development as a whole in
Section
410.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.090
100:994
conjunction with signage for the individual entities within the
development. These types of comprehensive sign packages shall be
composed of two (2) parts and be structured in the manner listed
below:
a. External development signage. One sign (primary sign) may be
installed within the subdivision pursuant to Section 410.070 of
this Chapter. The calculations for this sign shall be based on
the largest street frontage on the site (to be designated as the
primary frontage). In addition to the allowed primary sign, a
second sign (secondary sign) may be installed on one (1)
additional street frontage if that frontage is in excess of one
hundred twenty-five (125) linear feet and contains an entrance
to the site from a public right-of-way. The secondary sign will
be installed as close to the entrance on the secondary frontage
as reasonably possible.
b. Internal outlot signage. In addition to the external signage
allowed for in Section 410.090(A)(7)(a), a single freestanding
sign may be installed on each lot within the development.
These signs shall be limited to a maximum of twenty-four (24)
square feet in size. In the case of multi-tenant buildings, such
signs with a maximum size of forty-eight (48) square feet will
be allowed.
7. Residential land use signs.
a. Multiple-family or institutional residential lots with more than
four (4) dwelling units. For each development made up of
multiple-family or institutional residential lots containing more
than four (4) dwelling units, one (1) sign, not to exceed thirtytwo
(32) square feet in area, is permitted per entrance. Such
signs shall comply with the City's visibility standards for
intersections per Section 400.260(F) of the O'Fallon Zoning
Code.
b. Subdivision entrance signs. Subdivisions are permitted to
place signs not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. A
maximum of two (2) such signs is permitted per entrance to the
subdivision. Such signs shall comply with the City's visibility
standards for intersections per Section 400.260(F) of the
O'Fallon Zoning Code.
c. Subdivision construction signs. For each real estate
subdivision that has been approved in accordance with the
O'Fallon Zoning Code, one (1) temporary sign is permitted per
entrance. Each such sign shall be not more than seventy-two
(72) square feet in area and shall not exceed ten (10) feet in
height (if freestanding). Such signs shall be allowed to have
two (2) faces if placed back-to-back or in a "V" shape. These
signs shall comply with the City's visibility standards
Section
410.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.090
100:995
pertaining to driveway and street intersections. All signs shall
be removed upon the cessation of the presence of an active
sales office within the subdivision.
d. Internal construction subdivision signs. A sign that shall be
placed within the limits of a residential development. These
types of signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in
size and eight (8) feet in height. The signs shall be placed no
closer than five (5) feet from the right-of-way and shall not
impede traffic circulation. These types of signs shall be
removed when building permits have been issued for all lots
within a subdivision.
8. Off-premise signs. City will allow persons and entities, with valid
permits, to install, at specified locations within the City, additional
signage. Such signs shall be divided into two (2) categories:
a. Annual use. These signs are semi-permanent; once installed,
they may be left in place as long as they do not interfere with
traffic safety, are not in a State of disrepair and apply for
renewal on a yearly basis. In addition to all other applicable
parts of this Chapter, all signs used under this Section must
adhere to the following:
(1) The owner of the sign must be either a resident, business
owner, non-profit entity, or active development located
within the City of O'Fallon.
(2) Signs shall be freestanding and shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet in sign face size.
(3) These signs shall be out of any public rights-of-way, out of
the applicable sight triangles and shall require the written
approval of the property owner of the lot on which the
signs are placed.
(4) A separate annual permit shall be required for each annual
use off-premise directional sign installed within the City.
The permit fee is identified in the Schedule of Fees, Costs
and Expenses within Appendix B of Title IV: Land Use.
Failure to pay the fee prior to placement of the sign shall
result in a citation. Each sign shall be considered a
separate violation. Each annual use sign will expire at the
end of the calendar year and will be subject to submitting a
renewal application. The fee for a renewal is identified in
the Schedule of Fees, Costs and Expenses within Appendix
B of Title IV: Land Use.
b. Weekend use. These signs are to be displayed during the
higher volume traffic periods on the weekends. In addition to
all other applicable parts of this Chapter, all signs used must
adhere to the following:
Section
410.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.090
100:996
Section 410.095. Planned Signing Program. [Ord. No. 6232 § 1,
6-9-2016]
(1) Signs may only be displayed between 6:00 p.m. Fridays
and 6:00 a.m. Mondays of the same weekend.
(2) Shall be freestanding and shall not exceed four (4) square
feet in area or six (6) feet in height from the adjacent
finished grade.
(3) Placement of such signs shall be prohibited on private
property without the express permission of the property
owner.
(4) Signs shall not be placed as to interfere in any way with
public health or safety. Such signs placed within the State
right-of-way are further subject to the rules and
regulations of the Missouri Department of Transportation.
(5) No such sign shall be attached to any utility structure,
tree, fence or any public or existing private sign standard.
(6) An annual permit shall be required for each entity
requesting to place weekend use signs within the City. The
annual permit fee is identified in the Schedule of Fees,
Costs and Expenses within Appendix B of Title IV: Land
Use. Failure to pay the fee prior to placement of the signs
shall result in a citation. Each sign shall be considered a
separate violation.
c. Billboards, as defined in Section 410.060 are not considered to
be off-premise signs.
9. In non-residential zoning districts, additional signs may be located
on a project, site or development exceeding ten (10) acres in size,
provided that the signs located on any site shall not exceed twentyeight
(28) square feet in area and no sign should be more than ten
(10) feet in height or located closer than fifty (50) feet to a public or
private right-of-way. (Example usage - signs designed to
accommodate the names of all business/buildings with directional
arrows within a development.)
A. Special conditions may exist within large-scale developments which
make application of the sign requirements set forth in this Chapter
inappropriate or problematic. A planned signing program is intended to
provide maximum incentive and latitude to encourage variety and
aesthetic design and to allow flexibility in response to special
circumstances, but shall not be used to circumvent the objectives of this
Chapter. A planned signing program may be used with regard to land
areas that contain a single large-scale community style development
that is broken into several different components of development
interconnected by common areas and which is characterized by unique
Section
410.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.095
100:997
or disjointed topography, environmentally sensitive areas, features of
historic significance or components containing public amenities, such
as active or passive communal recreation areas or lifestyle enhancing
amenities.
1. Procedure. An application for a planned signing program shall be
processed in conjunction with a PD/PUD area plan application or
amended area plan application in accordance with the procedure
set forth in Article V of Chapter 400 of the Municipal Code.
2. Requirements.
a. The planned signing program shall include and provide for all
signs to be used within the boundaries of the development. No
sign will be permitted for any area within the development
unless such sign has been made a part of the planned signing
program.
b. All signage must be alike with regard to design and materials
and shall be crafted specifically for the development in which
they are used.
c. No sign shall be located within any right-of-way.
d. All signs shall comply with the visibility requirements of the
Municipal Code pertaining to intersections as set forth in
Section 400.260(F) of the Code.
e. All signs shall comply with Article VI, Prohibited Signs, of this
Chapter.
f. All signs shall comply with the safety and maintenance
requirements set forth in Section 410.110 of this Chapter.
3. Standards.
a. The planned signing program shall provide for an adequate
number of signs in order to suit the needs of the development,
and link the separate components of the development as part
of the larger overall community style or neighborhood style
development. However, the planned sign program shall not
include an overabundance of signage so as to detract from the
aesthetics of the development, cause confusion to motorists or
otherwise violate the objectives of this Chapter.
b. The planned signing program shall provide for sizing as
appropriate to accomplish the objectives of the program while
keeping the aesthetic character of the development.
c. The planned signing program shall be developed so as to
minimize the impact on environmentally sensitive areas.
Section
410.095
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.095
100:998
d. The design and materials used shall be environmentally
friendly, shall complement the aesthetic character of the
development and shall be compatible with the buildings and
improvements within the development.
e. Natural colors and design shall be used as thoroughly as
possible.
f. All signage shall be designed and placed in a manner that
allows it to blend in with the surrounding area.
4. Effect of denial. In the event that a planned signing program is
denied, the applicant and/or property owners may apply for
appropriate sign permits for each individual sign within the
development in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter
applicable for such signs.
Section
410.095
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.095
100:999

ARTICLE IV
Applications, Fees and Performance Standards
Section 410.100. General Application and Fee Requirements. [Ord.
No. 6232 § 1, 6-9-2016]
A. The primary responsibility for securing the necessary permits shall be
the property owner(s). However, a duly authorized agent, purchaser,
lessee, devisee or judiciary may be allowed to represent the owner with
proper consent. Regardless of whether the owner or their agent
applies, all required permits and approvals must been secured prior to
any work being initiated.
1. Application requirements. All applications for sign permits shall be
electronically submitted in a manner prescribed by the Planning
and Development Department. All forms are to be completed in
their entirety and shall have attached thereto the following
information:
a. A scaled plot plan. For all freestanding signs, a copy of the
approved site plan showing the location of the sign on the
subject property. The location of the proposed sign shall be
shown by giving the distances of that sign from the property
lines and the backs of applicable curbing. For all wall signs, a
building elevation showing the location of the proposed wall
sign and a site plan verifying that the proposed location is a
street frontage.
b. The configuration of the proposed sign listing the height,
width, total square footage (including sign area calculations),
proposed items of information, method of attachment, method
of illumination, sign construction materials and colors.
c. Footing/foundation details (applies to freestanding signs).
d. Seismic and wind load calculations in accordance with the
City's Building Code (applies to freestanding signs classified as
interchange signs).
2. Review procedure. The Planning and Development Department
shall review the submitted application for compliance with the
requirements of the Subsection above. If the application is
determined to be complete, the Planning and Development
Department shall review the application for compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable City Codes
and requirements and shall approve or deny the permit application
based on the submitted information.
3. Schedule of fees, costs and expenses. The City Council shall
establish a Schedule of Fees, Costs and Expenses for all matters
pertaining to the Sign Code. The Schedule of Fees, Costs and
Expenses is identified within Appendix B of Title IV: Land Use and
Section
410.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.100
100:1001
Section 410.110. General Performance Requirements. [Ord. No.
6232 § 1, 6-9-2016]
shall be filled with the City Clerk and posted in the offices of
the Planning and Development Department. The schedule shall
only be amended by the City Council and shall not require a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission. The
processing fee is applicable regardless of approval of the sign. A
permit approved by the Planning and Development Department is
not valid until the permit fee has been paid in full.
A. No sign in any district shall be installed or erected in any manner so as
to create any dangerous, injurious or otherwise objectionable condition
so as to adversely affect the surrounding area or adjoining premises.
1. Installation. The base or support(s) of any and all permanent
freestanding signs shall be securely anchored to a concrete base or
footing approved by the City's Building Division. All signs shall be
constructed and mounted in accordance with the City's Building
Code.
2. Inspection. All permanent freestanding signs require a footing
inspection to be performed by a multi-discipline inspector.
3. Maintenance. All signs, including non-conforming signs and signs
which do not require a permit, shall be maintained in their original,
pristine condition. Any signs which may be or may hereafter
become deteriorated, rotted, unsafe or in a State which is not
properly maintained shall be repaired or removed by the licensee
or owner of the sign or owner of the property upon which the sign
stands upon notice of the Planning and Development Department.
4. Dangerous signs. If it is deemed that an existing sign (or a sign
currently under construction) is or becomes an immediate danger
or hazard to the health, safety or general welfare of residents,
pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic, City staff is hereby empowered
to immediately remove the sign and its structure without notice to,
and at the expense of, the property and/or sign owner. City staff is
also hereby empowered to issue a stop work order upon such a sign
currently under construction.
Section
410.100
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.110
100:1002
ARTICLE V
Exempt Signs
Section 410.120. Signs Which Do Not Require a Permit. [Ord. No.
6232 § 1, 6-9-2016]
A. These signs are permitted in all zoning districts for the following uses
and purposes without the need for a sign permit. Such signs shall not
count as part of the maximum permitted sign area, maximum number of
signs per lot or building and other bulk and design regulations. No sign
permitted by this Section shall be displayed in a manner that would
otherwise cause it to be prohibited. All signs permitted in this Section
shall comply with all applicable codes and ordinances in regard to
design, illumination, placement, construction and maintenance:
1. The erection, construction and maintenance of official traffic signs,
signals, and any public notice or warning required by a valid and
applicable Federal, State or local law, regulation or ordinance.
2. Signs for the control or direction of traffic and other authorized
public purposes related to the promotion of the health, safety and
welfare of the general public as required by the City or other
governmental or private authority.
3. One (1) ground sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in
area and a height of eight (8) feet in residential zoning districts or
twelve (12) feet in height in all other zoning districts shall be
permitted provided in each instance that any such sign is located
on private property with the owner's permission. Additional ground
signs of six (6) square feet or less in all residential zoning districts
or sixteen (16) square feet or less in all other zoning districts are
permitted under this Subsection during the election season, not to
exceed the total number of questions or candidates on the ballot for
the ensuing election.
4. Construction signs. For construction on or development of a lot,
one (1) sign per street frontage, not more than forty-eight (48)
square feet in area and a maximum of twelve (12) feet in height (if
freestanding). Construction signs shall be removed upon issuance
of an occupancy permit.
5. Any property located in non-residential zoning districts having a
parking area, is allowed one (1) sign not more than four (4) square
feet in area for each entrance and/or exit is allowed. In addition,
three (3) other on premise signs per lot, a maximum of four (4)
square feet each, shall be allowed. No sign permitted pursuant to
this Subsection shall exceed three and one-half (3 1/2) feet in
height if an individual freestanding sign rather than a wall sign.
6. Any lot in a residentially zoned area that is on the market for sale or
lease shall be permitted two (2) additional signs of not more than
Section
410.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.120
100:1003
twelve (12) square feet in sign area. Any lot in a commercially (nonresidentially)
zoned area that is on the market for sale or lease shall
be permitted one (1) additional sign of not more than thirty-two
(32) square feet in sign area and twelve (12) feet in height, for each
street frontage.
7. Interior signs.
8. Legal/public notices. Any public notice or warning required by
applicable Federal, State or local law, regulation or ordinance.
9. Incidental signs.
10. Picketers and picket signs. They may only operate under
permission of the owner of the site on which the event occurs or in
a designated public space (common ground, sidewalks, etc.) and
may not operate in the public right-of-way. Their activities shall not
impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic or constitute a safety hazard.
11. Residential signs. The owners of property located within the City of
O'Fallon may place signs, not to exceed four (4) square feet in size;
within the subdivision the property is located in and/or outside the
subdivision for a radius of two (2) miles, provided they have the
permission of the owner of the ground on which the sign is located.
Signs may be installed at any time and left in place until the home is
sold. All signs shall conform to the visibility requirements of the
City pertaining to intersections per Section 400.260(F) of the
O'Fallon Zoning Code.
12. Temporary signs. Such signs must comply with the following:
a. Barkers. A maximum of two (2) barkers may be active during a
designated day. They may only operate under permission of the
owner of the site on which the event occurs or in a designated
public space (common ground, sidewalks, etc.) and may not
operate in the public right-of-way. Their activities shall not
impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic or constitute a safety
hazard. For each barker on site under the age of sixteen (16),
there shall be one (1) competent person of legal majority on
site to supervise their activities. The owner or other authorized
individual must inform the City's Building Division at least
forty-eight (48) hours prior to using barkers.
b. In non-residential zoning districts, after there has been a
change of ownership of a property, the new owner may erect
one (1) on site temporary wall, banner or freestanding signs,
not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area, for each
street frontage. Such signs may be erected for a maximum of
sixty (60) days at any time during the first six (6) months the
property is under the new ownership. (Example usage -
"Coming Soon" and "Now Hiring" signs).
Section
410.120
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.120
100:1004
13. Time and temperature signs. Time and temperature signs not
exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area. Such signs shall comply
with all electrical codes. Such signs may be a wall, window or other
permitted sign type.
14. Window signs and displays. Window signs shall not cover more
than twenty percent (20%) of the window or a series of contiguous
windows. Merchandise, pictures or models of products that are not
affixed or touching the window but are visible through the window,
that are not intended to be part of the signage, are not considered
signs. Any sign placed on the outside of a window, except for
individual letters painted directly onto the window, shall be
considered a wall sign.
15. Sandwich boards. A sandwich board sign, not exceeding eight (8)
square feet per face, may be placed no further than twenty (20) feet
from the front entrance of a business while opened. Each business
shall be allowed a maximum of one (1) sandwich board sign per
public entrance. At no time should a sandwich board sign block a
public sidewalk or designated parking space, or be placed within a
green space. Sandwich boards shall only be displayed during hours
of operation.
16. Internal construction subdivision signs. Refer to Section
410.090(A)(7)(d) for definition.
17. Vehicular and trailer signs. Vehicular and trailer signs shall
include, but are not limited to, signs, lettering or logos mounted,
attached, or painted on trailers, boats or vehicles which are parked
and left stationary near the business or development which is the
subject of the vehicular or trailer sign. However, vehicular and
trailer signs in compliance with the following regulations shall be
allowed to be parked within non-residential zoning districts, unless
otherwise prohibited by this Code:
a. Any vehicle or trailer as referenced in Section 355.110,
Subsection (F), classified by the Department of Transportation
(DOT) as Class 3 and above and any step van or any trailer
displaying signage or advertising shall be parked behind the
building face of any multi-tenant development. For purposes of
this Section "building face" shall mean the facade of the
building which faces any public street. Further, for purposes of
this Section, the phrase "in front of the building face" shall not
be construed as limited to directly in front of the building, but
instead shall be construed as the entire area, running from side
property boundary to side property boundary, between the
building face and the public street. Where parking is not
available behind the building face of a multi-tenant
development, the vehicle or trailer with signage shall be
parked in the parking space closest to the business that utilizes
said vehicle or trailer. Occupants of single-tenant buildings
Section
410.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.120
100:1005
shall be prohibited from parking vehicles or trailers with
signage in the parking spaces closest to the right-of-way or
private street.
b. All vehicles and/or trailers shall be parked within a properly
designated parking space and shall not encroach upon any
drive aisle or sidewalk.
Exceptions: The following vehicles and trailers shall be
exempt from the above-listed regulations:
(1) Mini buses or vans Class 3 or below predominately used in
the routine transportation of people to and from a place of
business;
(2) Construction-related vehicles parked on property under
construction; service and delivery vehicles while services
are being provided;
(3) Governmental and public safety vehicles; and
(4) Vehicles rented to the general public by a business whose
primary purpose is the rental of such vehicles; provided
that such vehicles are not parked on any drive aisle,
sidewalk or landscaped area.
18. Home occupations. Any property owner operating a permitted
home occupation or other commercial use permitted in a
residentially zoned area (unless otherwise noted), may have one (1)
sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area, per lot. These signs
may be placed without a permit.
Section
410.120
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.120
100:1006
ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Signs
Section 410.130. Prohibited Signs. [Ord. No. 6232 § 1, 6-9-2016]
A. Signs other than those specifically permitted under this Chapter or
those that are considered exempt are to be considered prohibited by
the terms herein. Such signs shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Balloons. Hot and cold air balloons that exceed the twelve (12) foot
height limit for freestanding signs; smaller balloons may be used as
temporary signs.
2. Beacons, spotlights and searchlights.
3. Flashing signs. Except as exempt holiday decorations and displays.
4. Moving signs. Except for electronic message signs, balloons and
flag banners (such as feather and teardrop flags), no fluttering,
undulating, swinging, rotating or otherwise moving signs, lights or
decorations shall be allowed.
5. Non-durable signs.
6. Obscene or indecent signs. Signs which contain characters,
cartoons, statements, words or pictures of an obscene, indecent,
prurient or immoral character.
7. Off-premise signs. No off-premise advertising signs shall be
permitted, except as expressly authorized in this Chapter.
8. Projecting signs.
9. Pylon signs. Unless used as interchange signs.
10. Right-of-way signs and signs on public property. No sign, unless
erected by or required by a government agency to protect the
health and safety of the general public (such as emergency or
warning signs), shall be located within or across any public right-ofway
or on any public property or utility pole.
11. Roof signs. Except in the case where the wall plane does not allow
for wall signage due to insufficient wall area to meet the
requirements of the Code. A roof sign shall not interfere with other
necessary equipment or access to such equipment located on the
roof, shall not utilize a pole or similar device to increase height,
shall not overhang the building and shall be securely mounted to
the roof.
12. Traffic imitating or interfering devices or signs. No sign shall be
erected or maintained at any location where, by reason of its
position, wording, illumination, size, shape or color, it may
obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of or be confused
Section
410.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.130
100:1007
with any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device. No sign
shall use any word, phrase, symbol, shape, form or character in
such manner as to interfere with moving traffic, including signs
that incorporate typical street type and/or traffic control type
signage designs and colors.
13. Wooden signs. Except as temporary real estate or construction ID
signs. This does not include vinyl coated signs, MDO board or other
signs that are composed of wood that is completely covered or
encased in a durable material.
14. Vehicular and trailer signs not otherwise allowed under Section
410.120 of this Chapter. Vehicular and trailer signs shall include,
but are not limited to, signs, lettering or logos mounted, attached,
or painted on trailers, boats or vehicles which are parked and left
stationary near the business or development which is the subject of
the vehicular or trailer sign.
Section
410.130
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.130
100:1008
ARTICLE VII
Pre-Existing Signage
Section 410.140. Non-Conforming Signs. [Ord. No. 6232 § 1,
6-9-2016]
A. Non-Conforming Temporary Signs. All signs installed under a
temporary sign permit found not to be in conformance with the
provisions of this Chapter, regardless of when erected, shall be
removed immediately upon official notice of non-compliance and
removal from the Planning and Development Department.
B. Non-Conforming Permanent Signs. No sign which is non-conforming in
one (1) respect may be altered even if such change is permitted herein,
e.g., if a sign exceeds the maximum height permitted, said sign shall not
be enlarged even if such increase in sign area is permitted within these
regulations. This requirement is based on the fact that nonconforming
structures may not generally be altered in any manner unless such
alterations bring the structure into conformance with current
standards.
1. Grandfathering of existing signs. Installed signs which do not
conform to the provisions of this Chapter, but were previously
approved and legally installed at the time of its passage, shall not
be required to adhere to the general regulations stated herein for
as long as they are maintained in their original State. If the sign is
altered in any way, then it shall be removed per Subdivision (2)
below.
2. Conditions for removal. Signs given a "grandfather" exemption
from this Chapter per Subdivision (1) above must be brought into
compliance if one (1) of the following occurs:
a. There is any alteration in the existing sign's size, shape or
configuration (this does not include modification of the text or
graphics on the sign face);
b. The sign is moved to another location on the subject property;
c. The sign's frame or structural support(s) are replaced or
altered for reasons other than normal maintenance of the sign;
or
d. The sign falls into a State of disrepair as called out in Section
410.110 of this Chapter (General Performance Requirements).
C. The repair or replacement of damaged or malfunctioning portions of the
sign face (including repair or replacement of the entire sign face) is not
considered to be an alteration of a sign, provided that the repair or
replacement does not alter the size, shape or configuration of the sign
face.
Section
410.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.140
100:1009

ARTICLE VIII
Violations, Penalties, Interpretations and Appeals
Section 410.150. Violations. [Ord. No. 6232 § 1, 6-9-2016]
Section 410.160. Voiding of a Sign Permit. [Ord. No. 6232 § 1,
6-9-2016]
A. All signs erected within the City limits of O'Fallon, Missouri, found not
to be in compliance with the provisions of the prevailing ordinance in
force at the time of their erection or were erected without the proper
permits shall be deemed illegal.
1. Code violations. If it is found that a sign is in violation of this
Chapter, official notice shall be given to the owner of the sign or if
the owner cannot be located, to the owner or property management
agent of the premises on which the sign is located or, if the sign
erection is not complete, to the sign erector. Such notice shall
State:
a. The violations found.
b. That all violations must be brought into compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter and all other provisions of the
O'Fallon Zoning Code within the time frame allowed (five (5)
days from the date of such notice for an installed sign or
immediately for a temporary sign or specialty display).
c. The requirements which must be met.
d. That any person found to be in violation of any provision of this
Chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars
($500.00), up to ninety (90) days imprisonment or both. With
each day of such violation constituting a separate offense
without further notice being required.
2. Removal of signs in violation. Any and all signs that are defined as
"prohibited" under the terms of this Chapter or that are located on
public property or public rights-of-way are subject to immediate
removal by City staff without any notice or warnings being issued.
a. All signs removed by City staff become City property and may
be destroyed. Under the terms of this Section, the parties from
whom the signs are taken will not be entitled to compensation
or remuneration.
A. A permit may be revoked by the Planning and Development Department
at any time it appears that there is departure from the plans,
specifications or conditions as required under terms of the permit, that
the same was procured by false representation or that any provisions of
this Chapter are being violated.
Section
410.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.160
100:1011
Section 410.170. Amendments, Variances, Interpretations and
Appeals. [Ord. No. 6232 § 1, 6-9-2016]
Section 410.180. Billboards. [Ord. No. 6232 § 1, 6-9-2016]
1. Notice of such revocation shall be served upon the owner, his/her
agent, contractor or upon any such person employed on the
building or structure for which such permit was issued via a stop
work order which shall be posted in a prominent location and
thereafter no such construction shall proceed.
2. A new permit application shall be completed that correctly and
completely reflects the departure from the voided permit(s) and/or
plans, specifications or conditions. If said application is not
returned within ten (10) days (for an installed sign or immediately
for a specialty display) of the date of notification, a summons to the
O'Fallon Municipal Court may be issued. A summons may be issued
for each subsequent day of non-compliance.
3. If the sign, as detailed in the revised permit application, does not
meet the standards of this Chapter, the Planning and Development
Department shall notify the owner or authorized agent of same and
shall allow ten (10) days (for an installed sign or immediately for a
specialty display) for the removal of the sign. If the sign is not
removed within the time allotted, a notice of violation and a
summons to appear before the O'Fallon Municipal Court may be
issued as of the expiration of the grace period and each subsequent
day thereafter until the violation is abated.
4. Any sign permit under which no construction work has been
commenced within ninety (90) days after the date of issuance of
said permit or under which proposed construction has not been
completed within six (6) months of the time of issuance shall expire
by limitation.
A. All text amendments, variances, interpretations or appeals sought from
the provisions of this Chapter shall follow the procedures outlined in
the O'Fallon Zoning Code.
1. To obtain a variance the applicant must show that this property was
acquired in good faith and where by reason of exceptional
circumstances that the strict application of the terms of the zoning
regulations actually prohibit the practical use of his/her property in
the manner similar to that of other property in the zoning district
where it is located.
A. General Provisions.
1. All billboard signs must comply with the more restrictive of these
regulations or the requirements contained in all State and Federal
Section
410.160
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.180
100:1012
laws including, without limitation, RSMo., Sections 226.500 to
226.600, 1986, as amended (the "State sign law").
2. All new billboard signs must comply with all provisions of
applicable building codes and the applicant must obtain all
necessary permits or licenses which are necessary or required.
3. Where a billboard sign, whether installed prior to or subsequent to
the effective date of this Chapter, June 9, 2016, does not include
any message for a period of one hundred twenty (120) continuous
days, such billboard structure shall be deemed abandoned
thereafter and shall be removed.
4. No billboard sign shall be placed on rocks, trees, or on poles
maintained by public utilities.
5. The owner of a billboard sign and each user thereon shall
indemnify and hold the City harmless from and against any loss,
claim or expense (including attorney's fees, publisher's liability and
advertiser's liability) arising, directly or indirectly, from the
erection and or/use of said billboard sign, and such owner and user
shall maintain liability insurance in accordance with, in an amount
to be approved by the City, except that the minimum insurance for
publisher's and advertiser's liability shall be five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence, one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) aggregate.
6. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Section
and any other provision in this Chapter, the provisions of this
Section shall prevail.
7. The provisions of Section 410.140(B)(1) & (2) shall apply to
billboards. Also, an existing non-conforming billboard may be
removed and replaced with a billboard upon the City Council's
approval of, and pursuant to, a relocation and reconstruction
agreement. Additional conditions and restrictions relating to the
replacement of billboards shall be set forth in the replacement and
relocation agreement. Each such replacement and relocation
agreement shall contain: (i) identification of the location of the
relocation agreement; (ii) conceptual design drawings for the
relocated billboard; and (iii) the time period within which billboard
removal and construction must occur.
8. Prior to consideration by the City Council of a replacement and
relocation agreement, such application shall be reviewed by the
Planning and Development Department, and submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, who shall make a
recommendation to the City Council as to whether: (i) a proposed
relocation site is compatible with the uses and structures on the
site and in the surrounding area; (ii) the proposed billboard would
create a traffic or safety problem, including problems associated
with onsite access circulation or visibility; (iii) the proposed
Section
410.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.180
100:1013
billboard would interfere with onsite parking or landscaping
required by the City's Municipal Code; and (iv) the proposed
billboard would otherwise result in a threat to the general health,
safety and welfare of the community. In considering approval after
a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
City Council shall consider the same forgoing criteria. If the City
Council approves a replacement and relocation agreement, the
applicant will be required to apply for any applicable sign permits.
9. The sign face of an existing billboard, that is visible from, Interstate
Highway 64 and Interstate Highway 70, and that does not have a
digital display may be changed for a digital display, provided that
the dimensions of the digital display are no greater than the
existing sign face, and that the digital display complies with all
applicable requirements of the City's Municipal Code.
10. Audio speakers are prohibited in association with a billboard.
B. Standards For Location, Spacing, Size, Height And Lighting.
1. Location and spacing.
a. No billboard sign shall be maintained, erected, or located
anywhere in the City unless:
(1) The proposed site for such billboard sign is in an area of
the City then zoned non-residential; and,
(2) The proposed site of such billboard sign is within six
hundred sixty (660) feet of the nearest edge of the right-ofway
of, and visible from, Interstate Highway 64 and
Interstate Highway 70; and,
b. No billboard sign shall hereafter be maintained, erected or
located within one (1) mile of an existing billboard sign on the
same side of the highway, irrespective of whether such existing
billboard sign is located within or outside the territorial limits
of the City. This distance shall be measured along the nearest
edge of the pavement at points directly opposite the billboard
sign along each side of the highway. This shall apply only to
billboard signs located on the same side of the highway
involved.
c. No billboard sign shall be placed closer than five hundred
(500) feet of an intersection on a dual or proposed dual
highway; provided, however, that such billboard may be affixed
to or located adjacent to a building at such intersection in such
a manner as not to materially cause any greater obstruction of
vision than caused by the building itself.
d. All billboard signs shall be exempt from the setback
requirements of the zoning district in which they are
Section
410.180
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.180
100:1014
permitted. All billboard signs shall, however, be set back from
the road right-of-way a minimum of thirty (30) feet.
e. No billboard sign shall be located on the right-of-way or any
road or any slope or drainage easement for such road.
f. No portion of a billboard shall be placed within a fifty (50) foot
radius of any point of a building. Once a billboard has been
erected, a fall line equal to the height of the billboard plus ten
(10) feet shall be maintained. No buildings or structures shall
be located within this zone. Existing buildings within this zone
shall be considered pre-existing non-conforming. [Ord. No.
6596, 8-22-2019]
g. No billboard shall be placed within a one thousand (1,000) foot
radius of the nearest point of any structure on a residentially
zoned property, measured from the base of the billboard.
2. Size.
a. The maximum area for any one (1) billboard shall be six
hundred seventy-two (672) square feet with a maximum height
of twenty-one (20) feet and a maximum length of fifty (50) feet,
inclusive of border and trim but excluding the base, apron, or
supports and other structural members. The area shall be
measured by the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or
combination thereof which will encompass the entire billboard.
b. The maximum size limitations shall apply to each side of a
billboard structure, and billboards may be placed back-to-back,
double faced, or in V-type construction with not more than two
(2) displays to each facing, but such billboard structure shall
be considered as one (1) billboard.
c. Temporary cutouts, to the extent permitted by Missouri
Department of Transportation are allowed, provided such
cutouts do not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the normal size
of the sign, and are not in place for a period of three (3) years
or more. When temporary cutouts are utilized, the size of the
sign may exceed the prescribed maximum size set forth herein.
3. Height. The maximum height to top of signage shall not exceed
forty-five (45) feet above ground level or the grade level of the
adjoining street, whichever is higher.
4. Lighting.
a. No revolving or rotating beam or beacon of light shall be
permitted as part of any billboard sign. No flashing,
intermittent or moving light or lights shall be permitted as a
part of any billboard sign.
Section
410.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.180
100:1015
b. External lighting, such as floodlights, thin line and gooseline
reflectors are permitted, provided the light source is directed
upon the face of the billboard sign and is effectively shielded so
as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed into
any portion of the main traveled way of any road or highway
near such billboard sign, and the lights are not of such
intensity so as to cause glare, impair the vision of the driver of
a motor vehicle or otherwise interfere with a driver's operation
of a motor vehicle.
c. No billboard sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with
the effectiveness of, or obscures, an official traffic sign, device
or signal.
5. Digital billboards. Billboards having a digital display (digital
billboards) are permitted, provided that such billboards do not
flash, scroll or employ any form of animation or moving images.
Digital billboards must present a static display that changes no
more frequently than every ten (10) seconds. A digital billboard
that complies with the provisions of this Section shall not be
considered a flashing sign. Digital billboards shall also be subject to
the following requirements:
a. When the full billboard image or any portion thereof changes,
the change sequence must be accomplished by means of
instantaneous re-pixalization.
b. The digital billboard must not exceed a maximum illumination
of five thousand (5,000) nits (candelas per square meter)
during daylight hours and a maximum illumination of three
hundred (300) nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk
and dawn as measured from the sign's face at maximum
brightness.
c. Digital billboards must have an automatic dimmer control to
produce a distinct illumination change from a higher
illumination level to a lower level for the time period between
dusk and dawn.
6. Fees.
a. Application fees: A non-refundable application fee calculated in
the same manner as application fees payable for other signs
shall be paid to the City upon application for any billboard sign
to defray the ordinary and necessary expense of the City to
assure compliance with local wind and other structural loads
and electrical requirements.
Section
410.180
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.190
100:1016
Section 410.190. Message Substitution Clause. [Ord. No. 6232 § 1,
6-9-2016]
Whenever a sign containing a commercial message would be permitted
under this Chapter, subject to the landowner's consent, a sign containing
a non-commercial message may be installed in its place, or vice versa
provided it otherwise complies with this Chapter. Such substitution of
message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. This
provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary within
this Chapter. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent
favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or vice versa.
This provision does not create a right to increase total signage on a parcel,
nor does it affect the requirements that the sign comply in all other respects
with the provisions of this Chapter.
Section
410.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.190
100:1017
Chapter 415
FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION CODE
Section
410.190
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
410.190
100:1018
ARTICLE I
Definitions
Section 415.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §415.010; Ord. No. 4974
§1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206 §1, 4-28-2016]
100-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — The same as "appurtenant structure."
ACUARIAL RATES — See "risk premium rates."
AGENCY — The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE — Any structure used exclusively in
connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of
agricultural commodities.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the City Administrator or his/her
designates interpretation of any provision of this Chapter or a request for a
variance.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE — A structure that is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one percent (1%) chance or greater of flooding in
any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also commonly known as the
100-year flood.
BASEMENT — Any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
COMMUNITY — Any State or area or political subdivision thereof which has
authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the
area within its jurisdiction.
CONSTRUCTION — The act of adding an addition to an existing building
or structure or the erection of a new principal or accessory building or
structure on a lot or property or the addition of walks, driveways or parking
lots or the addition of appurtenances to a building or structure.
CRITICAL FEATURE — An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT — Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations with the
exception of land that is agricultural in use and zoned as agricultural being
Section
415.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.010
100:1019
allow to remove trees, brush or shrubs and moving earthen material not to
exceed fifty (50) cubic yards.
ELEVATED BUILDING — For insurance purposes, a non-basement building
which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION (FOR THE PURPOSES OF DETERMINING
RATES) — Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA — Acronym for Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FIRM — Acronym for Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION — A determination by the
Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood; that is, the
flood level that has a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any given
year.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards.
FLOOD FRINGE — That part of the floodplain as defined by the current
FIRM that is outside the designated floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which the Flood Insurance Study has delineated the flood hazard
boundaries and the zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles as well
as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
Section
415.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
415.010
100:1020
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including,
but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other
applications of Police power. The term describes such State or local
regulations, in any combination thereof that provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities or structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES — The lines marking the limits of
floodways on Federal, State and local floodplain maps.
FLOODWAY FRINGE — That area of the floodplain outside of the floodway
that has a one percent (1%) chance of flood occurrence in any one (1) year.
FLOODWAY OR REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or
other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
2.
Section
415.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.010
100:1021
floodway conditions such as wave action, clogged bridge opening and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured
home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles
placed on site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include
park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MARKET VALUE or FAIR MARKET VALUE — An estimate of what is fair,
economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
1.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
2.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
3.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
a.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
b.
4.
Section
415.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
415.010
100:1022
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other
datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
NFIP — Acronym for the National Flood Insurance Program.
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association or any other entity, including Federal, State and local
governments and agencies.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least fifty-one percent (51%) of the
actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground.
PROGRAM DEFICIENCY — A defect in a community's floodplain
management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs
effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REMEDY A VIOLATION — To bring the structure or other development
into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations or,
if this is not possible, to reduce the impact of its non-compliance. Ways
that impact may be reduced include protecting the structure or other
affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement
provisions of this Chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations
1. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
2.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
3.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
4.
Section
415.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.010
100:1023
or reducing Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other
development.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two (2) separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, equals or exceeds twentyfive
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
RISK PREMIUM RATES — Those rates established by the Administrator
pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are
undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307
of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted
actuarial principles. "Risk premium rates" include provisions for operating
costs and allowances.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — An area having special flood hazards and
shown on a FIRM as Zones (unnumbered or numbered) A, AO, AE or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION (FOR OTHER THAN NEW CONSTRUCTION
OR SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS UNDER THE COAST BARRIER
RESOURCES ACT (PUB. L. 97-348)) — Includes substantial improvement
and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days
of the permit date. The "actual start" means either placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, construction of columns or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure.
STATE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — Agency of the State
Government or other office designated by the Governor of the State or by
State Statute to assist in the implementation of the NFIP in that State, also
known as SEMA.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home. "Structure" for insurance purposes, means a walled and roofed
building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home
on a permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a
building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does
not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such
construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are
within an enclosed building on the premises.
Section
415.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
415.010
100:1024
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. The term includes repetitive loss
buildings (see definition). For the purposes of this definition, "repair" is
considered to occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences. The term
does not apply to:
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any combination of reconstruction,
alteration, or improvement to a building, taking place during a 10-year
period, in which the cumulative percentage of improvement equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the current market value of the building.
For the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building. This term includes structures, which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
done. The term does not apply to:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
Chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by
this Chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary
hardship. Flood insurance requirements remain in place for any varied use
or structure and cannot be varied by the community.
Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with
existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
1.
Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure, or
2.
3. Any improvement to a building.
Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with
existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
1.
Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure." Or
2.
Any building that has been damaged from any source or is categorized
as repetitive loss.
** Recommend development of written and adopted policy and
procedure.
3.
Section
415.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.010
100:1025
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this Chapter
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified)
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal
riverine areas.
ZONE A — Areas subject to inundation by the 1-percent-annual-chance
flood event generally determined using approximate methodologies.
Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no Base
Flood Elevations (BFEs) or flood depths are shown. Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements and floodplain management standards
apply.
ZONE AE — Areas subject to inundation by the 1-percent-annual-chance
flood event determined by detailed methods. Base Flood Elevations (BFEs)
are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements and
floodplain management standards apply.
Section
415.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
415.010
100:1026
ARTICLE II
Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Method of Reducing
Flood Losses
Section 415.020. Authorization. [R.O. 2007 §415.020; Ord. No. 4974
§1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206 §2, 4-28-2016]
The Legislature of the State of Missouri has in Section 89.020, RSMo,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of O'Fallon, Missouri,
does ordain as follows.
Section 415.030. Findings of Fact. [R.O. 2007 §415.030; Ord. No.
4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6170 §1, 1-14-2016; Ord. No. 6206 §3,
4-28-2016]
A. Flood Losses Resulting From Periodic Inundation. The special flood
hazard areas of certain areas in the City of O'Fallon are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
B. General Causes Of The Flood Losses. These flood losses are caused by
the cumulative effect of urbanization of watersheds and obstructions in
floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the
occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to others which are inadequately elevated, flood proofed or
otherwise protected from flood damages.
C. Methods Used To Analyze Flood Hazards. The Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) that is the basis of this Chapter uses a standard engineering
method of analyzing flood hazards which consist of a series of
interrelated steps.
1. Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering
calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as
its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated and the
depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this Chapter is
representative of large floods which are characteristics of what can
be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this
Chapter. It is in the general order of a flood which could be
expected to have a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any
one (1) year as delineated on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency's FIS (Flood Insurance Study) and illustrative materials
dated January 20, 2016, as amended, and any future revisions
thereto.
Section
415.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.030
100:1027
Section 415.040. Purpose. [R.O. 2007 §415.040; Ord. No. 4974 §1,
3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206 §4, 4-28-2016]
Section 415.050. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [R.O. 2007
§415.050; Ord. No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006]
2. Calculations of water surface profiles are based on a standard
hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream
channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood.
3. Computation of a floodway required to convey this flood without
increasing flood heights more than one (1) foot at any point.
4. Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no
development is permitted that would cause any increase in flood
height.
5. Delineation of flood fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway
encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the base
flood.
A. It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses described in
Article II, Section 415.030(A); to establish or maintain the community's
eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 59.22(a)(3);
and to meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d) by applying the
provisions of this Chapter to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood
heights or velocities;
2. Requires uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that
serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of
initial construction, and;
3. Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the
intended development purposes due to the flood hazard.
A. In order to accomplish its purpose, this Chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
1. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water or erosion or to flood heights or
velocities.
2. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction.
Section
415.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
415.050
100:1028
3. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters.
4. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase erosion or flood damage.
5. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodway waters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.
Section
415.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.050
100:1029

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
Section 415.060. Lands To Which This Chapter Applies. [R.O. 2007
§415.060; Ord. No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6170 §2,
1-14-2016]
This Chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, identified as numbered and unnumbered A Zones and AE
Zones, on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) for St. Charles County on
map panels 29183C0210G, 29183C0215G, 29183C0220G, 29183C0230G,
29183C0235G, 29183C0237G, 29183C0239G, 29183C0240G,
29183C0241G, 29183C0242G, 29183C0243G, 29183C0405G,
29183C0410G, 29183C0430G, and 29183C0435G dated January 20, 2016,
as amended, and any future revisions thereto. In all areas covered by this
Chapter, no development shall be permitted except through the issuance
of a floodplain development permit, granted by the City Council or its
duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as
the City Council or the designated representative may reasonably impose
for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the
inhabitants of the community, and as specifically noted in Article IV.
Section 415.070. Basis For Establishing The Areas of Special Flood
Hazard. [R.O. 2007 §415.070; Ord. No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No.
6206 §5, 4-28-2016]
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency through a scientific and engineering report entitled
"The Flood Insurance Study for the City of O'Fallon, Missouri" dated January
20, 2016, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and any revision
thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
Chapter.
Section 415.080. Establishment of A Floodplain Development
Permit. [R.O. 2007 §415.080; Ord. No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No.
6206 §6, 4-28-2016]
A floodplain development permit shall be required for all proposed
construction or other development, including the placement of
manufactured homes, in the areas described in Section 415.060. No person,
firm, corporation or unit of government shall initiate any development
or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first
obtaining a separate floodplain development permit for each structure or
other development.
Section 415.090. Compliance. [R.O. 2007 §415.090; Ord. No. 4974
§1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206 §7, 4-28-2016]
No development located within the special flood hazard areas of this
community shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered
Section
415.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.090
100:1031
without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other
applicable regulations.
Section 415.100. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [R.O. 2007
§415.100; Ord. No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206 §8,
4-28-2016]
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail. All
other ordinances inconsistent with this Chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
Section 415.110. Interpretation. [R.O. 2007 §415.110; Ord. No.
4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206 §9, 4-28-2016]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall
be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor
of the governing body, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by State statutes.
Section 415.120. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [R.O. 2007
§415.120; Ord. No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206 §10,
4-28-2016]
The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering methods of study. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes,
such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Chapter
does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of O'Fallon
or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
Section
415.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
415.120
100:1032
ARTICLE IV
Administration
Section 415.130. Designation of The Local Administrator. [R.O.
2007 §415.130; Ord. No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206 §11,
4-28-2016]
The City of O'Fallon Plan Reviewer is hereby designated as the Floodplain
Administrator under this Chapter.
Section 415.140. Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain
Administrator. [R.O. 2007 §415.140; Ord. No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006;
Ord. No. 6206 §12, 4-28-2016120]
A. Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited
to:
1. Review all floodplain development applications to assure that sites
are reasonably safe from flooding and that the permit requirements
of the Chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review applications for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or
local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Notify adjacent communities and the Missouri State Emergency
Management Agency (SEMA) prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
4. Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished and shall be maintained within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse.
5. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the lowest floor (including the basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures.
6. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
to which the new or substantially improved structures have been
flood proofed.
7. When flood proofing is utilized for a particular non-residential
structure, provide certification from a registered professional
engineer or architect.
8. In order to administer the provisions of Article V where the base
flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
120. Editor’s Note: Section 12 of Ord. No. 6206 also changed the title of this Section from
“Duties and Responsibilities of the City Council” to “Duties and Responsibilities of the
Floodplain Administrator.”
Section
415.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.140
100:1033
Section 415.150. Establishment of A Floodplain Development
Permit. [R.O. 2007 §415.150; Ord. No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No.
6206 §13, 4-28-2016]
Section 415.160. Application For Floodplain Development Permit.
[R.O. 2007 §415.160; Ord. No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206
§14, 4-28-2016]
Section 415.070 for criteria for new construction, substantial
improvements or other development in Zone A where base flood
elevations have not been determined, the City Council or their
designee shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from Federal, State or other
sources.
9. Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications.
A. A floodplain development permit shall be obtained before construction
or development begins within any area of special flood hazard
established in Article III, Section 415.070. No person, firm or
corporation or unit of government shall initiate any development or
substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first
obtaining a separate permit for each development as defined in Section
415.010. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made
on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include,
but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures.
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential
structure is to be flood proofed.
3. Provide certification from a registered, professional engineer or
architect that the non-residential flood proofed structure will meet
the flood proofing criteria in Article V, Section 415.190(A)(2).
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file
an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every
floodplain development permit application shall:
1. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block and tract, house and street address or similar description
that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed
structure or work;
Section
415.140
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
415.160
100:1034
2. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain
development permit;
3. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
4. Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market
value of the improvement;
5. Specify whether development is located in designated flood fringe
or floodway;
6. Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the
proposed development;
7. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Plan Reviewer;
8. Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed
construction; and
9. Be signed by the permittee or his/her authorized agent who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
Section
415.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.160
100:1035

ARTICLE V
Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
Section 415.170. General Standards. [R.O. 2007 §415.170; Ord. No.
4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206 §15, 4-28-2016]
A. In all areas of special flood hazards (Zones A, AE,) or areas that have
had fill placed to remove it from the special flood hazard area, the
following provisions are required:
1. No permit for floodplain development shall be granted for new
construction, substantial-improvements, and other improvements,
including the placement of manufactured homes, within any
numbered or unnumbered A Zones and AE Zones, unless the
conditions of this Section are satisfied.
2. All new construction, including manufactured homes and
substantial improvements, shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
3. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
4. All new construction and substantial improvements shall have
adequate drainage provided and shall be constructed by methods
and practices that minimize flood damage.
5. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and airconditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
6. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
7. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharged from the systems into floodwaters.
8. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
9. The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding
buoyant, flammable, and explosive or could be injurious to human,
animal or plant life is prohibited.
10. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent
flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time
available after flood warning.
Section
415.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.170
100:1037
11. Until a floodway has been designated, no development, including
landfill, may be permitted within Zones A and AE on the City's
FIRM unless the applicant for the land use has demonstrated that
the proposed use, when combined with all other existing and
reasonable anticipated uses, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the one-hundred-year flood as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Study incorporated by reference, Article III,
Section 415.070.
12. All areas identified as unnumbered A Zones on the FIRM are
subject to inundation of the 100-year flood; however, the base flood
elevation is not provided. Development within unnumbered A
Zones is subject to all provisions of this Chapter. If Flood Insurance
Study data is not available, the developer shall supply the
community with and the community shall review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available
from Federal, State, or other sources.
13. All proposals for development, including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivisions (if the development is
five (5) acres or more, or fifty (50) lots or more) must depict the
base flood elevation data on the plan.
B. Hazardous Materials.
1. All hazardous material storage and handling sites shall be located
out of the floodplain.
C. Cumulative Improvement. A structure may be improved (remodeled or
enlarged) without conforming to current requirements for elevation so
long as the cumulative value of all work done within the last five
calendar years does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the structure's
current market value. If the cumulative value of the improvement
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the structure's current market value, the
structure must be brought into compliance with Article V, Section
415.190 which requires elevation of residential structures to or above
the base flood elevation or the elevation/flood proofing of nonresidential
structures to or above the base flood elevation.
D. Non-Conforming Use. A structure, or the use of a structure or premises
that was lawful before the passage or amendment of the ordinance, but
which is not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, may be
continued subject to the following conditions:
1. If such structure, use, or utility service is discontinued for twelve
(12) consecutive months, any future use of the building shall
conform to this ordinance.
2. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than
fifty percent (50%) of the pre-damaged market value of the
structure. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration
Section
415.170
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
415.170
100:1038
Section 415.180. Standards For Subdivision Proposals. [R.O. 2007
§415.180; Ord. No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006]
Section 415.190. Specific Standards. [R.O. 2007 §415.190; Ord. No.
4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206 §16, 4-28-2016]
to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, building,
safety codes, regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure
listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State
Inventory of Historic Places, or local inventory of historic places
upon determination.
E. Critical Facilities.
1. All new or substantially improved critical nonresidential facilities
including, but not limited, to governmental buildings, police
stations, fire stations, hospitals, orphanages, penal institutions,
communication centers, water and sewer pumping stations, water
and sewer treatment facilities, transportation maintenance
facilities, places of public assembly, emergency aviation facilities,
and schools shall be elevated above the 500-year flood level or
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be flood
proofed so that below the 500-flood level the structure is water
tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water
and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
standards of this Subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall
be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations.
2. All critical facilities shall have access routes that are above the
elevation of the 500-flood.
A. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments,
including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be consistent
with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
C. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including proposals for manufactured
home parks and subdivisions.
A. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in Article III, Section 415.070 or Article IV,
Section 415.140(8) (Zones A and AE) or areas that have had fill placed
Section
415.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.190
100:1039
to remove it from the special flood hazard area, the following provisions
are required:
1. Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to two (2) feet or more above
the base flood elevation.
2. Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to two (2) feet or more above the base flood elevation or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be flood
proofed so that below such a level the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
standards of this Subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall
be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in Section
415.140(A)(7).
3. Requirements for all new construction and substantial
improvements. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor used
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area
other than a basement, that are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria: a minimum of two (2) openings having
a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding be provided; and the
bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwater.
4. Manufactured homes.
a. All manufactured homes to be placed within all unnumbered
and numbered A zones and AE zones, on the community's
FIRM shall be required to be installed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this
requirement, manufactured homes shall be elevated and
anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Manufactured homes must be anchored in accordance with
State and local building codes and FEMA guidelines. In the
event that over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used,
the following specific requirements (or equivalent) shall be
met:
Section
415.190
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
415.190
100:1040
Section 415.200. Floodways. [R.O. 2007 §415.200; Ord. No. 4974 §1,
3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206 §17, 4-28-2016]
(1) Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four (4)
corners of the manufactured home with two (2) additional
ties per side at intermediate locations and manufactured
homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring one (1)
additional tie per side;
(2) Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with
five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points and
manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long
requiring four (4) additional ties per side;
(3) All components of the anchoring system be capable of
carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800)
pounds; and
(4) Any addition to the manufactured home is similarly
anchored.
b. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zones A and AE on the community's FIRM,
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is two (2) feet or more
above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the
provisions of this Section.
5. Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within
all unnumbered and numbered A Zones, and AE Zones on the
community's FIRM shall either:
a. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days; or
b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use*; or
c. Meet the permitting, elevating and the anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes of this Section.
* A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on
its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has
no permanently attached additions.
A. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Article III,
Section 415.070 are areas designated as floodways that are adopted
based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway
must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without
increasing the water surface elevation of the one percent (1%) chance
of flood in any given year. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous
Section
415.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.200
100:1041
Section 415.210. (Reserved)121
area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential
projectiles and erosion potential, the following provision shall apply:
1. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments unless
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is
provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
2. If Subsection (A)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of Article V.
3. In Zone A where base flood elevations have not been determined,
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any floodway data available
through Federal, State or other sources or Article V, Section
415.170(A)(12) of this Chapter in meeting the standards of this
Section. Provide a study establishing the limits of the ten-, fifty-,
one-hundred and five-hundred-year flood elevations and limits of
flood waters at those elevations.
121. Editor’s Note: Former Section 415.210, Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO and AH Zones),
enacted 3-30-2006 by §1 of Ord. No. 4974 was repealed 4-28-2016 by §18 of Ord. No. 6206.
Section
415.200
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
415.210
100:1042
ARTICLE VI
Amendments and Severability
Section 415.220. Amendments and Severability. [R.O. 2007
§415.220; Ord. No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206 §19,
4-28-2016]
A. Amendments. The regulation, restrictions and boundaries set forth in
this Chapter may from time to time be amended, supplemented,
changed or appealed to reflect any and all changes in the National
Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, provided, however, that no such
action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at
which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be
heard. At least twenty (20) days' notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be published in newspaper of general circulation in the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri. The regulations of this Chapter are in
compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program regulations as
published in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations. A copy of such
amendments will be provided to the Region VII office of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The regulations of this
Chapter are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) regulations.
B. Severability. If any Section, clause, provision or portion of this Chapter
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of appropriate
jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected thereby.
Section
415.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.220
100:1043

ARTICLE VII
Non-Conforming Use
Section 415.230. Non-Conforming Use. [R.O. 2007 §415.230; Ord.
No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006]
A. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the effective date of this Chapter, but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this Chapter, may be continued subject to the
following conditions:
1. No such use or substantial improvement of that use shall be
expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its non-conformity.
2. Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not
be entitled to continue as non-conforming uses.
B. If any non-conforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is equal to or
more than fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred except that if it is reconstructed in
conformity with the provisions of this Chapter. This limitation does not
include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing State or local
health, sanitary, building or safety codes or regulations or the cost of
any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or a State inventory of historic places.
Section
415.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.230
100:1045

ARTICLE VIII
Variance Procedure
Section 415.240. Variance Procedures. [R.O. 2007 §415.240; Ord.
No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206 §20, 4-28-2016]
A. The Board of Adjustment as established by the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from
the requirements of this Chapter.
B. Where an application for a floodplain development permit or request for
a variance from the floodplain management regulations is denied by the
Floodplain Administrator, the applicant may apply for such floodplain
development permit or variance directly to the Board of Adjustment, as
defined in Article VIII, Section 415.240(A).
The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this Chapter.
C. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court of St. Charles
County as provided in Section 89.110, RSMo.
D. In passing upon such application, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluation, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other Sections of this Chapter and:
1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
Section
415.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.240
100:1047
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and
streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purpose of this
Chapter, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this Chapter.
F. Conditions For Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2)
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
providing Subdivisions (2 — 6) below have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the
technical jurisdiction required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State inventory of historic places without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this Section.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. A showing of good and sufficient cause,
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
6. A community shall notify the applicant, in writing, over the
signature of a community official that:
Section
415.240
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
415.240
100:1048
a. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base
flood level will result in ($25.00) for one hundred dollars
($100.00) of insurance coverage; and
b. Such construction below the required freeboard or below the
base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such
notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required by this Section.
Section
415.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.240
100:1049

ARTICLE IX
Penalties For Violation
Section 415.250. Penalties For Violation. [R.O. 2007 §415.250; Ord.
No. 4974 §1, 3-30-2006; Ord. No. 6206 §21, 4-28-2016]
A. Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any
of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or special
exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates
this Chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or both,
and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
B. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of O'Fallon from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
Section
415.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.250
100:1051
Title IV
APPENDIXES
Appendix A. Listing Of Permitted And Conditionally Permitted Land
Uses. [Ord. No. 1161 App A, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 1281 §§2—3,
1-21-1986; Ord. No. 1308 §2, 4-15-1986; Ord. No. 1669 §2, 2-2-1989;
Ord. No. 1836 §2, 9-6-1990; Ord. No. 1844 §2, 10-4-1990; Ord. No.
1845 §2, 10-4-1990; Ord. No. 1853 §2, 11-1-1990; Ord. No. 1920 §2,
5-2-1991; Ord. No. 1966 §2, 9-5-1991; Ord. No. 2009 §2, 2-6-1992;
Ord. No. 3011 §2, 3-16-1993; Ord. No. 3012 §2, 3-16-1993; Ord. No.
3086 §2, 12-21-1993; Ord. No. 3258 §2, 7-18-1995; Ord. No. 3424 §5,
9-6-1996; Ord. No. 3440-A §2, 11-8-1996; Ord. No. 3604 §1,
11-17-1997; Ord. No. 3790 §2, 11-18-1998; Ord. No. 3929 §§1—2,
8-9-1999; Ord. No. 4786 §5, 3-30-2005; Ord. No. 4992 §§8—10,
4-14-2006; Ord. No. 5161 §§2—3, 4-12-2007; Ord. No. 5179 §3,
5-24-2007; Ord. No. 5401 §3, 12-26-2008; Ord. No. 5443 §3,
3-31-2009; Ord. No. 5608 §2, 7-22-2010; Ord. No. 5726 §4,
8-25-2011; Ord. No. 5831 §7, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 6171 §12,
1-14-2016; Ord. No. 6223 §4, 5-26-2016; Ord. No. 6375 § 1,
8-24-2017; Ord. No. 6421, 1-11-2018; Ord. No. 6531, 12-13-2018;
Ord. No. 6562, 3-28-2019]
The following Appendix is a listing of the conditional and permitted uses in
the Zoning Districts in the City of O'Fallon.
Note—In Appendix A, the letter P shall mean that the land use is outright
"permitted" in the corresponding Zoning District. The letter C shall mean
the land use is "conditionally permitted" in the corresponding Zoning
District (thus requiring a conditional use permit granted by the City
Council). The letter C-A shall mean the land use is "conditionally permitted"
in the corresponding Zoning District (where a conditional use permit
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission is required).
Note—In Appendix A, the abbreviations for the Zoning Districts are as
follows:
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-1A Single-Family Suburban Residential District
R-2 Two-Family Residential District
R-3 Garden Apartment District
R-4 Apartment House District
R-5 Mobile Home Park District
C-O Office District
C-1 Restricted Business District
C-2 General Business District
C-3 Highway Commercial District
Section
415.250
O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix A
100:1052
SC-1 Shopping Center District
I-1 Light Industrial District
I-2 Heavy Industrial District
AG Agricultural District
P-R Park and Recreation District
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
A
Aircrafts (including parts
and
equipment)—manufacturing
P
Aircrafts (including parts
and equipment)—retail/
wholesale
P P
Alcoholic beverages
(liquor, beer and wine),
excluding microbreweries
within restaurants and
do-it-yourself beer and
wine making
stores—manufacturing
C P
Alcoholic beverages
(liquor, beer and
wine)—retail
P P P P
Alcoholic beverages
(liquor, beer and
wine)—wholesale
C P P
Ambulance and fire
protection services
P C P P C P C P
Amphitheaters C C C C C C C C C C C
Amusement parks C
Animal adoption centers C C C
Animal shelters C C
Antique stores P P P P
Appliances (including
parts and
equipment)—manufacturing
P P
Appendix A GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix A
100:1053
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Appliances
(household)—repair
services
P P P P
Appliances (including
parts and
equipment)—retail
C P P P
Appliances (including
parts and
equipment)—wholesale
P P
Aquariums P P C
Arboretums and botanical
gardens
C
Arcades P P P
Arenas and fieldhouses C P P
Armed forces recruiting
centers
P P P
Artist galleries P P P P P C
Arts and crafts supply
stores
P P P
Asphalt and concrete
construction paving
services
C P P
Asphalt, concrete, and
other paving
mixtures—manufacturing
P
Athletic fields,
playgrounds, and tot lots
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Auction houses C C C
Auditoriums P P C
Automobile and other
motor vehicles (including
parts and
equipment)—manufacturing
P
Automobile and other
motor vehicles, parts and
equipment sales—retail
P P P P
Appendix A O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix A
100:1054
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Automobile and other
motor vehicles, parts and
equipment
sales—wholesale
P P
Automobile and other
motor vehicles, towing
services (storage limited
to 24 hours)
C C C C
Automobile and other
motor vehicles—fuel sales
(without repair services)
C C C C C C
Automobile and other
passenger motor
vehicles—rental services
P P P P
Automobile and other
motor vehicles—repair
services (with or without
fuel sales, excluding
drive-thru oil change
facilities)
C C P P
Automobile and other
motor vehicles—drivethru
oil change facilities
C P P P P
Automobile and other
motor vehicles—retail
(new and used)
C C C C
Automobile and other
motor
vehicles—wholesale (nonpublic)
C C
Automobile parking lots
and garages (commercial)
C C C C C C
B
Bait shops P P P C
Banks, savings and loans,
and credit unions
P P P P P C C
Banquet halls and party
centers
C C C
Appendix A GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix A
100:1055
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Bars, pubs, nightclubs,
and taverns
C-A
CA
C-A C-A
CA
Bed and breakfasts C C
Bicycles (including parts
and
equipment)—manufacturing
P P
Bicycles (including parts
and equipment)—retail
P P P P
Bicycles—rental services P P P P C
Biological
products—manufacturing
C C
Boats and other marine
vehicles (including parts
and
equipment)—manufacturing
P
Boats and other marine
vehicles, parts and
equipment sales—retail
P P P P
Boats and other marine
vehicles—rental services
P P C P C
Boats and other marine
vehicles—repair services
C C C C
Boats and other marine
vehicles—retail (new and
used)
C C C C
Boats and other marine
vehicles—wholesale
P P
Books, magazines,
newspapers, and similar
printed materials—retail
P P P P P
Books, magazines,
newspapers, and similar
printed
materials—wholesale
C P P
Bowling alleys P P P
Appendix A O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix A
100:1056
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Broadcast studios
(internet, radio, and
television)
C P P
Building and construction
materials—retail
P P C P P
Building and construction
materials—wholesale
P P
Bus (garages and
equipment maintenance)
P P
Bus (passenger
terminals)
C C C C
Business associations and
professional membership
organizations
P P P P P
C
Cable television
maintenance yard
P P
Camera and photographic
supplies—retail
P P P P
Campgrounds (including
recreational vehicle
parks)
C C
Carpet and floor covering
stores
P P P P
Car washes (excluding
semi-trailer trucks)
C P P C P P
Casinos C C
Cemeteries and
mausoleums (humans)
C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Cemeteries (pet) C
Ceramic, clay, glass,
gypsum, lime, porcelain,
and similar
products—manufacturing
C P
Charitable and welfare
services
P P P P
Appendix A GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix A
100:1057
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Check cashing, payday
loans and similar
facilities
C C
Chemicals and fertilizers
(agricultural and
industrial)—manufacturing
P
Chemicals and fertilizers
(agricultural and
industrial)—retail
C C
Chemicals and fertilizers
(agricultural and
industrial)—wholesale
P P
China, glassware, and
metalware—retail
P P P P
City facilities C C C C C C P P P P P P P P P
Civic, social, and
fraternal associations
P P P P
Civil defense and related
activities
P P P P P P P
Clothing and
apparel—retail
P P P P
Clothing and
apparel—wholesale
C P P
Commercial recreation
not elsewhere listed
(indoor)
C C C P P C C
Commercial recreation
not elsewhere listed
(outdoor)
C C C C C C C
Composting facility C C
Concrete
products—manufacturing
P
Construction, materials
handling, and mining
equipment—manufacturing
P
Appendix A O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix A
100:1058
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Construction, material
handling, and excavation
equipment—retail
C C P P
Construction, material
handling, and excavation
equipment—wholesale
P P
Contractor services
(carpentry, electrical,
general construction,
HVAC, plumbing, roofing,
and similar services)
C P P P
Convenience stores (with
fuel sales)
C C C C C C
Convenience stores
(without fuel sales)
C P P P P P
Convention centers C C C
Cosmetics, perfumes, and
other
toiletries—manufacturing
P
Cosmetic tattoo
establishment
P P P P P
Country clubs C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Curtains, drapery, and
upholstery—retail
P P P
D
Daycare center, adult C C C C C C C-A
CA
C-A
CA
C-A C
Daycare center, child C C C C C C C-A
CA
C-A
CA
C-A C
Delicatessens C P P P P
Department and home
improvement stores
P P P
Detective, private
investigative, and
protective services
P P P
Discount and variety
stores
P P P
Appendix A GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix A
100:1059
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Drug stores and
pharmacies
C P P P P
Dry cleaners and
laundering services
P P P P
Dwellings (boarding and
rooming homes)
C C
Dwellings (college and
university dormitories)
C C C C
Dwellings (convents and
rectories)
P P P P P P P P P P P P
Dwellings (in a nonresidential
zoned
structure)
C C C C
Dwellings (group homes) P P P P P P
Dwellings (living quarters
for caretakers or
custodians of
warehousing facilities)
C C
Dwellings (mobile homes
and mobile home parks)
P
Dwellings (multi-family) P P
Dwellings (orphanages) C C
Dwellings (senior
community overlay
district)
C C C C C C C
Dwellings (single-family
attached)
P P P
Dwellings (single-family
detached)
P P P P P P
Dwellings (fraternity and
sorority homes—off
campus)
C C C C C C C
Dwellings (fraternity and
sorority homes—on
campus)
C C C C
Dwellings (two-family) P P P
Appendix A O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix A
100:1060
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
E
Electric generation plants C C C
Electric utility
maintenance yards
C P C
Electricity regulating
substations
C C C C C C C C P P P P P C
Electrometallurgical
products and
processing—manufacturing
P P
Electronic apparatus and
components—manufacturing
P P
Electronic apparatus and
components—retail
C P P P
Electronic apparatus and
components—wholesale
C P P
Electronic entertainment
and communication
products (including parts
and
equipment)—manufacturing
P P
Electronic entertainment
and communication
products—repair
C P P P
Electronic entertainment
and communication
products (including parts
and equipment)—retail
P P P
Electronic entertainment
and communication
products (including parts
and
equipment)—wholesale
P P
Engines and
turbines—manufacturing
P
Equipment rental and
leasing services
(including moving vans,
trailers, and trucks)
C C C C C
Appendix A GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix A
100:1061
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Exhibition halls P P P C C C C
Extended stay facilities C C
Exterminating and
disinfecting services
P P P P P
F
Fairgrounds C C C C C
Farmers markets C C C P
Farm machinery and
equipment—manufacturing
P
Farm machinery and
equipment—retail
P C C P P
Farm machinery and
equipment—wholesale
P P
Farm supplies (including
feeds, grains, and
hay)—retail
P P C P P C
Farms (grain crops, fiber
crops, fodder and pasture
crops, fruits, sod,
tobacco, vegetables,
nursery stock,
commercial forestry)
P
Farms (bees, dairy,
poultry, fish, livestock,
worms)
P
Farms (pick-your-own
fruits, vegetables, trees,
etc.)
P
Farms (roadside stands) C C C C P
Feed lots and feed yards P
Firing ranges, indoor
(firearms, archery,
paintball)
C C C
Firing ranges, outdoor
(firearms, archery,
paintball)
C
Appendix A O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix A
100:1062
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Flea markets (indoor and
outdoor)
C C C C C
Florists P P P P P
Food and beverage
products (excluding
alcoholic beverages) for
human consumption
(excludes bakeries, coffee
shops, restaurants, and
similar establishments)
—manufacturing
C P
Food and beverage
products (excluding
alcoholic beverages) for
human consumption
(excludes bakeries, coffee
shops,
restaurants)—wholesale
C C P P
Funeral homes,
mortuaries, and
crematoriums
P P C
Furniture and home/
office
furnishings—manufacturing
P P
Furniture and home/
office furnishings—repair
P P P
Furniture and home/
office furnishings—retail
C P P P
Furniture and home/
office
furnishings—wholesale
P P
G
Garden centers,
greenhouses
(commercial) and
nurseries
P P P P P P P P
General stores and retail
trade not elsewhere listed
P P P P P C
Appendix A GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix A
100:1063
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Gift, novelty, and souvenir
stores
C P P P P
Golf courses and golf
driving ranges (outdoors)
C C C C C C C P
Golf (miniature) P P C C
Grocery stores P P P P
Grooming (pet) P P P
Gun shops and gunsmiths C C C C C C
H
Hardware stores P P P P
Health and fitness clubs P P P P P P
Heating, ventilation,
cooling, and plumbing
equipment (including
parts and
supplies)—manufacturing
P P
Heating, ventilation,
cooling, and plumbing
equipment (including
parts and
supplies)—retail
P P P
Heating, ventilation,
cooling, and plumbing
equipment (including
parts and
supplies)—wholesale
P P
Heliport pads C C C C C C
Historic monuments and
sites
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Hobby stores P P P P
Hospitals C P P C
Hotels and motels C C
Hunting and fishing clubs P
I
Ice cream and frozen
desserts—retail
P P P P P
Appendix A O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix A
100:1064
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Ice skating and roller
skating rinks (indoor)
P P P C C
Impound yards (storage
over 24 hours)
C
Industrial and
commercial machinery
(including parts and
equipment)—manufacturing
P
Industrial and
commercial machinery
(including parts and
equipment)—wholesale
C P P
J
Janitorial and cleaning
services
C P P P P P
Jewelry, watches, and
clocks—manufacturing
P P
Jewelry, watches, and
clocks (including
repair)—retail
P P P P
K
Kennels (boarding,
breeding)
C C C C C-A
L
Labor unions and similar
labor organizations
P P P P P P
Landscape contracting
services
P P P
Landscape nurseries and
garden supply stores
P P P P C
Laundromats P P P P
Laundry pickup and
delivery services
(clothing, diapers, linen,
and similar services)
C P P P
Lawn care services P P
Appendix A GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix A
100:1065
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Libraries C C C C C P P P P P P
Liquified petroleum gas
and other fuel oils—retail
C P P P
Liquified petroleum gas
and other fuel
oils—wholesale
P P
Locksmiths P P P P
Logging camps and
logging contractors
C
Lumber yards, building
material yards, and
sawmills
C P C
M
Machine
shop—manufacturing
P P
Mail order facilities P P P P
Manufactured and mobile
homes—manufacturing
P
Manufactured and mobile
homes (including parts
and equipment)—retail
C C
Marijuana cultivation
facility (indoor only)
P P
Medical marijuana
dispensary facility
P P
Medical marijuanainfused
products
manufacturing facility
P P
Medical marijuana
testing facility
P P
Martial arts studios P P P P P
Metals and alloys
(casting, drawing,
extrusion, fabricating,
refining, rolling, smelting,
stamping, and similar
operations)—manufacturing
P
Appendix A O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix A
100:1066
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Medical devices,
equipment, and supply
stores
C P P P P
Medical instruments and
equipment (including
parts and
supplies)—manufacturing
P P
Metals and
alloys—wholesale
P
Microbreweries within
restaurants and do-ityourself
beer and wine
making stores
C-A
CA
C-A
CA
C-A C-A
Military administration,
command, and
communication centers
C C C C C C C C
Military training bases
and defense installations
C C
Mining or quarrying
(ceramic, chemicals, clay,
coal, fertilizers, gravel,
metals, minerals, sand,
stone, or other earth
materials and related
services and activities)
C
Monuments—retail P P P
Motor freight terminals
(including garages and
equipment maintenance)
C C P P
Motion pictures
distribution services
P P P P P P
Motion pictures
production studios
P P P
Moving companies P P
Appendix A GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix A
100:1067
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Munitions and explosives
(ammunition, explosives,
explosive devices, guns,
military vehicles
equipped with weaponry,
small arms, rifles,
shotguns, and similar
munitions used for either
hunting, military, police,
or self-defense
applications)—manufacturing
C
Museums P C P P P C P
Musical instruments
(including parts and
supplies)—manufacturing
P P
Musical instruments
(including parts and
supplies)—retail
P P P P
N
Natural gas (bulk stations
and
terminals)—wholesale
C C
Natural gas (pipeline
rights-of-way)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Natural gas (pressure
control stations)
C C C C C C C C C C C C P C
Natural gas (storage and
distribution points)
C
Natural gas (utility and
maintenance yards)
C C
Non-metallic mineral
products—manufacturing
P
Nursing, convalescent,
and rest homes (not
within a senior
community overlay
district)
C C C
O
Appendix A O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix A
100:1068
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Office equipment and
business
machines—manufacturing
P P
Office equipment and
business
machines—repair
C P P P
Office equipment and
business machines—retail
P P P
Office equipment and
business
machines—wholesale
P P
Offices—medical services P P P P P
Offices—professional
services
P P P P P P P
P
Paints, varnishes,
lacquers, enamels, and
similar
products—manufacturing
P
Paper (cardboard, die-cut
paper, paperboard,
pulp)—manufacturing
P
Paper
products—manufacturing
P P
Paper
products—wholesale
C P P
Park and ride (commuter)
lots
P P P
Parks (public) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Pawnshops C C C
Personal care services
(health spas, tanning
beds, massage services
license by State of
Missouri, barber and
beauty shops and similar
uses)
P P P P P
Appendix A GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix A
100:1069
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Petroleum and other
hazardous liquids (bulk
petroleum stations and
terminals)—wholesale
C C
Petroleum and other
hazardous liquids
(pipeline rights-of-way)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Pet food manufacturing,
excluding rendering
C
Pet stores C P P P
Pharmaceuticals—
celmanufacturing
P P
Photocopying and
printing services
P P P P P
Photoengraving C P P
Photofinishing services P P P P P P P
Photographic equipment
(including parts and
supplies)—manufacturing
P P
Photographic equipment
(including parts and
supplies)—retail
P P P P
Photography studios P P P P P
Plastic, rubber, and
similar
products—manufacturing
C P
Pool and billiard halls C C C C C
Post offices and private
postal services
P P P P P P
Printing and publishing
(books, newspapers,
magazines, and similar
printed products)
P P P P
Private clubs C C C
Q
R
Appendix A O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix A
100:1070
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Racetracks and
courses—motorized
vehicles
C C C C
Radio and television
transmitting stations and
relay towers
C C C C C C C C C
Railroads (equipment
manufacturing,
equipment and
maintenance yards,
switching yards)
P
Railroads (freight
terminals)
P P
Railroads (passenger
terminals)
C C C C C C P P P P P P P C C
Railroads (right-of-way) C C C C C C P P P P P P P C C
Recording studios P P C P P
Recreational vehicles and
equipment—manufacturing
C P
Recreational vehicles and
equipment—retail
C C C C
Recreation centers C P P P P C P
Recycling centers C C C C
Religious places of
worship (churches,
temples, synagogues,
mosques)
C C C C C C P C P P P C C C
Research, development,
and testing services
C P P P P P
Resorts C C
Restaurants, coffee
shops, bakeries, and
similar dining
establishments with
drive-thru windows
C C C C C C
Appendix A GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix A
100:1071
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Restaurants, coffee
shops, bakeries, and
similar dining
establishments without
drive-thru windows
P P P P P P
Restaurants, coffee
shops, bakeries and
similar dining
establishments (without
drive-thru windows)
which sell or serve
alcoholic beverages by
the drink
C-A
CA
C-A
CA
C-A C-A
Restaurants, coffee
shops, bakeries and
similar dining
establishments (without
drive-thru windows)
which do not sell or serve
alcoholic beverages by
the drink
P P P P P P
Riding stables P C
Road maintenance yards P P
S
Scientific research,
engineering, and
laboratory instruments
and equipment (including
parts and
supplies)—manufacturing
P P
Schools (colleges and
universities)
C C C C
Schools (athletic, trade
and vocational)
P P C P P
Schools, private and
public
C C C C C C P P
Secondhand merchandise
(including
consignment)—retail
C P P P
Appendix A O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix A
100:1072
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Sewage pressure control
stations
C C C C C C C C C C C P P C C
Sewage sludge drying
beds and holding ponds
C C C C
Sewage treatment
facilities (not membrane
bioreactors)
C C C C
Sewage treatment
facilities (membrane
bioreactors)
C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Sexually-oriented
business
C
Signs and advertising
displays—manufacturing
C C P P
Small engine repair P P P P
Soaps, detergents, and
other cleaning, polishing,
and sanitation
products—manufacturing
P
Solid waste transfer
stations
C C
Sporting goods and
toys—manufacturing
P P
Sporting goods stores P P P P
Stadiums C C C C C
Steel works, blast
furnaces, and rolling of
ferrous metals
C
Stone
products—manufacturing
P
Storage, indoors (mini
and self-storage)
C P P
Storage yards
(commercial), outdoors
C C
Substance abuse facility C C
Appendix A GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix A
100:1073
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Synthetic resins,
synthetic rubber, elastic
materials, synthetic and
other man-made
fibers—manufacturing
P
T
Tailoring, garment, shoe,
and upholstery repair
P P P P
Tattoo and body piercing
establishments
C
Taxicab, limousine, and
car service dispatch
P P P P
Taxidermists P P
Telephone (business
office)
P C P P P P
Telephone (exchange
stations)
C C C C C C P P P P P P P
Telephone (maintenance
yards)
P P
Textile materials (plant,
mineral, and
synthetic)—manufacturing
P
Textile
materials—wholesale
P P
Textile material products
(apparel, carpeting,
curtains, draperies,
upholstery, and similar
products)—manufacturing
P P
Theaters, motion pictures
(indoor)
P P P
Theaters, motion pictures
(outdoors)
C
Theaters, performing arts
(indoors)
P C P P P C
Appendix A O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix A
100:1074
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Tobacco products
(chewing tobacco, cigars,
cigarettes, pipe tobacco,
snuff, and similar
products)—manufacturing
P P
Tobacco products
(chewing tobacco, cigars,
cigarettes, pipe tobacco,
snuff, and similar
products)—retail
P P P P
Toy stores P P P
Truck (semi-trailer)
washes
C P P P
Truck stops C C C
U
V
Vending machine
operators—repair,
distribution and
warehousing
P P
Veterinarian clinics and
animal hospitals
C C P P C C P
Video game arcades P P P
W
Warehousing and storage
of farm products
(excluding stock yard
products)
P P C
Warehousing and storage
of hazardous products
C
Warehousing and storage
of household goods and
non-hazardous products
(including refrigerated
warehousing)
P P
Waste transfer stations C
Water storage C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Appendix A GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix A
100:1075
LAND USE CATEGORY
ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USE (P) OR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USE (C) OR
(C-A)
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 SC-1 I-1 I-2 AG P-R
Water treatment plants C C C C
Water utility maintenance
yards
P P C C
Water well drilling
services
P P
Welding (as primary
operation)
P P
Wholesaling (storage and
distribution)
P P
Wineries (including the
manufacturing and sale
of wine)
C
Wireless
telecommunication
facilities (that do not
include new or modified
wireless
telecommunication
support structures)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Wireless
telecommunication
facilities (that include
new or modified wireless
telecommunication
support structures)
C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Wood products (building
materials, containers,
pulp goods, and similar
products)—manufacturing
P P
X
Y
Z
Zoos C C
Appendix B. Schedule Of Fees, Costs And Expenses. [Ord. No. 4931
§6, 12-14-2005; Ord. No. 5022 §3, 7-3-2006; Ord. No. 5216 §3,
8-23-2007; Ord. No. 5223 §3, 8-23-2007; Ord. No. 5726 §5,
8-25-2011; Ord. No. 5831 §8, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 5883 §10,
Appendix A O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix B
100:1076
5-24-2013; Ord. No. 6188 §1, 2-25-2016; Ord. No. 6421, 1-11-2018;
Ord. No. 6496, 9-13-2018; Ord. No. 6506, 10-11-2018; Ord. No.
6562, 3-28-2019]
SCHEDULE OF FEES, COSTS AND EXPENSES
Annexation No Fee
Area Plan--Mixed-Use Traditional
Development District
$300.00 + the cost of the legal
notice advertising the public
hearings + $0.62 mailing fee for the
notification of each adjacent
property owner within a 300 foot
radius of the subject site.
Area Plan--Planned Development $300.00 + the cost of the legal
notice advertising the public
hearings + $0.62 mailing fee for the
notification of each adjacent
property owner within a 300 foot
radius of the subject site.
Area Plan (Revised)--Planned Unit
Development
$300.00 + the cost of the legal
notice advertising the public
hearings + $0.62 mailing fee for the
notification of each adjacent
property owner within a 300 foot
radius of the subject site.
Boundary Adjustment or Condo Plat $100.00.
Business License (Marijuana-
Related Use)
$150.00 plus the $50.00 fee as
described in Section 605.030.
Certificate of Zoning Compliance $15.00.
Conditional Use Permit (CUP)
Conditional Use Permit (C-A)
$100.00 + the cost of $0.62 mailing
fee for the notification of each
adjacent property owner within 300
feet + $0.62 mailing fee for the
notification of each adjacent
property owner within 300 feet of
the final action.
Appendix B GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix B
100:1077
SCHEDULE OF FEES, COSTS AND EXPENSES
Construction Site Plans and
Inspections
Two percent (2%) of the estimated
cost of improvements reviewed by
the Planning and Engineering
Department.
"Improvements" shall include any
structural, material or physical
change incident to servicing or
furnishing facilities for the site such
as, but not limited to, the demolition
of structures, removal of trees and
other vegetative cover, grading, the
installation of street pavement,
curbs and gutters, driveway
approaches, sidewalks,
multipurpose trails, traffic signals
and/or other off-site roadway
improvements, water mains and
lines, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, culverts, bridges, detention
facilities, outfall structures, lakes,
waterways, canals, permanent
street monuments, street trees,
landscaping or any other
improvements required or deemed
necessary with the approved
construction site plan.
*For residential plans, the fee shall
be two percent (2%) of the
construction estimate less submittal
fee ($50.00/page for first submittal
only, capped at $4,500.00 on the
per-page fee).
*For commercial plans, the fee shall
be two percent (2%) of the
construction estimate less $200.00
submittal fee for first submittal only.
1st and 2nd review - no charge.
Each additional review - $200.00.
Review fees for subsequent
submittals may be waived if the
developer meets with City staff to
discuss comments.
Display House Plat $100.00.
Appendix B O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix B
100:1078
SCHEDULE OF FEES, COSTS AND EXPENSES
Escrow Renewal or Extension $100.00.
Excavation/Utility Permit $25.00 per lot/$50.00 per open cut/
hole (whichever is greater)
Inspection fee of $0.20/linear foot of
utility installed ($50.00 minimum).
Fence Permit $10.00.
Final Plan--Mixed-Use Traditional
Development District
$300.00 + the cost of the legal
notice advertising the public
hearings + $0.62 mailing fee for the
notification of each adjacent
property owner within a 300 foot
radius of the subject site.
Final Plan--Planned Development $300.00 + the cost of the legal
notice advertising the public
hearings + $0.62 mailing fee for the
notification of each adjacent
property owner within a 300 foot
radius of the subject site.
Final Plan--Planned Unit
Development
$300.00 + the cost of the legal
notice advertising the public
hearings + $0.62 mailing fee for the
notification of each adjacent
property owner within a 300 foot
radius of the subject site.
Flood Plain Information No fee.
Grading Plan (if separate from
construction site plans)
Two percent (2%) of the
construction estimate cost of
improvements less $200.00
submittal fee reviewed by the
Planning and Engineering
Department (see the definition of
"improvements" listed under
Construction Site Plans and
Inspections).
1st and 2nd review - no charge.
Each additional review - $200.00.
Home Occupation Permit $15.00.
Appendix B GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix B
100:1079
SCHEDULE OF FEES, COSTS AND EXPENSES
Inspections for Escrow or
Commercial Finals (Engineering)
1st and 2nd inspections per
category - no charge. Each
additional per category - $100.00.
For developer-requested inspections
that occur on Saturdays, Sundays
and City-adopted holidays - $40.00
per hour per inspector needed.
Photocopies $0.10 per page.
Plan Reviews (Engineering) 1st and 2nd review – no charge.
Each additional review – $200.00.
Review fees for subsequent
submittals may be waived if the
developer meets with City staff to
discuss comments.
Preconstruction Meeting Deposit $250.00. Said fee will be
reimbursed to the applicant upon
verification of attendance/
participation in the preconstruction
meeting.
Preliminary Plat $150.00 + the cost of the legal
notice advertising the public
hearings + $0.62 mailing fee for the
notification of each adjacent
property owner within a 300 foot
radius of the subject site.
Recording Fees Actual recording costs from the St.
Charles County Recorder of Deeds
office, including non-standard fees.
A 2.5% fee will be added on to the
straight recording costs per deed to
cover credit card convenience fees.
These costs shall be reimbursable to
the City from the owner or owner's
representative, or benefitted party,
after the City has recorded said
documents.
Record Plat $200.00 application fee.
First and second review - no
additional charge. Each additional
review - $50.00.
Sign Permit—Installed $35.00 + $1.00 per square foot of
sign area.
Appendix B O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix B
100:1080
SCHEDULE OF FEES, COSTS AND EXPENSES
Sign Permit--Temporary/Specialty
Display
Duration: 30 days or less ($35.00)
Sign Permit--Temporary/Specialty
Display
Duration: 31 to 60 days ($55.00)
Sign Permit--Temporary/Specialty
Display
Duration: 61 to 90 days ($75.00)
Sign Permit--Off-Premise Directional
(Annual)
$150.00 + $1.00 per square foot of
sign area (initial installation)
Sign Permit--Off-Premise Directional
(Annual Renewal)
$50.00
Sign Permit--Off-Premise Directional
(Weekend)
$150.00 (per calendar year)
Site Plan $150.00
Site Review Permit (Marijuana-
Related Use)
$150.00
Temporary Use Permit
Storage unit/bulk container
(residential use)on site less than
5 days
Free
Storage unit/bulk container
(residential use) on site more
than 5 days
$15.00
Extension of approved permit
beyond 30 days
$15.00
Storage unit/bulk container
(commercial/industrial use)
$50.00
Storage unit/bulk container
(developmental/construction
use)
$50.00
Tent $200.00 ($100.00 of which is
refundable upon request once the
tent has been removed).
Transfer of a Conditional Use Permit
Application
$50.00
Variance Request and Appeal of an
Administrative Decision
$100.00 + the cost of $0.62 mailing
fee for the notification of each
adjacent property owner.
Zoning Verification Letter $15.00.
Appendix B GENERAL PROVISIONS Appendix B
100:1081
SCHEDULE OF FEES, COSTS AND EXPENSES
Zoning District Classification
Amendment
$100.00 + the cost of the legal
notice advertising the public
hearings + $0.62 mailing fee for the
notification of each adjacent
property owner within a 300 foot
radius of the subject site.
Zoning District Classification Map $15.00 per copy (36" x 50")
$10.00 per copy (11" x 17")
Chapter 500
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Appendix B O'FALLON CITY CODE Appendix B
100:1082
ARTICLE I
Building Code
Section 500.010. Adoption of Building Code. [R.O. 2007 § 500.010;
Ord. No. 1886 § 2, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3529 § 2, 5-22-1997; Ord. No.
4090 § 2, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4795 § 1, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4815
§ 1, 5-6-2005; Ord. No. 4835 § 1, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5671 § 1,
2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 1, 9-8-2016]
That certain document, a copy which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, being marked and designated as
the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendix Chapters
F, H, I and K, as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of O'Fallon, in the State
of Missouri, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance
of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation
and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of said Building Code on file in the office of the City Clerk of the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri and hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this Article, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 500.020 of this Article.
Section 500.020. Additions, Insertions and Changes. [R.O. 2007
§ 500.030; Ord. No. 1886 § 6, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 1913 § 1, 4-4-1991;
Ord. No. 3529 § 6, 5-22-1997; Ord. No. 3550 § 2, 7-7-1997; Ord. No.
3551 § 3, 7-7-1997; Ord. No. 4090 § 6, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4092 § 2,
7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4795 § 2, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4835 § 2,
5-16-2005; Ord. No. 4926 § 2, 11-16-2005; Ord. No. 5065 § 1,
10-12-2006; Ord. No. 5087 § 1, 11-1-2006; Ord. No. 5671 § 1,
2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 1, 9-8-2016]
The following numbered subsections of the International Building Code,
2015 Edition, including Appendices F, H, I, and K, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., are hereby amended by additions,
insertions, deletions and changes so that such section and subsections read
as follows:
(CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRATION)
(SECTION 101 GENERAL)
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
Section
500.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.020
100:1083
101.4.90 Aquatic recreation facilities. The provisions of the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall apply to the
construction, alteration, movement, renovation, replacement, repair and
maintenance of aquatic recreation facilities, pools and spas. The pools and
spas covered by this code are either permanent or temporary, and shall be
only those that are designed and manufactured to be connected to a
circulation system and that are intended for swimming, bathing or
wading.
(SECTION 103 DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY)
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Department of Building
Safety is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known
as the Building Official.
103.2 Appointment. The Building Official shall be appointed by the chief
appointing authority of the jurisdiction.
(SECTION 105 PERMITS)
105.1 Required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent who intends to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy
of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair,
remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing
system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any
such work to be performed, shall first make application to the Building
Official and obtain the required permit.
[Note: For specific types of work that require a construction permit,
please see Section 105.7 of the Fire Prevention Code.]
105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit
requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for
any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this
code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not
be required for the following:
Building:
1. Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1,219 mm) in height
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall,
unless supporting a surcharge, impounding Class I, II or IIIA
liquids, or altering the channelized drainage of any drainage area
or lot.
2. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity is not
greater than 5,000 gallons (18 925 L) and the ratio of height to
diameter or width is not greater than 2:1.
3. Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm)
above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below
and which are not part of an accessible route.
4. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops,
tuckpointing, siding, and similar finish work.
Section
500.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.020
100:1084
5. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery.
6. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3
occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, are not
greater than 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and are installed entirely
above ground.
7. Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural
purposes, not including service systems.
8. Window awnings in Group R-3 and U occupancies, supported by
an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1,372
mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.
9. Non-fixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and
partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1,753 mm) in height.
10. Flag poles less than thirty-five (35) feet in height.
11. Replacement of doors and windows where the opening size is not
increased or decreased.
12. Reroofing of asphalt shingle roofs.
Electrical:
Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the
replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical
equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.
Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this code
shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television
transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply
and the installations of towers and antennas.
Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the
installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing
of electrical equipment or apparatus.
Gas:
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
Mechanical:
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Portable ventilation equipment.
3. Portable cooling unit.
4. Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment regulated by this code.
5. Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make
it unsafe.
6. Portable evaporative cooler.
Section
500.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.020
100:1085
7. Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (4.54
kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower
(0.75 kW) or less.
Plumbing:
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe,
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water,
soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes
necessary to remove and replace the same with new material,
such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be
obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes,
valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water
closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the
replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
3. Fixture replacement with similar fixtures where plumbing
connections are not relocated.
(SECTION 107 SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS)
107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construction
documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report and
other data shall be submitted as required by the Building Official with
each permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared by
a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the
jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special
conditions exist, the Building Official is authorized to require additional
construction documents to be prepared by a registered design
professional.
Exception:
The Building Official is authorized to waive the submission of construction
documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered
design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is
such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain
compliance with this code.
107.2 Construction documents. Construction documents shall be in
accordance with all subsections of 107.2.
107.2.90 Professionally prepared plans. Where required, all plans and
specifications shall be prepared, signed and sealed by an architect or
engineer licensed and registered in the State of Missouri to render this
service.
Exceptions:
The following exceptions are at the discretion of the Building Official:
1. Single-family dwelling plans prepared and designed for use by the
owner of the proposed structure and built for his/her exclusive
use and occupancy for a period of not less than one (1) year.
Section
500.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.020
100:1086
2. Miscellaneous residential structures such as room additions,
carports, garages, sheds, etc.
107.2.91 Elevations certified. Any building being erected or
constructed in the flood plain shall provide an elevation certificate by a
registered engineer or land surveyor, licensed in the State of Missouri,
before final approval of foundation.
(SECTION 109 FEES)
109.2 Schedule of permit fees. Fees related to administration of this
code shall be as set forth elsewhere in this Chapter of the Municipal Code.
109.2.90 Integrated permits. The Building Official, at his/her
discretion, may issue integrated building, plumbing, electrical and/or
mechanical permits which shall be as described in Section 109.2.90.
109.2.91 Integrated permit fees. The total integrated permit fee and
the portions applicable to the building, plumbing, electrical and/or
mechanical permits shall be as described in Section 109.2.90.
109.2.3 Applicant responsibility. Integrated permit applications shall
include the name, original signature and license number of the
appropriate licensed sub-contractor.
Exception:
Online permit applications where a licensed contractor is defined.
(SECTION 110 INSPECTIONS)
110.90 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner in
compliance with this code, in accordance with industry standards, and in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
(SECTION 113 MEANS OF APPEALS)
113.1 Application for appeal. Any applicant shall have the right to
appeal a decision of the Building Official to the Board of Adjustment.
Application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent
form of construction is to be used. The appellant shall have the burden to
prove that an equivalent form of construction complies with the intent of
the provisions of this code, and that the material, method, or work offered
is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in
this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and
safety.
113.1.90 Board of appeals. Whenever "Board of Appeals" is used in this
code, it shall mean Board of Adjustment.
(SECTION 114 VIOLATIONS)
Section
500.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.020
100:1087
114.2 Notice of violation. When the Building Official determines that a
violation of this code exists, other than a violation of a stop work order,
he/she shall immediately notify the violator. The notification shall be in
writing and shall be delivered to the violator or his/her legally authorized
representative or mailed 1st Class U.S. Mail to his/her last known address.
Any person having been notified that a violation, other than a violation of
a stop work order, exists and who fails to abate the violation within (10)
days after notification shall be subject to the penalties enumerated in
Section 114.4.
(SECTION 115 STOP WORK ORDER)
115.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who continues any work in or
about the structure after having been served with a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove said
violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to penalties as specified in
Section 114.4 of this code.
(CHAPTER 5 GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS)
(SECTION 506 BUILDING AREA)
506.1.90 Minimum residential dwelling unit areas. The minimum
residential dwelling unit area shall be in accordance with Section
500.030.
(CHAPTER 12 INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT)
(SECTION 1208 INTERIOR SPACE DIMENSIONS)
1208.90 Minimum residential dwelling unit areas. The minimum
residential dwelling unit area shall be in accordance with Section
500.030.
(CHAPTER 16 STRUCTURAL DESIGN)
(SECTION 1612 FLOOD LOADS)
1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard
areas, the applicable governing authority shall adopt a flood hazard map
and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum,
areas of special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in an engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study for the City of O'Fallon," dated January 20, 2016, as
amended or revised with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto. The
adopted flood hazard map supporting data are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be part of this decision.
(CHAPTER 29 PLUMBING SYSTEMS)
(SECTION 2902 MINIMUM PLUMBING FACILITIES)
2902.2 Separate facilities. Where plumbing fixtures are required,
separate facilities shall be provided for each sex.
Exceptions:
Section
500.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.020
100:1088
1. Separate facilities shall not be required for dwelling units and
sleeping units.
2. Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant
spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and
customers, of 15 or fewer.
3. Separate facilities shall not be required in mercantile occupancies
in which the maximum occupant load is 100 or fewer.
4. Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant
spaces functioning solely as exercise facilities with a square
footage less than 1,500 square feet.
(CHAPTER 31 SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION)
(SECTION 3107 SIGNS)
3107.1 General. Signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with this code and the Municipal Code of the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri.
(SECTION 3109 SWIMMING POOL ENCLOSURES AND SAFETY
DEVICES)
3109.1 General. Aquatic recreation facilities shall comply with the
Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
3109.2 Definition. Delete in its entirety.
3109.3 Public swimming pools. Delete in its entirety.
3109.4 Residential swimming pools. Delete in its entirety.
3109.4.1 Barrier height and clearances. Delete in its entirety.
3109.4.1.1 Openings. Delete in its entirety.
3109.4.1.2 Solid barrier surfaces. Delete in its entirety.
3109.4.1.3 Closely spaced horizontal members. Delete in its entirety.
3109.4.1.4 Widely spaced horizontal members. Delete in its entirety.
3109.4.1.5 Chain link dimensions. Delete in its entirety.
3109.4.1.6 Diagonal members. Delete in its entirety.
3109.4.1.7 Gates. Delete in its entirety.
3109.4.1.8 Dwelling wall as a barrier. Delete in its entirety.
3109.4.1.9 Pool structure as barrier. Delete in its entirety.
3109.4.2 Indoor swimming pools. Delete in its entirety.
3109.4.3 Prohibited locations. Delete in its entirety.
3109.5 Entrapment avoidance. Delete in its entirety.
(APPENDIX H SIGNS)
(SECTION H101 GENERAL)
H101 General. Delete in its entirety.
Section
500.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.020
100:1089
H101.2 Signs exempt from permits. Permits for signs shall comply
with the applicable provisions of the Sign Code of the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri.
(SECTION H101 DEFINITIONS)
H102.1 General. Delete in its entirety. [Refer to the Sign Code of the City
of O'Fallon, Missouri]
(SECTION H104 IDENTIFICATION)
H104.1 Identification. Delete in its entirety. [Refer to the Sign Code of
the City of O'Fallon, Missouri]
(SECTION H108 ANIMATED DEVICES)
H108.1 General. Delete in its entirety. [Refer to the Sign Code of the City
of O'Fallon, Missouri]
(SECTION H109 GROUND SIGNS)
H109.1 Height restrictions. Delete in its entirety. [Refer to the Sign
Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri]
H109.2 Required clearance. Delete in its entirety. [Refer to the Sign
Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri]
H109.3 Wood anchors and supports. Delete in its entirety. [Refer to
the Sign Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri]
(SECTION H112 PROJECTING SIGNS)
H112.1 General. Delete in its entirety. [Refer to the Sign Code of the City
of O'Fallon, Missouri]
H112.2 Attachment of supports. Delete in its entirety. [Refer to the
Sign Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri]
H112.3 Wall mounting details. Delete in its entirety. [Refer to the Sign
Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri]
H112.4 Height limitation. Delete in its entirety. [Refer to the Sign Code
of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri]
H112.5 Additional loads. Delete in its entirety. [Refer to the Sign Code
of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri]
Section 500.030. Minimum Square Feet. [R.O. 2007 § 500.040; Ord.
No. 3021 § 1, 5-6-1993; Ord. No. 3081 § 1, 11-16-1993; Ord. No.
5239.1 § 1, 10-25-2007; Ord. No. 5671 § 1, 2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250
§ 1, 9-8-2016]
Residential dwelling units, excluding the garage and basement, shall have a
minimum building area as defined below:
Unit Type
Minimum Square Feet Per
Dwelling Unit
Single-family 1,100 sq. ft. of floor area
Two-family 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Section
500.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.030
100:1090
Unit Type
Minimum Square Feet Per
Dwelling Unit
Multi-family and Townhouses with 1
bedroom
750
Multi-family and Townhouses with 2
or more bedrooms
850
Section 500.040. Saving Clause and Validity. [R.O. 2007 § 500.050;
Ord. No. 1886 § 8, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3529 § 7, 5-22-1997; Ord. No.
4090 §§ 7—8, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4795 §§ 4—5, 4-14-2005; Ord. No.
4835 §§ 4—5, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5671 § 1, 2-10-2011]
Section 500.050. Penalty. [R.O. 2007 § 500.060; Ord. No. 5671 § 1,
2-10-2011]
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Article or the code hereby adopted shall, upon conviction, for each offense
be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be punished by
imprisonment in jail not to exceed three (3) months, or be punished by
both fine and imprisonment. Each day's violation of, or refusal or neglect to
comply with, any provision of this Article or the code hereby adopted shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
A. Nothing in this Article or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this Article.
B. If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article. The City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, hereby declares that it would have passed this
Article, and each Section, Subsection, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more Sections, Subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section
500.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.050
100:1091

ARTICLE II
Property Maintenance Code
Section 500.060. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code. [R.O.
2007 § 500.070; Ord. No. 1884 § 2, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3531 § 2,
5-22-1997; Ord. No. 4096 § 2, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4801 § 1,
4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4821 § 1, 5-13-2005; Ord. No. 4841 § 1,
5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5669 § 1, 2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 2,
9-8-2016]
That certain document, a copy which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, being marked and designated as the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition including Appendix
A, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of O'Fallon, in the State
of Missouri, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance
of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation
and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Article, with the additions,
insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 500.070 of
this Article.
Section 500.070. Additions, Insertions and Changes. [R.O. 2007
§ 500.090; Ord. No. 1884 § 4, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3531 § 4,
5-22-1997; Ord. No. 4096 § 4, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4801 § 2,
4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4841 § 2, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5087 § 2,
11-1-2006; Ord. No. 5669 § 1, 2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 §2,
9-8-2016; Ord. No. 6250 § 1, 9-8-2016; Ord. No. 6497, 9-13-2018]
The following numbered subsections of the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendix A, as published by
the International Code Council, Inc., are hereby amended by additions,
insertions, deletions and changes so that such section and subsections read
as follows:
(CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRATION)
(SECTION 101 GENERAL)
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International
Property Maintenance Code of O'Fallon, hereinafter referred to as "this
code."
(SECTION 102 APPLICABILITY)
Section
500.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.070
100:1093
102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the International Building Code,
International Existing Building Code, International Energy Conservation
Code, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International
Mechanical Code, International Residential Code, International Plumbing
Code and NFPA 70. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel,
modify or set aside any provision of the Municipal Code, City of O'Fallon,
Missouri.
(SECTION 103 DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
INSPECTION)
103.1 General. Wherever the term "jurisdiction" is used, it is deemed to
mean the "City of O'Fallon, Missouri" and whenever the expression or
term "Code Official" is used, it is deemed to mean "Building Official or his/
her designee."
103.5 Fees. Fees related to administration of this code shall be as set
forth elsewhere in this Chapter of the Municipal Code.
(SECTION 111 MEANS OF APPEAL)
111.2 Application for appeal. For the purposes of this code, all appeals
shall be in accordance with the procedure established for the Building
Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
111.2 Appeals board. Delete in its entirety.
111.2.1 Alternate members. Delete in its entirety.
111.2.2 Chairman. Delete in its entirety.
111.2.3 Disqualification of member. Delete in its entirety.
111.2.4 Secretary. Delete in its entirety.
111.2.5 Compensation of members. Delete in its entirety.
111.4 Open hearing. Delete in its entirety.
111.4.1 Procedure. Delete in its entirety.
111.5 Postponed hearing. Delete in its entirety.
111.6 Board decision. Delete in its entirety.
111.6.1 Records and copies. Delete in its entirety.
111.6.2 Administration. Delete in its entirety.
111.7 Court review. Delete in its entirety.
111.8 Stays of enforcement. Delete in its entirety.
(SECTION 112 STOP WORK ORDER)
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be liable to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Section
500.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.070
100:1094
(SECTION 190 INSURANCE PROCEEDS)
(CHAPTER 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS)
(SECTION 302 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS)
302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. Sidewalks, walkways, stairs,
driveways, parking lots, private streets, parking spaces and similar areas
shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from
hazardous conditions.
302.4 Weeds. Refer to City of O'Fallon Municipal Code Section 220.010,
Nuisances Prohibited.
302.7 Accessory structures. Accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences, private signs, sheds, exterior storage structures, flag
poles and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
302.8 Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no
inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on
any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major
disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved
spray booth. [Refer to City of O'Fallon Municipal Code Section 220.010,
Nuisances Prohibited regarding derelict vehicles.]
Exception:
A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including
body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or
similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes.
302.9 Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly
damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or
building on any private or public property by placing thereon any
marking, carving or graffiti. [Refer to City of O'Fallon Municipal Code
Section 220.010, Nuisances Prohibited regarding graffiti.]
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an
approved state of maintenance and repair. Painting over graffiti shall be a
color to match or closely match the existing building.
(SECTION 303 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS)
303.2 Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing
water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely
surrounded by a fence or barrier not less than 48 inches (1,219 mm) in
height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier
away from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing
and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is not less than 54 inches
(1,372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be
located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates
shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when
released from an open position of 6 inches (152 mm) from the gatepost.
No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a
manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier.
Section
500.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.070
100:1095
Exceptions:
1. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F
1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section.
2. Where a pool with a chain link fence, a minimum of 42 inches in
height, was erected prior to April 5, 1999, the fence shall be
allowed to remain as an approved barrier.
(SECTION 304 EXTERIOR STRUCTURE)
304.2 Protective treatment. Exterior surfaces, including but not limited
to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition and free from
mold/algae. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods,
shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other
protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall
be eliminated and surfaces repainted. Siding and masonry joints, as well
as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows,
doors and skylights, shall be maintained weather resistant and water
tight. Metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit
such rust and corrosion, and surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be
stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains
shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for
stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
304.7 Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be: (1) sound, (2)
tight, and (3) not have defects that admit rain. Missing shingles shall be
replaced with similar roof covering. Roof drainage shall be adequate to
prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in
good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be
discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from January 1 to December
31, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation
of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any
areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be
supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per
inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control
shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception:
Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air
curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
(CHAPTER 6 MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS)
(SECTION 602 HEATING FACILITIES)
Section
500.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.070
100:1096
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either
expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply
heat during the period from January 1 to December 31 to maintain a
minimum temperature of 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms
and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum
room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating
system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in
Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30° F.
(-1° C.), a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) shall be
maintained.
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat during the period from January 1 to December 31 to
maintain a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) during the period the
spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
Section 500.075. Saving Clause and Validity. [R.O. 2007 § 500.100;
Ord. No. 1884 § 5, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3531 § 5, 5-22-1997; Ord. No.
4096 §§ 5—6, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4801 §§ 4—5, 4-14-2005; Ord. No.
4841 §§ 4—5, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5669 § 1, 2-10-2011)
A. Nothing in this Article or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending
in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause
or causes of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance
hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this Article.
B. If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article. The City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, hereby declares that it would have passed this
Article, and each Section, Subsection, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more Sections, Subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section
500.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.078
100:1097
Section 500.078. Penalty. [Ord. No. 5669 § 1, 2-10-2011; Ord. No.
6250 § 2, 9-8-2016]
A. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Article or the code hereby adopted shall, upon conviction, for each
offense be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be
punished by imprisonment in jail not to exceed three (3) months, or be
punished by both fine and imprisonment. Each day's violation of, or
refusal or neglect to comply with, any provision of this Article or the
code hereby adopted shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
B. However, any person, firm, or corporation violating Section 110 of the
code hereby adopted by failing to demolish or repair a dangerous
building within the time prescribed by order of the Building Official,
shall be subject to a fine and imprisonment in jail not to exceed three (3)
months or both a fine and imprisonment. Such fine may not exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), unless the owner of the property is not
also a resident of the property, then such fine may not exceed two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
Section
500.078
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.078
100:1098
ARTICLE III
Fire Code
Section 500.080. Adoption of Fire Code. [R.O. 2007 § 500.120; Ord.
No. 1880 § 2, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3534 § 2, 5-22-1997; Ord. No. 4093
§ 2, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4802 § 1, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4822 § 1,
5-13-2005; Ord. No. 4842 § 1, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5672 § 1,
2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 3, 9-8-2016; 122]
That certain document, a copy which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, being marked and designated as
the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendices B and F,
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Fire Code of the City of O'Fallon, in the State of Missouri, for
regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and
explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises has herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said Fire
Code on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri,
are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out
in this Article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in Section 500.090 of this Article.
Section 500.090. Additions, Insertions and Changes. [R.O. 2007
§ 500.140; Ord. No. 1880 § 4, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3534 § 4,
5-22-1997; Ord. No. 4093 § 4, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4802 §§ 2—3,
4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4842 §§ 2—3, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5672 §§ 1—2,
2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 3, 9-8-2016]
The following numbered subsections of the International Fire Code, 2015
Edition, including Appendices B and F, as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., are hereby amended by additions, insertions, deletions
and changes so that such section and subsections read as follows:
(CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRATION)
(SECTION 101 SCOPE AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS)
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
(SECTION 102 APPLICABILITY)
122. Editor’s Note: Section 3 also changed the title of Article III, from "Fire Prevention Code"
to "Fire Code" and this Section from "Fire Prevention Code Adopted" to "Adoption of Fire
Code."
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.090
100:1099
102.4 Application of building code. The design and construction of
new structures shall comply with the International Building Code or
International Residential Code based on the scope of the respective code.
Any alterations, additions, changes in use or changes in structures
required by this code shall comply with the International Existing Building
Code or International Residential Code based on the scope of the
respective code.
(SECTION 103 DEPARTMENT OF FIRE PREVENTION)
103.1 General. The department of fire prevention is established within
the jurisdiction under the direction of the fire code official. The function of
the department shall be the implementation, administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this code. For the purposes of this code,
the Building and Code Enforcement Division shall serve as the department
of fire prevention and the Building Official of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri
shall serve as the fire code official.
(SECTION 104 GENERAL AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES)
104.90 Rule-making authority. The fire code official shall have
authority as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general
welfare, to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to interpret and
implement the provisions of this code to secure the intent thereof and to
designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other
conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or
fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this code or of
violating accepted engineering practice involving public safety.
(SECTION 105 PERMITS)
105.3.3 Occupancy prohibited before approval: Except as specifically
provided for temporary occupancy listed in Chapter 1 in the adopted
Building Code, a building, structure or portion thereof shall not be used or
occupied in whole or in part until all fire protection devices and
equipment protecting the building, structure or portion to be occupied
have been tested and approved by the code official charged with enforcing
this code. All portions of the means of egress for the building, structure or
portion to be occupied shall be unobstructed and available for immediate
use.
105.4.1 Submittals. Construction documents and supporting data shall
be submitted, as required by the Building Official, with each application
for a permit and in such form and detail as required by the fire code
official. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered
design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in
which the project is to be constructed.
Exception:
The fire code official is authorized to waive the submission of construction
documents and supporting data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work
applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary
to obtain compliance with this code.
Section
500.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.090
100:1100
105.4.90 Professionally prepared plans. Where required, all plans and
specifications shall be prepared, signed and sealed by an architect or
engineer licensed and registered in the State of Missouri to render this
service.
105.7 Required construction permits. The fire code official is
authorized to issue construction permits for work as set forth in Sections
105.7.1 through 105.7.18. The term "construction permit" shall mean
building permit and shall follow the requirements of Section 105 of the
Building Code in addition to the requirements of this code.
(SECTION 106 INSPECTIONS)
106.90 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner in
compliance with this code, in accordance with industry standards, and in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
(SECTION 108 MEANS OF APPEAL)
108.1 Board of appeals established. For the purposes of this code, all
appeals shall be in accordance with the procedure established for the
Building Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
108.2 Limitations on authority. Delete in its entirety.
108.3 Qualifications. Delete in its entirety.
(SECTION 109 VIOLATIONS)
109.3 Notice of violation. When the Building Official determines that a
violation of this code exists, other than a stop work order, he/she shall
immediately notify the violator. The notification shall be in writing and
shall be delivered to the violator or his/her legally authorized
representative or mailed 1st Class U.S. Mail to his/her last known address.
Any person having been notified that a violation other than a stop work
order exists and who fails to abate the violation within ten (10) days after
notification shall be subject to the penalties enumerated in Section 109.3.
109.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates
any provisions of this code, or fails to comply with any of the requirements
thereof, or erects, constructs, alters or repairs a structure in violation of
an approved plan or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code or a previous
ordinance, or who shall continue any work in or about a structure after
having been served a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, or any
owner or tenant of a building or premises in which such violation shall
exist, shall upon conviction thereof be punishable by a fine of not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding
ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offence.
(SECTION 111 STOP WORK ORDER)
Section
500.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.090
100:1101
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who continues any work in or about
the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove said violation
or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to penalties as specified in Section
109.4 of this code.
(CHAPTER 11 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING
BUILDINGS)
(SECTION 1103 FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING
BUILDINGS)
1103.5.3 Group I-2 Condition 2. In addition to the requirements of
Section 1103.5.2, existing buildings of Group I-2 Condition 2 occupancy
shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The automatic sprinkler
system shall be installed as established by the local fire district and the
State of Missouri.
(CHAPTER 56 EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS)
(SECTION 5601 GENERAL)
5601.1.3 Fireworks. Fireworks shall comply with Section 215.690 of the
Municipal Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
(SECTION 5609 TEMPORARY STORAGE OF CONSUMER
FIREWORKS)
5609.1 General. Delete in its entirety.
(CHAPTER 57 FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS)
(SECTION 5704 STORAGE)
5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited.
Storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings
is prohibited within the City limits of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, unless
approved by ordinance.
(SECTION 5706 SPECIAL OPERATIONS)
5706.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited.
Storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings
is prohibited within the City limits of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, unless
approved by ordinance.
(CHAPTER 58 FLAMMABLE GASES AND FLAMMABLE CRYOGENIC
FLUIDS)
(SECTION 5806 FLAMMABLE CRYOGENIC FLUIDS)
5806.2 Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary
containers outside of buildings is prohibited within the City limits of the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri, unless approved by ordinance.
Section
500.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.090
100:1102
(CHAPTER 61 LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GASES)
(SECTION 6104 LOCATION OF LP-GAS CONTAINERS)
6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. The aggregate
capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000
gallons (7570 L) within the City limits of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri,
unless specifically approved by ordinance.
Section 500.100. Saving Clause and Validity. [R.O. 2007 § 500.150;
Ord. No. 1880 § 9,2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3534 § 8, 5-22-1997; Ord. No.
4093 §§ 6, 8, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4802 §§ 5—6, 4-14-2005; Ord. No.
4842 §§ 5—6, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5672 § 1, 2-10-2011]
Section 500.110. Penalty. [Ord. No. 5672 § 1, 2-10-2011]
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall install fire prevention
work in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building Official
or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
A. Nothing in this Article or in the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any
court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this Article.
B. If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article. The City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, hereby declares that it would have passed this
Article, and each Section, Subsection, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more Sections, Subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section
500.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.110
100:1103

ARTICLE IV
Energy Conservation Code
Section 500.120. Adoption of Energy Conservation Code. [R.O. 2007
§ 500.170; Ord. No. 1887 § 2, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3533 § 2,
5-22-1997; Ord. No. 3550 § 3, 7-7-1997; Ord. No. 3724 § 3,
8-10-1998; Ord. No. 4092 §§ 1—3, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 5676 § 1,
2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 4, 9-8-2016]
That certain document, a copy which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, being marked and designated as
the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Energy
Conservation Code of the City of O'Fallon, in the State of Missouri, for
regulating and governing energy efficient building envelopes and
installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of said Energy Conservation Code on file in the office of the City Clerk
of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made
a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Article, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 500.125 of this Article.
Section 500.125. Additions, Insertions and Changes. [Ord. No. 5676
§ 1, 2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 4, 9-8-2016]
The following numbered subsections of the International Energy
Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Code
Council, Inc., are hereby amended by additions, insertions, deletions and
changes so that such section and subsections read as follows:
(CHAPTER 1 [CE] SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION)
(SECTION C101 SCOPE AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS)
C101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the International Energy
Conservation Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, and shall be cited as
such. It is referred to herein as "this code."
(SECTION C103 CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS)
C103.1 General. Construction documents, technical reports and other
supporting data shall be submitted as required by the Building Official
with each application for a permit. The construction documents and
technical reports shall be prepared by a registered design professional
where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to
be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the code official is
authorized to require necessary construction documents to be prepared
by a registered design professional.
Exception:
Section
500.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.125
100:1105
The code official is authorized to waive the requirements for construction
documents or other supporting data if the code official determines they
are not necessary to confirm compliance with this code.
(SECTION C104 INSPECTIONS)
C104.90 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner in
compliance with this code, in accordance with industry standards, and in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
(SECTION C108 STOP WORK ORDER)
C108.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be liable to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(SECTION C109 MEANS OF APPEAL)
C109.1 General. For the purposes of this code, all appeals shall be in
accordance with the procedure established for the Building Code of the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
C109.2 Limitations on authority. Delete in its entirety.
C109.3 Qualifications. Delete in its entirety.
(CHAPTER 1 [RE] SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION)
(SECTION R101 SCOPE AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS)
R101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the International Energy
Conservation Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, and shall be cited as
such. It is referred to herein as "this code."
R101.2 Scope. This code applies to residential buildings and the building
sites and associated systems and equipment.
Exception:
Residential buildings and their accessory structures within the scope of
the International Residential Code shall utilize the energy provisions of
that code.
(SECTION R103 CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS)
R103.1 General. Construction documents, technical reports and other
supporting data shall be submitted as required by the Building Official
with each application for a permit. The construction documents and
technical reports shall be prepared by a registered design professional
where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to
be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the code official is
authorized to require necessary construction documents to be prepared
by a registered design professional.
Exception:
Section
500.125
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.125
100:1106
The code official is authorized to waive the requirements for construction
documents or other supporting data if the code official determines they
are not necessary to confirm compliance with this code.
(SECTION R104 INSPECTIONS)
R104.90 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner in
compliance with this code, in accordance with industry standards, and in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
(SECTION R108 STOP WORK ORDER)
R108.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be liable to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(SECTION R109 MEANS OF APPEAL)
R109.1 General. For the purposes of this code, all appeals shall be in
accordance with the procedure established for the Building Code of the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
R109.2 Limitations on authority. Delete in its entirety.
R109.3 Qualifications. Delete in its entirety.
Section 500.130. Saving Clause and Validity. [R.O. 2007 § 500.180;
Ord. No. 1887 § 3, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3533 § 3, 5-22-1997; Ord. No.
3550 § 4, 7-7-1997; Ord. No. 3724 § 4, 8-10-1998; Ord. No. 4092
§§ 4—5, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 5676 § 1, 2-10-2011]
A. Nothing in this Article or in the Energy Conservation Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending
in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause
or causes of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance
hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this Article.
B. If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article. The City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, hereby declares that it would have passed this
Article, and each Section, Subsection, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more Sections, Subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section
500.125
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.140
100:1107
Section 500.140. Penalty. [R.O. 2007 § 500.190; Ord. No. 1887 § 6,
2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3533 § 6, 5-22-1997; Ord. No. 3550 § 6, 7-7-1997;
Ord. No. 3724 § 6, 8-10-1998; Ord. No. 4092 § 6, 7-31-2000; Ord. No.
5676 § 1, 2-10-2011]
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Article or the code hereby adopted shall, upon conviction, for each offense
be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be punished by
imprisonment in jail not to exceed three (3) months, or be punished by
both fine and imprisonment. Each day's violation of, or refusal or neglect to
comply with, any provision of this Article or the code hereby adopted shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Section
500.140
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.140
100:1108
ARTICLE V
Mechanical Code
Section 500.150. Adoption of Mechanical Code. [R.O. 2007
§ 500.200; Ord. No. 1883 § 2, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3535 § 2,
5-22-1997; Ord. No. 4094 § 2, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4798 § 1,
4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4818 § 1, 5-13-2005; Ord. No. 4838 § 1,
5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5668 § 1, 2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 5,
9-8-2016]
That certain document, a copy which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, being marked and designated as
the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical
Code of the City of O'Fallon, in the State of Missouri, for regulating and
governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to,
use or maintenance of mechanical plumbing systems as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said
Mechanical Code on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this Article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in Section 500.160 of this Article.
Section 500.160. Additions, Insertions and Changes. [R.O. 2007
§ 500.220; Ord. No. 1883 § 3, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3535 § 3,
5-22-1997; Ord. No. 4094 § 3, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4798 § 2,
4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4818 § 1, 5-13-2005; Ord. No. 4838 § 2,
5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5087 § 3, 11-1-2006; Ord. No. 5668 § 1,
2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 5, 9-8-2016]
The following numbered subsections of the International Mechanical Code,
2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., are
hereby amended by additions, insertions, deletions and changes so that
such section and subsections read as follows:
(CHAPTER 1 SCOPE AND APPLICATION)
(SECTION 101 GENERAL)
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of
the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
(SECTION 103 DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICAL INSPECTION)
103.1 General. The department of mechanical inspection is hereby
created and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the
Building Official. Where the term "code official" is used in the code, it
shall mean the Building Official or his/her appointee.
103.2 Appointment. The Building Official shall be appointed as provided
by ordinance.
Section
500.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.160
100:1109
103.90 Licensing of mechanical contractors. Any contractor wishing
to enter into the mechanical business within the City of O'Fallon, shall
first be duly examined and be successfully passed and licensed by St.
Charles County, Missouri, and hold an active license as Class A or Class B.
(SECTION 106 PERMITS)
106.3.1 Construction documents. Construction documents,
engineering calculations, diagrams and other data shall be submitted as
required by the Building Official with each application for a permit. The
code official shall require construction documents, computations and
specifications to be prepared and designed by a registered design
professional where required by state law. Where special conditions exist,
the code official is authorized to require additional construction
documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.
Construction documents shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient
clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed
and show in detail that the work conforms to the provisions of this code.
Construction documents for buildings more than two stories in height
shall indicate where penetrations will be made for mechanical systems,
and the materials and methods for maintaining required structural safety,
fire-resistance rating and fireblocking.
Exception:
The code official shall have the authority to waive the submission of
construction documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the
work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not
necessary to determine compliance with this code.
106.5.2 Fee schedule. Fees related to administration of this code shall
be as set forth elsewhere in this Chapter of the Municipal Code.
106.5.3 Fee refunds. Delete this Section in its entirety.
(SECTION 107 INSPECTIONS AND TESTING)
107.90 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner in
compliance with this code, in accordance with industry standards, and in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
(SECTION 108 VIOLATIONS)
Section
500.160
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.160
100:1110
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates
any provisions of this code, or who fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building
Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
code, or who shall continue any work in or about a structure after having
been served a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, or any
owner or tenant of a building or premises in which such violation shall
exist, shall upon conviction thereof be punishable by a fine of not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding
ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official that
mechanical work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or
in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease.
Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the
property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The
notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to
resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be
required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person
who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with
a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform
to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of no
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
108.5.90 Unlawful continuance. Any person who continues any work in
or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove said
violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to penalties as specified in
Section 108.4 of this code.
(SECTION 109 MEANS OF APPEAL)
109.1 Application for appeal. For the purposes of this code, all appeals
shall be in accordance with the procedure established for the Building
Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
109.1.1 Limitation of authority. Delete in its entirety.
109.2 Membership of board. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.2 Alternate members. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.3 Chairman. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.4 Disqualification of member. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.5 Secretary. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.6 Compensation of members. Delete in its entirety.
109.3 Notice of meeting. Delete in its entirety.
109.4 Open hearing. Delete in its entirety.
Section
500.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.160
100:1111
109.4.1 Procedure. Delete in its entirety.
109.5 Postponed hearing. Delete in its entirety.
109.6 Board decision. Delete in its entirety.
109.6.1 Resolution. Delete in its entirety.
109.6.2 Administration. Delete in its entirety.
109.7 Court review. Delete in its entirety.
(CHAPTER 9 SPECIFIC APPLIANCES, FIREPLACES AND SOLID
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT)
(SECTION 903 FACTORY-BUILT FIREPLACES)
903.90 Required fire separation enclosure. All prefabricated metal
chimneys shall be enclosed in a fire-resistant shaft with one (1) layer of
five-eighths (5/8) inch type "X" gypsum board from the fireplace connector
to the underside of the roof sheathing, securely attached with framing
material. When the chimney chase is located on an exterior wall of the
structure, it need only be separated by lining the wall between the
chimney chase and the exterior wall with five-eighths (5/8) type "X" inch
gypsum board. All joints are to be tight within one-eighth (1/8) of an inch
or tape with joint compound. Required clearances shall be maintained
between the chimney and the gypsum board per chimney manufacturer's
specifications.
Section 500.170. Saving Clause and Validity. [R.O. 2007 § 500.230;
Ord. No. 1883 § 4, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3535 § 4, 5-22-1997; Ord. No.
4094 §§ 4—5, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4798 §§ 4—5, 4-14-2005; Ord. No.
4838 §§ 4—5, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5668 § 1, 2-10-2011]
Section 500.180. Penalty. [R.O. 2007 § 500.240; Ord. No. 3535 § 3,
5-22-1997; Ord. No. 5668 § 1, 2-10-2011]
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall install mechanical work
in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building Official or of
A. Nothing in this Article or in the Mechanical Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed;
nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this Article.
B. If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article. The City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, hereby declares that it would have passed this
Article, and each Section, Subsection, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more Sections, Subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section
500.160
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.180
100:1112
a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
Section
500.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.180
100:1113

ARTICLE VI
Electrical Code
Section 500.190. Adoption of Electrical Code. [R.O. 2007 § 500.250;
Ord. No. 1881 § 2, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3530 § 2, 5-22-1997; Ord. No.
4091 § 2, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4800 § 1, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4820
§ 1, 5-13-2005; Ord. No. 4840 § 1, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5670 § 1,
2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 6, 9-8-2016]
That certain document, a copy which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, being marked and designated as
the National Electric Code, 2014 Edition, as published by the National Fire
Protection Agency, be and is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the
City of O'Fallon, in the State of Missouri, for regulating and governing the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration,
repair, location, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical
systems as herein provided; utilizing Appendix K "Administrative
Provisions" of the Building Code adopted in Section 500.010; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said Electrical Code
on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this Article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in Section 500.200 of this Article.
Section 500.200. Additions, Insertions and Changes. [R.O. 2007
§ 500.260; Ord. No. 1881 § E, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3530 § 2,
5-22-1997; Ord. No. 4091 § 3, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4800 § 2,
4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4840 § 2, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5087 § 4,
11-1-2006; Ord. No. 5670 § 1, 2-10-2011; Ord. No. 5685 § 1,
3-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 6, 9-8-2016]
The following numbered subsections of the National Electric Code, 2014
Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Agency, are hereby
amended by additions, insertions, deletions and changes so that such
section and subsections read as follows:
(ARTICLE 90 INTRODUCTION)
90.1 (D) Administration of this code. The administration of this code
shall be in accordance with Appendix K "Administrative Provisions" of the
Building Code adopted in Section 500.010.
90.1 (E) Licensing of Electrical Contractors. Any contractor wishing
to enter into the electrical business within the City of O'Fallon, shall first
be duly examined and be successfully passed and licensed by St. Charles
County, Missouri, and hold an active license.
Section
500.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.200
100:1115
90.1 (F) Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner in
compliance with this code, in accordance with industry standards, and in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
Section 500.210. Saving Clause and Validity. [R.O. 2007 § 500.270;
Ord. No. 1881 § 3, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3530 § 3, 5-22-1997; Ord. No.
4091 §§ 4—5, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4800 §§ 4—5, 4-14-2005; Ord. No.
4840 §§ 4—5, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5670 § 1, 2-10-2011]
Section 500.220. Penalty. [Ord. No. 5670 § 1, 2-10-2011]
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall install electric work in
violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building Official or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
A. Nothing in this Article or in the Electric Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed;
nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this Article.
B. If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article. The City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, hereby declares that it would have passed this
Article, and each Section, Subsection, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more Sections, Subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section
500.200
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.220
100:1116
ARTICLE VII
Plumbing Code
Section 500.230. Adoption of Plumbing Code. [R.O. 2007 § 500.290;
Ord. No. 1882 § 2, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3532 § 2, 5-22-1997; Ord. No.
4095 § 2, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4797 § 1, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4817
§ 1, 5-13-2005; Ord. No. 4837 § 1, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5673 § 1,
2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 7, 9-8-2016]
That certain document, a copy which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, being marked and designated as
the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendix E, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as
the Plumbing Code of the City of O'Fallon, in the State of Missouri, for
regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, replacement, addition to,
use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code
on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this Article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in Section 500.240 of this Article.
Section 500.240. Additions, Insertions and Changes. [R.O. 2007
§ 500.310; Ord. No. 1882 § 3, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3532 § 3,
5-22-1997; Ord. No. 4095 § 3, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4797 § 2,
4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4837 § 2, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5087 § 5,
11-1-2006; Ord. No. 5673 § 1, 2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 7,
9-8-2016; Ord. No. 6577, 6-14-2019]
The following numbered subsections of the International Plumbing Code,
2015 Edition, including Appendix E, as published by the International Code
Council, Inc., are hereby amended by additions, insertions, deletions and
changes so that such section and subsections read as follows:
(CHAPTER 1 SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION)
(SECTION 101 GENERAL)
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International
Plumbing Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as
"this code."
(SECTION 103 DEPARTMENT OF PLUMBING INSPECTION)
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The department of plumbing
inspection is hereby created and the executive official in charge thereof
shall be known as the Building Official. Where the term "code official" is
used in this code, it shall mean the Building Official or his/her appointee.
103.2 Appointment. The Building Official shall be appointed as provided
by ordinance.
Section
500.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.240
100:1117
103.90 Licensing of plumbing/drainlaying contractors. Any
contractor wishing to enter into the plumbing business within the City of
O'Fallon, shall first be duly examined and be successfully passed and
licensed by St. Charles County, Missouri, and hold an active license.
(SECTION 106 PERMITS)
106.6.2 Fees. Fees related to administration of this code shall be as set
forth elsewhere in this Chapter of the Municipal Code.
106.6.3 Fee refunds. Delete in its entirety.
(SECTION 107 INSPECTIONS AND TESTING)
107.90 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner in
compliance with this code, in accordance with industry standards, and in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
(SECTION 108 VIOLATIONS)
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall
violate any provisions of this code, or who shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a
structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building
Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
code, or who shall continue any work in or about a structure after having
been served a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, or any
owner or tenant of a building or premises in which such violation shall
exist, shall upon conviction thereof be punishable by a fine of not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding
ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official, work on any
plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this code
or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice
shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to
the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state
the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an
emergency exists, the Building Official shall not be required to give a
written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue
any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
108.5.90 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to penalties as specified in
Section 108.4 of this code.
Section
500.240
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.240
100:1118
(SECTION 109 MEANS OF APPEAL)
109.1 Application for appeal. For the purposes of this code, all appeals
shall be in accordance with the procedure established for the Building
Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
109.2 Membership of board. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.1 Qualifications. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.2 Alternate members. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.3 Chairman. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.4 Disqualification of member. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.5 Secretary. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.6 Compensation of members. Delete in its entirety.
109.3 Notice of meeting. Delete in its entirety.
109.4 Open hearing. Delete in its entirety.
109.4.1 Procedure. Delete in its entirety.
109.5 Postponed hearing. Delete in its entirety.
109.6 Board decision. Delete in its entirety.
109.6.1 Resolution. Delete in its entirety.
109.6.2 Administration. Delete in its entirety.
109.7 Court review. Delete in its entirety.
(CHAPTER 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS)
(SECTION 305 PROTECTION OF PIPES AND PLUMBING SYSTEM
COMPONENTS)
305.4.1 Sewer Depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage
disposal systems shall be a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) below
finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall
be a minimum of 36 inches (915 mm) below grade.
(SECTION 306 TRENCHING, EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL)
306.90 Tracer wire or other utility location technology. Tracer wire
or other utility location technology shall be installed as required by
Section 319.033, RSMo., and the local utility.
(CHAPTER 4 FIXTURES, FAUCETS AND FIXTURE FITTINGS)
(SECTION 403 MINIMUM PLUMBING FACILITIES)
403.2 Separate facilities. Where plumbing fixtures are required,
separate facilities shall be provided for each sex.
Exceptions:
1. Separate facilities shall not be required for dwelling units and
sleeping units.
Section
500.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.240
100:1119
2. Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant
spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and
customers, of twenty-five (25) or fewer.
3. Separate facilities shall not be required in mercantile occupancies
in which the maximum occupant load is one hundred (100) or
fewer.
4. Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant
spaces functioning solely as exercise facilities with a square
footage less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.
(SECTION 410 DRINKING FOUNTAINS)
410.2 Small occupancies. Drinking fountains shall not be required for
an occupant load of fifteen (15) or fewer.
Exceptions:
1. Drinking fountains are not required in spaces functioning as
mercantile use less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet.
2. In occupancies of less than twenty-five (25), water coolers or
bottled water dispensers shall be permitted to be substituted
where drinking fountains are required.
(CHAPTER 6 WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION)
(SECTION 602 WATER REQUIRED)
602.2.90 Potable water connection. The water distribution system of
any building in which plumbing fixtures are installed shall connect to a
potable public water supply, if available. A potable public water supply
shall be considered available when the nearest property line is located
within two hundred (200) feet of a potable public water main. When a
potable public water supply is not available, an individual water supply
shall be provided.
(SECTION 608 PROTECTION OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY)
608.16.6.90 Annual testing. All reduced pressure backflow devices and
check assemblies shall be registered and tested annually by a certified
individual as authorized by the State of Missouri.
(CHAPTER 7 SANITARY DRAINAGE)
(SECTION 701 GENERAL)
Section
500.240
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.240
100:1120
701.2 Sewer required. The sanitary drainage system of any building in
which plumbing fixtures are installed shall connect to a public sewer, if
available. A public sewer shall be considered available when the nearest
property line is located within two hundred (200) feet of a public sewer.
When a public sewer is not available, the sanitary drainage shall be
connected to an approved private sewage disposal system installed in
accordance with the Private Sewage Disposal Code of the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri, and all State, Federal, and St. Charles County regulations. All
private sewage disposal systems shall be maintained and function without
any ground surface discharge. When a conflict occurs between these
regulations the most restrictive regulation shall apply unless otherwise
approved by the Building Official.
(SECTION 702 MATERIALS)
702.3 Building sewer pipe. Building sewer pipe shall conform to one (1)
of the standards listed in Table 702.3. All sewer laterals will be polyvinyl
chloride schedule 40 or equivalent as determined by the City of O'Fallon.
(CHAPTER 9 VENTS)
(SECTION 903 VENT TERMINALS)
903.1 Roof extension. Open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall
be terminated not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the roof. Where a
roof is to be used for assembly or as a promenade, observation deck,
sunbathing deck or similar purposes, open vent pipes shall terminate not
less than 7 feet (2,134 mm) above the roof.
Section 500.250. Saving Clause and Validity. [R.O. 2007 § 500.320;
Ord. No. 1882 § 4, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3532 § 4, 5-22-1997; Ord. No.
4095 §§ 4—5, 7-31-2000; Ord. No. 4797 §§ 4—5, 4-14-2005; Ord. No.
4837 §§ 4—5, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5673 § 1, 2-10-2011]
A. Nothing in this Article or in the Plumbing Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed;
nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this Article.
B. If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article. The City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, hereby declares that it would have passed this
Article, and each Section, Subsection, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more Sections, Subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section
500.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.260
100:1121
Section 500.260. Penalty. [R.O. 2007 § 500.330; Ord. No. 3532 § 3,
5-22-1997; Ord. No. 5673 § 1, 2-10-2011]
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall install plumbing work
in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building Official or of
a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
Section
500.260
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.260
100:1122
ARTICLE VIII
Private Sewage Code
Section 500.270. Adoption of Private Sewage Disposal Code. [R.O.
2007 § 500.340; Ord. No. 1885 § 2, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3536 § 2,
5-22-1997; Ord. No. 4803 § 1, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4823 § 1,
5-13-2005; Ord. No. 4843 § 1, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 6250 § 8,
9-8-2016; Ord. No. 6577, 6-14-2019]
The St. Charles County Private Sewage Disposal Code Section OSCCMo
500.300, as amended, three (3) copies of which are on file in the City offices,
are incorporated herein by reference and hereby adopted as the City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, Private Sewage Disposal Code.
Section 500.280. (Reserved)123
Section 500.290. Saving Clause and Validity. [R.O. 2007 § 500.370;
Ord. No. 1885 § 4, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3536 § 4, 5-22-1997; Ord. No.
4803 §§ 4—5, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4843 §§ 4—5, 5-16-2005]
Section 500.300. Penalty.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Article or the code hereby adopted, shall upon conviction, for each offense
be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be punished by
imprisonment in jail not to exceed three (3) months, or be punished by
both fine and imprisonment. Each day's violation of, or refusal or neglect to
comply with, any provision of this Article or the code hereby adopted, shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
A. Nothing in this Article or in the Private Sewage Disposal Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending
in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause
or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance
hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this Article.
B. If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article. The City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, hereby declares that it would have passed this
Article, and each Section, Subsection, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more Sections, Subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
123. Editor’s Note: Former Section 500.280, Additions, Insertions and Changes, related to the
Private Sewage Disposal Code, which derived from R.O. 2007 § 500.360; Ord. No. 1885 § 3,
2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3536 § 3, 5-22-1997; Ord. No. 4803 § 2, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4843 § 2,
5-16-2005, was repealed 9-8-2016 by § 8 of Ord. No. 6250.
Section
500.270
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.300
100:1123

ARTICLE IX
Explosives Code
Section 500.310. Adoption of Explosives Code. [R.O. 2007
§ 500.385; Ord. No. 4656 § 1, 6-10-2004; Ord. No. 6577, 6-14-2019]
The St. Charles County Explosives Code Sections OSCCMo 635.030,
635.050, 635.060, 635.070, 635.080, 635.090, 635.100, 635.110, 635.120,
and 635.130, as amended, three (3) copies of which are on file in the City
offices, are incorporated herein by reference and adopted as the City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, Explosives Code.
Section 500.315. Blasting Log. [R.O. 2007 § 500.460; Ord. No. 4706
§§ 1—2, 7-27-2004]
Section 500.320. Penalty.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Article or the code hereby adopted, shall upon conviction, for each offense
be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be punished by
imprisonment in jail not to exceed three (3) months, or be punished by
both fine and imprisonment. Each day's violation of, or refusal or neglect to
comply with, any provision of this Article or the code hereby adopted, shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law or ordinance to the
contrary, any person possessing a blasting license shall submit on or
before the fifteenth (15th) day of each month a copy of the blasting log
for all blasts during the preceding month.
B. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law or ordinance to the
contrary, for any blast that is required to be monitored by
seismographic instrumentation and/or airblast monitoring equipment
by the Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, any person possessing a
blasting license shall submit on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of
each month to the Managing Director of Community Development of
the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, a record of all monitored blasts for all
blasts during the preceding month indicating compliance with all
blasting limitations contained in the Code of the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri.
Section
500.310
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.320
100:1125

ARTICLE X
Residential Code
Section 500.330. Adoption of Residential Code. [R.O. 2007
§ 500.386; Ord. No. 4796 §§1, 4—5, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4816 §1,
5-6-2005; Ord. No. 4836 §§1, 4—5, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5674 §1,
2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 9, 9-8-2016]
That certain document, a copy which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, being marked and designated as
the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendices E,
G, H, I, J, K, and P, as published by the International Code Council, be and
is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the City of O'Fallon, in the
State of Missouri, for regulating and governing the construction, alteration,
movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal
and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories in
height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said Residential Code on file
in the office of the City Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Article,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
Section 500.340.
Section 500.340. Additions, Insertions and Changes. [R.O. 2007
§ 500.387; Ord. No. 4796 §2, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4836 §2,
5-16-2005; Ord. No. 4927 §§1—2, 11-16-2005; Ord. No. 5065 §2,
10-12-2006; Ord. No. 5066 §§1—2, 10-12-2006; Ord. No. 5087 §6,
11-1-2006; Ord. No. 5372 §§1—2, 9-11-2008; Ord. No. 5674 §1,
2-10-2011; Ord. No. 5686 §1, 3-10-2011; Ord. No. 5985 §1,
2-27-2014; Ord. No. 6002 §1, 5-8-2014; Ord. No. 6250 § 9, 9-8-2016;
Ord. No. 6577, 6-14-2019]
The following numbered subsections of the International Residential Code,
2015 Edition, including Appendices E, G, H, I, J, K, L, and P, as published
by the International Code Council, Inc., are hereby amended by additions,
insertions, deletions and changes so that such section and subsections read
as follows:
(CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRATION)
(SECTION R101 GENERAL)
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code
for One- and Two-family Dwellings of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, and
shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code."
(SECTION R103 DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY)
R103.2 Appointment. The Building Official shall be appointed as
approved by ordinance.
Section
500.330
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1127
R103.90 Work completed by licensed contractors. All mechanical,
electrical, plumbing, and drainlaying work shall be performed by a
contractor licensed in accordance with Sections 103.90.1 through
103.90.4.
Exceptions:
1. Work in which a permit is not required.
2. Minor work, as determined by the Building Official, when the
work is performed by the owner to the dwelling in which he/she
resides.
R103.90.1 Licensing of mechanical contractors. Any contractor
wishing to enter into the mechanical business within the City of O'Fallon,
shall first be duly examined and be successfully passed and licensed by St.
Charles County, Missouri, and hold an active license as Class A or Class B.
R103.90.2 Licensing of electrical contractors. Any contractor wishing
to enter into the electrical business within the City of O'Fallon, shall first
be duly examined and be successfully passed and licensed by St. Charles
County, Missouri, and hold an active license as electrical contractor.
R103.90.3 Licensing of plumbing contractors. Any contractor wishing
to enter into the plumbing business within the City of O'Fallon, shall first
be duly examined and be successfully passed and licensed by St. Charles
County, Missouri, and hold an active license as plumbing contractor.
R103.90.4 Licensing of drainlaying contractors. Any contractor
wishing to enter into the drainlaying business within the City of O'Fallon,
shall first be duly examined and be successfully passed and licensed by St.
Charles County, Missouri, and hold an active license as drainlaying
contractor.
(SECTION R105 PERMITS)
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemption from permit
requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for
any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this
code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not
be required for the following:
Building:
1. Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1,219 mm) in height
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall,
unless supporting a surcharge, impounding Class I, II or IIIA
liquids, or altering the channelized drainage of any drainage
area or lot.
2. Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does
not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio of height to
diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1.
3. Sidewalks and driveways on private property and not affecting
the right-of-way.
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1128
4. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops,
tuckpointing, siding, and similar finish work.
5. Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610
mm) deep.
6. Swings and other playground equipment.
7. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not
project more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall
and do not require additional support.
8. Flag poles less than thirty-five (35) feet in height.
9. Replacement of doors and windows where the opening size is
not increased or decreased.
10. Reroofing of asphalt shingle roofs.
11. Sheds less than 3 feet in depth and a total square footage of
less than 25.
Electrical:
1. Listed cord-and-plug-connected temporary decorative lighting.
2. Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the
outlets therefor.
3. Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the
required capacity in the same location.
4. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment
operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying
more than 50 watts of energy.
5. Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to
approved permanently installed receptacles.
Gas:
1. Portable heating, cooking or clothes-drying appliances.
2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
3. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
Mechanical:
1. Portable heating appliances.
2. Portable ventilation appliances.
3. Portable cooling units.
4. Steam, hot- or chilled-water piping within any heating or
cooling equipment regulated by this code.
5. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
6. Portable evaporative coolers.
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1129
7. Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds
(4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of
1 horsepower (746 W) or less.
8. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
Plumbing:
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe;
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water,
soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes
necessary to remove and replace the same with new material,
such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall
be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes,
valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water
closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the
replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
3. Fixture replacement with similar fixtures where plumbing
connections are not relocated.
(SECTION R106 CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS)
R106.1 Submittal documents. Submittal documents consisting of
construction documents, and other data shall be submitted as required by
the Building Official. The construction documents shall be prepared by a
registered design professional where required by the statutes of the
jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special
conditions exist, the Building Official is authorized to require additional
construction documents to be prepared by a registered design
professional.
Exception:
The Building Official is authorized to waive the submission of construction
documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered
design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is
such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to obtain
compliance with this code.
R106.90 Sprinkler verification. All applications for permit for one- and
two-family dwellings shall include a written verification by the builder
affirming that a fire sprinkler system was offered to the purchaser prior to
entering into the purchase contract. If there is no purchaser at the time
that the permit application is submitted, then said verification shall be
made as soon as there is a purchaser and prior to the issuance of a
certification of occupancy for the new residence.
R106.91 Elevations certified. Any building being erected or constructed
in flood plain shall provide an elevation certificate from a Registered
Engineer or Land Surveyor, licensed in the State of Missouri, before final
approval of the foundation inspection will be given.
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1130
R106.3.1 Approval of construction documents. Where the Building
Official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved in
writing or by a stamp that states "REVIEWED FOR CODE COMPLIANCE."
One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the
Building Official. The other set shall be kept at the site of work, including
in the local office such as a job trailer or display home, or made available
at the time of inspection and shall be open to inspection by the Building
Official or a duly authorized representative.
(SECTION R108 FEES)
R108.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. On buildings, structures, electrical,
gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a
fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with Section
500.470 of the City of O'Fallon Municipal Code.
R108.6 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who
commences work requiring a permit on a building, structure, electrical,
gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary
permits shall be subject to a fee established by the applicable governing
authority that shall be in addition to the required permit fees.
Exceptions:
1. Rough grading of lots, not to include excavating for
basements
2. Stakeouts and other similar preparatory actions
(SECTION R109 INSPECTIONS)
R109.90 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner in
compliance with this code, in accordance with industry standards, and in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
(SECTION R112 MEANS OF APPEAL)
R112.1 Application for Appeal. For the appeal process and
requirements, see Section 113 of the Building Code.
R112.2 Limitations on Authority. Delete in its entirety.
R112.3 Qualifications. Delete in its entirety.
R112.4 Administration. Delete in its entirety.
(SECTION R113 VIOLATIONS)
R113.2 Notice of Violation. When the Building Official determines that
a violation of this code exists, he/she shall immediately notify the violator.
The notification shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the violator or
his/her legally authorized representative or mailed to his/her last known
address via 1st Class U.S. Mail. Any person having been notified that a
violation other than a stop work order exists and who fails to abate the
violation within ten (10) days after notification shall be subject to the
penalties enumerated in Section 113.4.
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1131
R113.4 Violation Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall
violate any provisions of this code, or who shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a
structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building
Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
code, or who shall continue any work in or about a structure after having
been served a stop work order, or any owner or tenant of a building or
premises in which such violation shall exist, shall upon conviction thereof
be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(SECTION R114 STOP WORK ORDER)
R114.2 Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work
in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition(s), shall be subject to penalties as prescribed
by law liable to penalties as specified in Section 113.4 of this code.
(CHAPTER 3 BUILDING PLANNING)
(SECTION R301 DESIGN CRITERIA)
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
GROUND SNOW LOAD 20 PSF
WIND DESIGN Speed (MPH) 115 MPH
Topographic effects No
Special wind region No
Wind-borne debris zone No
SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY SDC C
SUBJECT TO DAMAGE
FROM
Weathering Severe
Frost line depth 30 inches
Termite Moderate to Heavy
WINTER DESIGN TEMP 6° F.
ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED No
FLOOD HAZARDS (See Floodplain
Administrator)
AIR FREEZING INDEX 1000
MEAN ANNUAL TEMP 55.2° F.
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1132
For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/
s.
a. Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of
masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of
this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the
weathering index, "negligible," "moderate" or "severe" for concrete
as determined from Figure R301.2(3). The grade of masonry units
shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129,
C 145, C 216 or C 652.
b. The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in
Figure R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth
column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade.
c. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need
for protection depending on whether there has been a history of
local subterranean termite damage.
d. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind
speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R301.2(4)A]. Wind
exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in
accordance with Section R301.2.1.4.
e. The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from
the columns of 97 1/2-percent values for winter from Appendix D
of the International Plumbing Code. Deviations from the Appendix
D temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local
weather experience as determined by the Building Official.
f. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic
design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1.
g. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with: (a) the date of
the jurisdiction's entry into the National Flood Insurance Program
(date of adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of
flood hazard areas), (b) the date(s) of the Flood Insurance Study,
and (c) the panel numbers and dates of the currently effective
FIRMs and FBFMs or other flood hazard map adopted by the
authority having jurisdiction, as amended.
h. In accordance with Sections R905.1.2, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1,
R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a
history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the
jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise,
the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "NO."
i. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year
return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or
from the 100-year (99 percent) value on the National Climatic Data
Center data table "Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32° F.)."
j. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean
annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data
table "Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32° F.)."
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1133
k. In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local
historical data documenting structural damage to buildings due
to topographic wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in
this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall
indicate "NO" in this part of the table.
l. In accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A, where there is local
historical data documenting unusual wind conditions, the
jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES" and identify
any specific requirements. Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate
"NO" in this part of the table.
m. In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2.1, the jurisdiction shall
indicate the wind-borne debris wind zone(s). Otherwise, the
jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table.
R301.90 Minimum residential dwelling unit areas. The minimum
residential dwelling unit area shall be in accordance with Section
500.030.
(SECTION R302 FIRE-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION)
R302.1 Exterior walls. Construction, projections, openings and
penetrations of exterior walls of dwellings and accessory buildings shall
comply with Table R302.1(1); or dwellings equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section P2904
shall comply with Table R302.1(2).
Exceptions:
1. Walls, projections, openings or penetrations in walls
perpendicular to the line used to determine the fire separation
distance.
2. Walls of dwellings and accessory structures located on the same
lot.
3. Detached tool sheds and storage sheds, playhouses and similar
structures exempted from permits are not required to provide
wall protection based on location on the lot. Projections beyond
the exterior wall shall not extend over the lot line.
4. Detached garages accessory to a dwelling located within 2 feet
(610 mm) of a lot line are permitted to have roof eave projections
not exceeding 4 inches (102 mm).
5. Foundation vents installed in compliance with this code are
permitted.
6. Uncovered decks.
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1134
R302.2 Townhouses. Common walls separating townhouses shall be
assigned a fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section R302.2, Item
1 or 2. The common wall shared by two (2) townhouses shall be
constructed without plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in
the cavity of the common wall. The wall shall be rated for fire exposure
from both sides and shall extend to and be tight against exterior walls and
the underside of the roof sheathing. Electrical installations shall be in
accordance with Chapters 34 through 43. Penetrations of the membrane
of common walls for electrical outlet boxes shall be in accordance with
Section R302.4.
1. Where a fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section P2904
is provided, the common wall shall be not less than a 1-hour fireresistance-
rated wall assembly tested in accordance with ASTM E
119 or UL 263.
2. Where a fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section P2904
is not provided, the common wall shall be not less than a 2-hour
fire-resistance-rated wall assembly tested in accordance with
ASTM E 119 or UL 263, or the common wall shall be two (2)
independent 1-hour fire-resistance-rated wall assemblies.
R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly
into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other
openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid
wood doors not less than 1 3/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or
honeycombcore steel doors not less than 1 3/8 inches (35 mm) thick, or
20-minute fire-rated doors.
R302.11.3 Required Fire Separation Enclosure. All prefabricated
metal chimneys shall be enclosed in a fire-resistant shaft with one (1)
layer of type "X" gypsum board five-eighths (5/8) inch thick, starting from
the fireplace connection to the underside of the roof sheathing, securely
attached with framing materials. When the chimney chase is located on an
exterior wall of the structure, it need only be separated by lining the wall
between the chimney chase and the exterior wall with type "X" gypsum
board 5/8 inch (16 mm) thick.
R302.13 Fire protection of floors. Floor assemblies that are not
required elsewhere in this code to be fire-resistance rated, shall be
provided with a 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard membrane, 5/8-inch
(16 mm) wood structural panel membrane, or equivalent on the underside
of the floor framing member. Penetrations or openings for ducts, vents,
electrical outlets, lighting, devices, luminaires, wires, speakers, drainage,
piping and similar openings or penetrations shall be permitted. Fire
blocking, draft stopping, taping, and or additional framing is not required.
Exceptions:
1. Floor assemblies located directly over a space protected by an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section P2904,
NFPA 13D, or other approved equivalent sprinkler system.
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1135
2. Floor assemblies located directly over a crawl space not intended
for storage or fuel-fired appliances.
3. Portions of floor assemblies shall be permitted to be unprotected
where complying with the following:
3.1. The aggregate area of the unprotected floor assembly
does not exceed 100 square feet (7.4 m2) per story.
3.2. Areas of the floor assembly covered by metal plenum,
trunk lines and steel structural beams shall be considered
protected. The gypsum wallboard membrane shall be
within two (2) inches of all previously listed items.
4. Wood floor assemblies using dimension lumber or structural
composite lumber equal to or greater than 2-inch by 10-inch (50.8
mm by 254 mm) nominal dimension, or other approved floor
assemblies demonstrating equivalent fire performance.
(SECTION R303 LIGHT, VENTILATION, AND HEATING)
R303.1.90 Basements and cellars. The glass window area in basements
and cellars shall not be less than one percent (1%) of the floor area served
and shall be operable for natural ventilation.
R303.4 Mechanical ventilation. Where the air infiltration rate of a
dwelling unit is less than five (5) air changes per hour where tested with a
blower door at a pressure of 0.2 inch w.c. (50 Pa) in accordance with
Section N1102.4.1.2, the dwelling unit shall be provided with whole-house
mechanical ventilation in accordance with Section M1507.3.
R303.5.2 Exhaust openings. Exhaust air shall not be directed below six
(6) feet and eight (8) inches onto public walkways.
R303.7.90 Controls. All switches that control interior stairway lights
shall be illuminated switches.
R303.8 Exterior stairway illumination. Exterior stairways shall be
provided with an artificial light source. Exterior stairways providing
access to a basement from the outdoor grade level shall be provided with
an artificial light source located at the bottom landing of the stairway.
(SECTION R306 SANITATION)
R306.90 Hose Bib. Every dwelling shall be equipped with one (1)
outside frost proof hose bib which shall be protected from backflow in
accordance with Section P2902.4.3 of this code.
R306.91 Floor Drain. All basements shall be equipped with a floor drain
within twenty (20) feet of heating/cooling system(s) and water heaters.
The floor drain shall comply with Chapter 27, Section P2719 of this code.
(SECTION R309 GARAGES AND CARPORTS)
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1136
R309.5 Fire sprinklers. Private garages shall be protected by fire
sprinklers where the garage wall has been designed based on Table
R302.1(2), Footnote a, and the homeowner has opted to purchase a fire
sprinkler system for their residence in accordance with Section 67.281,
RSMo. Sprinklers in garages shall be connected to an automatic sprinkler
system that complies with Section P2904. Garage sprinklers shall be
residential sprinklers or quick-response sprinklers, designed to provide a
density of 0.05 gpm/ft2. Garage doors shall not be considered obstructions
with respect to sprinkler placement.
(SECTION R310 EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENINGS)
R310.1 Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings. Basements,
habitable attics and every sleeping room shall have not less than one (1)
operable emergency escape and rescue opening. Where basements
contain one (1) or more sleeping rooms, an emergency escape and rescue
opening shall be required in each sleeping room. Emergency escape and
rescue openings shall open directly into a public way, or to a yard or court
that opens to a public way.
Exceptions:
1. Storm shelters and basements used only to house mechanical
equipment not exceeding a total floor area of two hundred (200)
square feet.
2. Emergency escape and rescue openings are not required in basements
(other than sleeping rooms) provided they were approved prior to the
adoption of this ordinance.
(SECTION R311 MEANS OF EGRESS)
R311.3 Floors and landings at exterior doors. There shall be a
landing or floor on each side of each exterior door. The width of each
landing shall not be less than the door served. Every landing shall have a
dimension of not less than 36 inches (914 mm) measured in the direction
of travel. The slope at exterior landings shall not to exceed 1/4 unit
vertical in 12 units horizontal (2 percent).
Exceptions:
1. Exterior balconies less than 60 square feet (5.6 m2) and only
accessible from a door are permitted to have a landing less than
36 inches (914 mm) measured in the direction of travel.
2. Doors that are not required egress doors and are served by a
stairway no more than four (4) risers.
3. Doors protected by a guard in accordance with this code.
4. Doors protected in a manner approved by the Building Official.
R311.3.2 Floor elevations for other exterior doors. Doors other than
the required egress door shall be provided with landings and floors not
more than 7 3/4 inches (196 mm) below the top of the threshold.
Exception:
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1137
A landing is not required where a stairway of four (4) or fewer risers is
located on the exterior side of the door, provided the door does not swing
over the stairway.
R311.7.5 Stair treads and risers. Stair treads and risers shall meet the
requirements of this Section. For the purposes of this Section, dimensions
and dimensioned surfaces shall be exclusive of carpets, rugs or runners.
Exceptions:
The alteration, repair, or reconstruction of an existing stairway shall not
be required to comply with this Section where the existing space and
construction does not allow a reduction in pitch or slope.
R311.7.6 Landings for stairways. There shall be a floor or landing at
the top and bottom of each stairway. The width perpendicular to the
direction of travel shall be not less than the width of the flight served.
Landings of shapes other than square or rectangular shall be permitted
provided that the depth at the walk line and the total area is not less than
that of a quarter circle with a radius equal to the required landing width.
Where the stairway has a straight run, the depth in the direction of travel
shall be not less than 36 inches (914 mm).
Exceptions:
1. A floor or landing is not required at the top of an interior flight of
stairs, including stairs in an enclosed garage, provided that a
door does not swing over the stairs.
2. Where not required by Section R311.3 and R311.3.2.
(SECTION R313 AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS)
R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic
residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses, in
accordance with R313.90.
Exception:
An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required where
additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses that do not have
an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.
R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems. An
automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in one- and
two-family dwellings in accordance with R313.90.
Exception:
An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for
additions or alterations to existing buildings that are not already provided
with an automatic residential sprinkler system.
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1138
R313.90 Sprinklers in Residential Structures. Notwithstanding the
provisions of the Building Code and International Residential Code, as
amended and adopted by the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, and in accordance
with Section 67.281, RSMo., a builder of one- or two-family dwellings shall
offer to any purchaser on or before the time of entering into the purchase
contract the option, at the purchaser's cost, to install or equip fire
sprinklers in the dwelling, residence, or unit. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, no purchaser of such a one- or two-family
dwelling shall be denied the right to choose or decline to install a fire
sprinkler system in such dwelling or residence being purchased.
(CHAPTER 4 FOUNDATIONS)
(SECTION R403 FOOTINGS)
R403.1.1 Minimum size. The minimum width, W, and thickness, T, for
concrete footings shall be in accordance with Tables R403.1(1) through
R403.1(4) and Figure R403.1(1) or R403.1.3, as applicable. The footing
width shall be based on the load-bearing value of the soil in accordance
with Table R401.4.1. Footing projections, P, shall be not less than 2 inches
(51 mm) and shall not exceed the thickness of the footing. Footing
thickness and projection for fireplaces shall be in accordance with Section
R1001.2. The size of footings supporting piers and columns shall be based
on the tributary load and allowable soil pressure in accordance with Table
R401.4.1. Footings for wood foundations shall be in accordance with the
details set forth in Section R403.2, and Figures R403.1(2) and R403.1(3).
Table R403.1(1)
Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings for Light-
Frame Construction (inches)a, b
Load-Bearing Value of Soil
(psf)
Snow
Load
or Roof
Live
Load
Story
and
Type of
Structure
with
Light
Frame 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
20 psf 1 story -
slab-ongrade
12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
with
crawl
space
12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1139
Table R403.1(1)
Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings for Light-
Frame Construction (inches)a, b
Load-Bearing Value of Soil
(psf)
Snow
Load
or Roof
Live
Load
Story
and
Type of
Structure
with
Light
Frame 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
1 story -
plus
basement
18 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
slab-ongrade
12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
with
crawl
space
16 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
plus
basement
22 x 6 16 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
slab-ongrade
14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
with
crawl
space
19 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
plus
basement
25 x 8 19 x 6 15 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
30 psf 1 story -
slab-ongrade
12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
with
crawl
space
13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1140
Table R403.1(1)
Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings for Light-
Frame Construction (inches)a, b
Load-Bearing Value of Soil
(psf)
Snow
Load
or Roof
Live
Load
Story
and
Type of
Structure
with
Light
Frame 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
1 story -
plus
basement
19 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
slab-ongrade
12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
with
crawl
space
17 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
plus
basement
23 x 6 17 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
slab-ongrade
15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
with
crawl
space
20 x 6 15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
plus
basement
26 x 8 20 x 6 16 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
50 psf 1 story -
slab-ongrade
12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
with
crawl
space
16 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1141
Table R403.1(1)
Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings for Light-
Frame Construction (inches)a, b
Load-Bearing Value of Soil
(psf)
Snow
Load
or Roof
Live
Load
Story
and
Type of
Structure
with
Light
Frame 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
1 story -
plus
basement
21 x 6 16 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
slab-ongrade
14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
with
crawl
space
19 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
plus
basement
25 x 7 19 x 6 15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
slab-ongrade
17 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
with
crawl
space
22 x 6 17 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
plus
basement
28 x 9 21 x 6 17 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
70 psf 1 story -
slab-ongrade
12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
with
crawl
space
18 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1142
Table R403.1(1)
Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings for Light-
Frame Construction (inches)a, b
Load-Bearing Value of Soil
(psf)
Snow
Load
or Roof
Live
Load
Story
and
Type of
Structure
with
Light
Frame 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
1 story -
plus
basement
24 x 7 18 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
slab-ongrade
16 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
with
crawl
space
21 x 6 16 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
plus
basement
27 x 9 20 x 6 16 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
slab-ongrade
19 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
with
crawl
space
25 x 7 18 x 6 15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
plus
basement
30 x 10 23 x 6 18 x 6 15 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 plf = 14.6N/m, 1 pound per square foot =
47.9 N/m2.
a. Interpolation allowed. Extrapolation is not allowed.
b. Based on 32-foot-wide house with load-bearing center wall that
carries half of the tributary attic, and floor framing. For every two
(2) feet of adjustment to the width of the house, add or subtract
two (2) inches of footing width and one (1) inch of footing
thickness (but not less than six (6) inches thick).
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1143
Table R403.1(2)
Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings for Light-
Frame Construction with Brick Veneer (inches)a,b
Load-Bearing Value of Soil
(psf)
Snow
Load
or Roof
Live
Load
Story
and
Type of
Structure
with
Brick
Veneer 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
20 psf 1 story -
slab-ongrade
12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
with
crawl
space
15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
plus
basement
21 x 6 15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
slab-ongrade
15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
with
crawl
space
20 x 6 15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
plus
basement
26 x 8 20 x 6 16 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
slab-ongrade
20 x 6 15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1144
Table R403.1(2)
Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings for Light-
Frame Construction with Brick Veneer (inches)a,b
Load-Bearing Value of Soil
(psf)
Snow
Load
or Roof
Live
Load
Story
and
Type of
Structure
with
Brick
Veneer 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
3 story -
with
crawl
space
26 x 8 19 x 6 15 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
plus
basement
32 x 11 24 x 7 19 x 6 16 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6
30 psf 1 story -
slab-ongrade
12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
with
crawl
space
16 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
plus
basement
22 x 6 16 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
slab-ongrade
16 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
with
crawl
space
22 x 6 16 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
plus
basement
27 x 9 21 x 6 16 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
slab-ongrade
21 x 6 16 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1145
Table R403.1(2)
Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings for Light-
Frame Construction with Brick Veneer (inches)a,b
Load-Bearing Value of Soil
(psf)
Snow
Load
or Roof
Live
Load
Story
and
Type of
Structure
with
Brick
Veneer 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
3 story -
with
crawl
space
27 x 8 20 x 6 16 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
plus
basement
33 x 11 24 x 7 20 x 6 16 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6
50 psf 1 story -
slab-ongrade
13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
with
crawl
space
18 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
plus
basement
24 x 7 18 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
slab-ongrade
18 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
with
crawl
space
24 x 7 18 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
plus
basement
29 x 10 22 x 6 18 x 6 15 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
slab-ongrade
27 x 7 18 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1146
Table R403.1(2)
Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings for Light-
Frame Construction with Brick Veneer (inches)a,b
Load-Bearing Value of Soil
(psf)
Snow
Load
or Roof
Live
Load
Story
and
Type of
Structure
with
Brick
Veneer 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
3 story -
with
crawl
space
29 x 9 22 x 6 17 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
plus
basement
35 x 12 26 x 8 21 x 6 17 x 6 15 x 6 13 x 6
70 psf 1 story -
slab-ongrade
15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
with
crawl
space
20 x 6 15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
plus
basement
26 x 8 20 x 6 16 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
slab-ongrade
20 x 6 15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
with
crawl
space
26 x 8 19 x 6 15 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
plus
basement
32 x 11 24 x 7 19 x 6 16 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
slab-ongrade
26 x 8 19 x 6 15 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1147
Table R403.1(2)
Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings for Light-
Frame Construction with Brick Veneer (inches)a,b
Load-Bearing Value of Soil
(psf)
Snow
Load
or Roof
Live
Load
Story
and
Type of
Structure
with
Brick
Veneer 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
3 story -
with
crawl
space
31 x 11 23 x 7 19 x 6 16 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
plus
basement
37 x 13 28 x 9 22 x 6 18 x 6 16 x 6 14 x 6
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 plf = 14.6N/m, 1 pound per square foot =
47.9 N/m2.
a. Interpolation allowed. Extrapolation is not allowed.
b. Based on 32-foot-wide house with load-bearing center wall that
carries half of the tributary attic, and floor framing. For every two
(2) feet of adjustment to the width of the house, add or subtract
two (2) inches of footing width and one (1) inch of footing
thickness (but not less than six (6) inches thick).
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1148
Table R403.1(3)
Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings With Cast-in-
Place Concrete or Fully Grouted Masonry Wall Construction
(inches)a,b
Load-Bearing Value of Soil
(psf)
Snow
Load
or Roof
Live
Load
Story
and
Type of
Structure
with
CMU 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
20 psf 1 story -
slab-ongrade
14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
with
crawl
space
19 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
plus
basement
25 x 8 19 x 6 15 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
slab-ongrade
23 x 7 18 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
with
crawl
space
29 x 9 22 x 6 17 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
plus
basement
35 x 12 26 x 8 21 x 6 17 x 6 15 x 6 13 x 6
3 story -
slab-ongrade
32 x 11 24 x 7 19 x 6 16 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
with
crawl
space
38 x 14 28 x 9 23 x 6 19 x 6 16 x 8 14 x 6
3 story -
plus
basement
43 x 17 33 x 11 26 x 8 22 x 6 19 x 6 16 x 6
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1149
Table R403.1(3)
Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings With Cast-in-
Place Concrete or Fully Grouted Masonry Wall Construction
(inches)a,b
Load-Bearing Value of Soil
(psf)
Snow
Load
or Roof
Live
Load
Story
and
Type of
Structure
with
CMU 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
30 psf 1 story -
slab-ongrade
15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
with
crawl
space
20 x 6 15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
plus
basement
26 x 8 20 x 6 16 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
slab-ongrade
24 x 7 18 x 6 15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
with
crawl
space
30 x 10 22 x 6 18 x 6 15 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
plus
basement
36 x 13 27 x 8 21 x 6 18 x 6 15 x 6 13 x 6
3 story -
slab-ongrade
33 x 12 25 x 7 20 x 6 17 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6
3 story -
with
crawl
space
39 x 14 29 x 9 23 x 7 19 x 6 17 x 6 14 x 6
3 story -
plus
basement
44 x 17 33 x 12 27 x 8 22 x 6 19 x 6 17 x 6
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1150
Table R403.1(3)
Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings With Cast-in-
Place Concrete or Fully Grouted Masonry Wall Construction
(inches)a,b
Load-Bearing Value of Soil
(psf)
Snow
Load
or Roof
Live
Load
Story
and
Type of
Structure
with
CMU 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
50 psf 1 story -
slab-ongrade
17 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
with
crawl
space
22 x 6 17 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
plus
basement
28 x 9 21 x 6 17 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
slab-ongrade
27 x 8 20 x 6 16 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
with
crawl
space
32 x 11 24 x 7 19 x 6 16 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
plus
basement
38 x 14 28 x 9 23 x 6 19 x 6 16 x 6 14 x 6
3 story -
slab-ongrade
35 x 13 27 x 8 21 x 6 18 x 6 15 x 6 13 x 6
3 story -
with
crawl
space
41 x 15 31 x 10 24 x 7 20 x 6 17 x 6 15 x 6
3 story -
plus
basement
47 x 18 35 x 12 28 x 9 23 x 7 20 x 6 17 x 6
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1151
Table R403.1(3)
Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings With Cast-in-
Place Concrete or Fully Grouted Masonry Wall Construction
(inches)a,b
Load-Bearing Value of Soil
(psf)
Snow
Load
or Roof
Live
Load
Story
and
Type of
Structure
with
CMU 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
70 psf 1 story -
slab-ongrade
19 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
with
crawl
space
25 x 7 18 x 6 15 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
1 story -
plus
basement
30 x 10 23 x 6 18 x 6 15 x 6 13 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
slab-ongrade
29 x 9 22 x 6 17 x 6 14 x 6 12 x 6 12 x 6
2 story -
with
crawl
space
34 x 12 26 x 8 21 x 6 17 x 6 15 x 6 13 x 6
2 story -
plus
basement
40 x 15 30 x 10 24 x 7 20 x 6 17 x 6 15 x 6
3 story -
slab-ongrade
38 x 14 28 x 9 23 x 6 19 x 6 16 x 6 14 x 6
3 story -
with
crawl
space
43 x 16 32 x 11 26 x 8 21 x 6 18 x 6 16 x 6
3 story -
plus
basement
49 x 19 37 x 13 29 x 10 24 x 7 21 x 6 18 x 6
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1152
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 plf = 14.6N/m, 1 pound per square foot =
47.9 N/m2.
a. Interpolation allowed. Extrapolation is not allowed.
b. Based on 32-foot-wide house with load-bearing center wall that
carries half of the tributary attic, and floor framing. For every two
(2) feet of adjustment to the width of the house, add or subtract
two (2) inches of footing width and one (1) inch of footing
thickness (but not less than six (6) inches thick).
Table R403.1(4)
Minimum Width of Concrete, Precast, or Masonry Footings
(inches) for Light-Frame Construction with Pre-Fabricated Roof
Trussesa,b,c
Load-Bearing Value of Soil (psf)
1500 2000 3000 >4000
Conventional light-frame construction with pre-fabricated trusses
1 story 12 12 12 12
2 story 15 12 12 12
3 story 23 17 12 12
4-inch brick veneer over light frame or 8-inch hollow concrete
masonry
1 story 12 12 12 12
2 story 21 16 12 12
3 story 32 24 16 12
8-inch solid or fully grouted masonry
1 story 16 12 12 12
2 story 29 21 14 12
3 story 42 32 21 16
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa
a. Spread footings shall be same thickness as the wall (minimum of
eight (8) inches).
b. Where minimum footing width is twelve (12) inches, use of a single
wythe of solid or fully grouted 12-inch nominal concrete masonry
units is permitted.
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1153
c. Snow Load or Roof Live Load shall not exceed 20 psf. If load
exceeds 20 psf, designs must be completed by a licensed design
professional.
R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection. Except where otherwise protected from
frost, foundation walls, piers and other permanent supports of buildings
and structures shall be protected from frost by one or more of the
following methods:
1. Extended below the frost line specified in Table R301.2.(1).
2. Constructed in accordance with Section R403.3.
3. Constructed in accordance with ASCE 32.
4. Erected on solid rock.
Exceptions:
1. Protection of freestanding accessory structures, other than
garages, with an area of two hundred (200) square feet or less, of
light-frame construction, with an eave height of 10 feet (3,048
mm) or less shall not be required.
2. Decks not supported by a dwelling need not be provided with
footings that extend below the frost line.
Footings shall not bear on frozen soil unless the frozen condition is
permanent.
R403.1.7 Footings on or adjacent to slopes. The placement of
buildings and structures on or adjacent to slopes steeper than one unit
vertical in three units horizontal (33.3-percent slope) shall conform to
Sections R403.1.7.1 through R403.1.7.4. or designed and sealed by a
registered engineer with approval from the Building Official.
(SECTION R404 FOUNDATION AND RETAINING WALLS)
R404.1.3.2 Reinforcement for foundation walls. Concrete foundation
walls shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom. Horizontal
reinforcement shall be provided in accordance with Table R404.1.2(10).
Vertical reinforcement is permitted to be provided in accordance with
Table R404.1.2(2), R404.1.2(3), R404.1.2(4), R404.1.2(5), R404.1.2(6),
R404.1.2(7) or R404.1.2(8). Vertical reinforcement for flat basement walls
retaining 4 feet (1,219 mm) or more of unbalanced backfill is permitted to
be determined in accordance with Table R404.1.2(9). For basement walls
supporting above grade concrete walls, vertical reinforcement shall be the
greater of that required by Tables R404.1.2(2) through R404.1.2(8) or by
Section R608.6 for the above-grade wall. In buildings assigned to Seismic
Design Category D0, D1 or D2, concrete foundation walls shall also
comply with Section R404.1.4.2.
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1154
Table R404.1.2(10)
Concrete Foundation Walls
Maximum Wall
Height
Maximum Depth of
Unbalanced Backfill
Minimum Nominal
Wall Thickness
7'-0" 6'-0" or less
7'-0"
8"
10" (Note a)
8'-0" 6'-0 or less
7'-0"
8'-0"
8" (Note a)
8" (Note a)
8" (Note a)
9'-0" 6'-0" or less
7'-0"
8'-0"
9'-0"
10" (Note b)
10" (Note b)
10" (Note b)
10" (Note b)
10'0" 9'0" 12" (Note c)
Note a: Concrete foundation walls may be constructed a minimum of
nominal 8 inches thick where the wall height from the top of the footing
to the top of the wall does not exceed eight (8) feet. A minimum of two #4
reinforcing bars shall be placed horizontally in the top and bottom of the
foundation wall. A minimum of two #5 reinforcing bars shall be provided
around all window and door openings in concrete foundation and basement
walls; bars shall extend a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches beyond the
corners of the openings.
Note b: Concrete foundation walls may be constructed a minimum of
nominal 10 inches thick. A minimum of two #5 reinforcing bars shall be
placed horizontally in the top, middle, and bottom of the foundation wall. A
minimum of two #5 reinforcing bars shall be provided around all window
and door openings in concrete foundation and basement walls; bars shall
extend a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches beyond the corners of the
openings.
Note c: Concrete foundation walls may be constructed a minimum of
nominal 12 inches thick. A minimum of three #5 reinforcing bars shall be
placed horizontally in the top, middle, and bottom of the foundation wall. A
minimum of two #5 reinforcing bars shall be provided around all window
and door openings in concrete foundation and basement walls; bars shall
extend a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches beyond the corners of the
openings.
Note d: The concrete minimum wall thickness shall be eight (8) inches for
foundation walls in soil classes SC, MH, ML-CL and inorganic CL when
maximum wall height is eight (8) feet.
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1155
Note e: The concrete minimum wall thickness shall be ten (10) inches for
foundation walls in soil classes SC, MH, ML-CL and inorganic CL when the
maximum wall height is nine (9) feet.
Note f: The concrete minimum wall thickness shall be twelve (12) inches
for foundation walls in soil classes SC, MH, ML-CL and inorganic CL when
the maximum wall height is ten (10) feet.
(SECTION R405 FOUNDATION DRAINAGE)
R405.1 Concrete or masonry foundations. Drains shall be provided
around concrete or masonry foundations that retain earth and enclose
habitable or usable spaces located below grade. Drainage tiles, gravel or
crushed stone drains, perforated pipe or other approved systems or
materials shall be installed at or below the area to be protected and shall
discharge by gravity or mechanical means into an approved drainage
system. Gravel or crushed stone drains shall extend not less than 1 foot
(305 mm) beyond the outside edge of the footing and 6 inches (152 mm)
above the top of the footing and be covered with an approved filter
membrane material. The top of open joints of drain tiles shall be protected
with strips of building paper. Except where otherwise recommended by
the drain manufacturer, perforated drains shall be surrounded with an
approved filter membrane or the filter membrane shall cover the washed
gravel or crushed rock covering the drain. Drainage tiles or perforated
pipe shall be placed on a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm) of washed gravel
or crushed rock not less than one (1) sieve size larger than the tile joint
opening or perforation and covered with not less than 6 inches (152 mm)
of the same material.
Exceptions:
1. A drainage system is not required where the foundation is
installed on well-drained ground or sand-gravel mixture soils
according to the Unified Soil Classification System, Group I soils,
as detailed in Table R405.1.
2. Drains provided as detailed in Section R405.1.90 are approved as
an alternative method to meet the requirements of this Section.
R405.1.90 Soil evaluations. An evaluation of the soil for the presence or
absence of groundwater is required. The evaluation report shall be based
on either a subsurface soil investigation or satisfactory data from adjacent
areas together with an inspection of the excavation prior to pouring
concrete.
R405.1.90.1 Groundwater present. Provide drain tile, perforated pipe
or other approved foundation drainage systems around perimeter of the
outside of the foundation and inside the foundation. Drain discharge shall
be by gravity to daylight or be connected to a basement floor sump.
R405.1.90.2 No groundwater present. Provide drain tile, perforated
pipe or other approved foundation drainage systems around perimeter of
the outside of the foundation or inside the foundation. Drain discharge
shall be by gravity to daylight or be connected to a basement floor sump.
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1156
R405.1.90.3 Filter membranes. An approved filter membrane shall be
placed over the top of the joints/pipe perforations. The tile/pipe shall be
placed on two (2) inches minimum of gravel or crushed stone and have six
(6) inches of minimum cover.
R405.1.90.4 Drainage system. A drainage system shall discharge by
gravity to daylight or be connected to an approved sump with pump.
(CHAPTER 5 FLOORS)
(SECTION 507 EXTERIOR DECKS)
R507.2.4 Deck lateral load connection. The lateral load connection
required by Section R507.1 shall be one (1) of the following methods:
1. In accordance with Figure R507.2.3(1) with hold-down tension
devices installed in not less than two (2) locations per deck, within
twenty-four (24) inches of each end of the deck. Each device shall
have an allowable stress design capacity of not less than 1,500
pounds (6672 N).
2. In accordance with Figure R507.2.3(2) with hold-down tension
devices installed in not less than four (4) locations per deck, and
each device shall have an allowable stress design capacity of not
less than 750 pounds (3336 N).
3. Using knee braces extending from the floor system to the posts.
4. Using a diagonal brace across the floor system installed below the
floor system and attached using a (2) 10d nails through the brace
into each joist, or by a metal diagonal brace "cut-in" and attached
to the top chords of the joist.
5. Full depth burial of the deck posts.
(CHAPTER 6 WALL CONSTRUCTION)
(SECTION 602 WOOD WALL FRAMING)
R602.7.5 Supports for headers. Headers shall be supported on each
end with one (1) or more jack studs or with approved framing anchors in
accordance with Table R602.7(1) or R602.7.(2). The full-height stud
adjacent to each end of the header shall be end nailed to each end of the
header with four-16d nails (3.5 inches x 0.135 inches). The minimum
number of full-height studs at each end of a header shall be in accordance
with Table R602.7.5.
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1157
Table R602.7.5
MINIMUM NUMBER OF FULL HEIGHT STUDS AT EACH END OF
HEADERS IN EXTERIOR WALLSa
Maximum Header
Span
(feet)
Ultimate Design Wind Speed and Exposure
Category
<140mph, Exposure
B or <130 mph,
Exposure C
<115 mph, Exposure
Bb
4 1 1
6 2 1
8 2 1
10 3 2
12 3 2
14 3 2
16 4 2
18 4 2
a. For header spans between those given above, use the minimum number
of full-height studs associated with the larger header span.
b. The tabulated minimum number of full-height studs is applicable where
jack studs are provided to support the header at each end in
accordance with Table R602.7.(1). Where a framing anchor is used to
support the header in lieu of a jack stud in accordance with footnote
"d" of Table R602.7.(1), the minimum number of full-height studs at
each end of a header shall be in accordance with requirements for wind
speed <140mph, Exposure B.
R602.12 Simplified wall bracing. Buildings meeting all of the
conditions listed below shall be permitted to be braced in accordance with
this Section as an alternate to the requirements of Section R602.10. The
entire building shall be braced in accordance with this Section; the use of
other bracing provisions of Section R602.10, except as specified herein,
shall not be permitted.
1. There shall be not more than three (3) stories above the top of a
concrete or masonry foundation or basement wall. Permanent
wood foundations shall not be permitted.
2. Floors shall not cantilever more than 24 inches (607 mm) beyond
the foundation or bearing wall below.
3. Wall height shall not be greater than a nominal 12 feet when
using the minimum required bracing lengths specified in Table
602.12.4.
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1158
Exception: Structural calculations and details are not required when
there are no braced wall panels in that portion of a wall where the
height exceeds a nominal 12 feet and that greater wall height segment
is part of a prescriptive braced wall line on each of the adjacent
stories.
4. The building shall have a roof eave-to-ridge height of 15 feet
(4,572 mm) or less.
5. Exterior walls shall have gypsum board with a minimum thickness
of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) installed on the interior side fastened in
accordance with Table R702.3.5.
Exception: Gypsum board is not required for wall bracing on exterior
walls in garages.
6. The structure shall be located where the ultimate design wind
speed is less than or equal to 130 mph (58 m/s), and the exposure
category is B or C.
7. The structure shall be located in Seismic Design Category A, B or
C for detached one- and two-family dwellings or Seismic Design
Category A, B or C for townhouses.
8. Cripple walls shall not be permitted in three-story buildings.
602.12.1 Circumscribed rectangle. The bracing required for each
building shall be determined by circumscribing a rectangle around the
entire building on each floor as shown in Figure 602.12.1. The rectangle
shall surround all enclosed offsets and projections such as sunrooms and
attached garages. Open structures, such as carports and decks, shall be
permitted to be excluded. The rectangle shall not have a side greater than
60 feet (18,288 mm), and the ratio between the long side and short side
shall not be greater than 3:1.
R602.12.2 Sheathing materials. The following sheathing materials
installed on the exterior side of exterior walls shall be used to construct a
bracing unit as defined in Section R602.12.3. Mixing materials is
prohibited.
1. Wood structural panels with a minimum thickness of 7/16 inch
fastened in accordance with Table R602.3(3).
2. Structural fiberboard sheathing with a minimum thickness of 1/2
inch (12.7 mm) fastened in accordance with Table R602.3(1).
R602.12.3 Bracing unit. A bracing unit shall be a full-height sheathed
segment of the exterior wall without openings or vertical or horizontal
offsets and a minimum length as specified herein. Interior walls shall not
contribute toward the amount of required bracing. Mixing of Items 1 and
2 is prohibited on the same story.
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1159
1. Where all framed portions of all exterior walls are sheathed in
accordance with Section R602.12.2, including wall areas between
bracing units, above and below openings and on gable end walls,
the minimum length of a bracing unit shall be 3 feet (914 mm).
For walls with heights greater than a nominal 10 feet, the
minimum length of a bracing unit shall be 4 feet (1,219 mm).
2. Where the exterior walls are braced with sheathing panels in
accordance with Section R602.12.2 and areas between bracing
units are covered with other materials, the minimum length of a
bracing unit shall be 4 feet (1,219 mm).
(CHAPTER 9 ROOF ASSEMBLIES)
(SECTION 905 REQUIREMENTS FOR ROOF COVERINGS)
R905.2.8.2 Valleys. Valley linings shall be installed in accordance with
the manufacturer's instructions before applying shingles. Valley linings of
the following types shall be permitted:
1. For open valleys (valley lining exposed) lined with metal, the valley
lining shall be not less than twenty-four (24) inches (610 mm) wide
and be of any of the corrosion-resistant metals in Table R905.2.8.2.
2. For open valleys, valley lining of two (2) plies of mineral-surfaced
roll roofing, complying with ASTM D 3909 or ASTM D 6380 Class
M, shall be permitted. The bottom layer shall be 18 inches (457
mm) and the top layer not less than 36 inches (914 mm) wide.
3. For closed valleys (valley covered with shingles), valley lining of
two (2) plies of No. 15 felt complying with ASTM D 226 Type 1,
ASTM D 4869 Type 1, or ASTM D 6757, or valley lining as
described in Item 1 and 2 shall be permitted. Self-adhering
polymer modified bitumen underlayment complying with ASTM D
1970 shall be permitted in lieu of the lining material.
R905.2.8.5 Drip edge. A drip edge shall be provided at eaves and rake
edges of shingle roofs. Adjacent segments of drip edge shall be
overlapped not less than 2 inches (51 mm). Drip edges shall extend not
less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) below the roof sheathing and extend up back
onto the roof deck not less than 2 inches (51 mm). Drip edges shall be
mechanically fastened to the roof deck at not more than 12 inches (305
mm) o.c. with fasteners as specified in Section R905.2.5. Underlayment
shall be installed over the drip edge along eaves and under the
underlayment along rake edges.
Exception:
Unless drip edge specifically is required by the manufacture's installation
instructions of the roofing, metal wrapped fascia extending one (1) inch
under the roof covering with the underlayment installed over it, shall be
deemed to meet the requirements of this Section.
(CHAPTER 10 CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES)
(SECTION 1005 FACTORY-BUILT CHIMNEYS)
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1160
R1005.7 Factory-built chimney offsets. Where a factory-built chimney
assembly incorporates offsets, no part of the chimney shall be at an angle
of more than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) from vertical at any point in the
assembly and the chimney assembly shall not include more than four (4)
elbows.
Exception:
When allowed by the manufacturer's installation instructions.
(CHAPTER 11 ENERGY EFFICIENCY)
(SECTION N1101 GENERAL)
N1101.6 Defined terms. Add definition:
PROJECTION FACTOR. The ratio of the horizontal depth of an overhang,
eave, or permanently attached shading device, divided by the distance
measured vertically from the bottom of the fenestration glazing to the
underside of the overhang, eave, or permanently attached shading device.
N1101.13 (R401.2) Compliance. Projects shall comply with one of the
following:
1. Sections N1101.14 through N1104 as amended.
2. Section N1105 and the provisions of Sections N1101.14 through
N1104 labeled "Mandatory."
3. An energy rating index (ERI) approach in Section N1106.
N1101.14 (R401.3) Certificate (Mandatory). Unless otherwise
presented to the home owner and Building Official in writing, a
permanent certificate shall be completed by the builder or registered
design professional and posted on a wall in the space where the furnace is
located, a utility room or an approved location inside the building. Where
located on an electrical panel, the certificate shall not cover or obstruct
the visibility of the circuit directory label, service disconnect label or
other required labels. The certificate shall list the predominant R-values of
insulation installed in or on ceiling/roof, walls, foundation (slab, basement
wall, crawl space wall and/or floor) and ducts outside conditioned spaces;
U-factors for fenestration; and the results from any required duct system
and building envelope air leakage testing done on the building. Where
there is more than one (1) value for each component, the certificate shall
list the value covering the largest area. The certificate shall list the types
and efficiencies of heating, cooling and service water heating equipment.
Where a gas-fired unvented room heater, electric furnace, or baseboard
electric heater is installed in the residence, the certificate shall list "gasfired
unvented room heater," "electric furnace" or "baseboard electric
heater," as appropriate. An efficiency shall not be listed for gas-fired
unvented room heaters, electric furnaces or electric baseboard heaters.
Exception:
Homes built using a master plan shall provide a code block outlining the
basic energy elements of the home listed above, and a copy of this
information will be provided to the buyer of the home.
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1161
(SECTION N1102 BUILDING THERMAL ENVELOPE)
TABLE N1102.1.2 (R402.1.2)
INSULATION AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY
COMPONENTa
CLIMATE ZONE 4
FENESTRATION UFACTOR
0.35
SKYLIGHT U-FACTOR 0.60 See Note B
GLAZED
FENESTRATION SHGC
NR
CEILING R-VALUE 38
WOOD FRAME WALL
R-VALUE
13
MASS WALL R-VALUE 8/13 See Note I
FLOOR R-VALUE 19
BASEMENT WALL RVALUE
0 See Note J
SLAB R-VALUE AND
DEPTH
10, 2 ft See Note D
CRAWL SPACE WALL
R-VALUE
10/13 See Note C
a. R-values are minimums. U-factors and SHGC are maximums. When
insulation is installed in a cavity which is less than the label or design
thickness of the insulation, the installed R-value of the insulation shall
not be less than the R-value specified in the table.
b. The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC
column applies to all glazed fenestration.
c. "15/19" means R-15 continuous insulation on the interior or exterior of
the home or R-19 cavity insulation at the interior of the basement wall.
"15/19" shall be permitted to be met with R-13 cavity insulation on the
interior of the basement wall plus R-5 continuous insulation on the
interior or exterior of the home. "10/13" means R-10 continuous
insulation on the interior or exterior of the home or R-13 cavity
insulation at the interior of the basement wall.
d. R-5 shall be added to the required slab edge R-values for heated slabs.
Insulation depth shall be the depth of the footing or 2 feet, whichever
is less in Zones 1 through 3 for heated slabs.
e. —
f. —
g. —
h. —
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1162
i. The second R-value applies when more than half of the insulation is on
the interior of the mass wall.
j. Band boards and cripple walls shall be insulated to R-13.
N1102.4.1 (R402.4.1) Building thermal envelope. The building
thermal envelope shall comply with Sections N1102.4.1.1 and either
N1102.4.1.2 or N1102.4.1.90. The sealing methods between dissimilar
materials shall allow for differential expansion and contraction.
TABLE N1102.4.1.1 (402.4.1.1)
AIR BARRIER AND INSULATION INSTALLATION
COMPONENT
AIR BARRIER
CRITERIA
INSULATION
INSTALLATION
CRITERIA
General requirements A continuous air barrier
shall be installed in the
building envelope.
The exterior thermal
envelope contains a
continuous air barrier.
Breaks or joints in the
air barrier shall be
sealed.
Air-permeable insulation
shall not be used as a
sealing material.
Ceiling/attic The air barrier in any
dropped ceiling/soffit
shall be aligned with
the insulation and any
gaps in the air barrier
sealed.
Access openings, drop
down stairs or knee
wall doors to
unconditioned attic
spaces shall be sealed.
The insulation in any
dropped ceiling/soffit
shall be aligned with the
air barrier.
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1163
TABLE N1102.4.1.1 (402.4.1.1)
AIR BARRIER AND INSULATION INSTALLATION
COMPONENT
AIR BARRIER
CRITERIA
INSULATION
INSTALLATION
CRITERIA
Walls The junction of the
foundation and sill
plate shall be sealed.
The junction of the top
plate and the top of
exterior walls shall be
sealed.
Knee walls shall be
sealed.
Cavities within corners
and headers of frame
walls shall be insulated
by completely filling the
cavity with a material
having a thermal
resistance of R-3 per
inch minimum.
Exterior thermal
envelope insulation for
framed walls shall be
installed in substantial
contact and continuous
alignment with the air
barrier.
Windows, skylights and
doors
The space between
window/door jambs and
framing, and skylights
and framing shall be
sealed.
Rim joists Rim joists shall include
the air barrier.
Rim joists shall be
insulated.
Floors (including above
garage and
cantilevered floors)
The air barrier shall be
installed at any exposed
edge of insulation.
Floor framing cavity
insulation shall be
installed to maintain
permanent contact with
the underside of
subfloor decking, or
floor framing cavity
insulation shall be
permitted to be in
contact with the top side
of sheathing, or
continuous insulation
installed on the
underside of floor
framing; and extends
from the bottom to the
top of all perimeter floor
framing members.
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1164
TABLE N1102.4.1.1 (402.4.1.1)
AIR BARRIER AND INSULATION INSTALLATION
COMPONENT
AIR BARRIER
CRITERIA
INSULATION
INSTALLATION
CRITERIA
Crawl space walls Exposed earth in
unvented crawl spaces
shall be covered with a
Class I vapor retarder
with overlapping joints
taped.
Where provided instead
of floor insulation,
insulation shall be
permanently attached to
the crawl space walls.
Shafts, penetrations Duct shafts, utility
penetrations, and flue
shafts opening to
exterior or
unconditioned space
shall be sealed.
Narrow cavities Batts in narrow cavities
shall be cut to fit, or
narrow cavities shall be
filled by insulation that
on installation readily
conforms to the
available cavity space.
Garage separation Air sealing shall be
provided between the
garage and conditioned
spaces.
Recessed lighting Recessed light fixtures
installed in the building
thermal envelope shall
be sealed to the drywall
by means such as, but
not limited to, a
gasketed fixture.
Recessed light fixtures
installed in the building
thermal envelope shall
be air tight and IC
rated.
Plumbing and wiring Batt insulation shall be
cut neatly to fit around
wiring and plumbing in
exterior walls, or
insulation that on
installation readily
conforms to available
space shall extend
behind piping and
wiring.
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1165
TABLE N1102.4.1.1 (402.4.1.1)
AIR BARRIER AND INSULATION INSTALLATION
COMPONENT
AIR BARRIER
CRITERIA
INSULATION
INSTALLATION
CRITERIA
Shower/tub on exterior
wall
The air barrier installed
at exterior walls
adjacent to showers
and tubs shall separate
them from the showers
and tubs.
Exterior walls adjacent
to showers and tubs
shall be insulated.
Electrical/phone box on
exterior walls
The air barrier shall be
installed behind
electrical or
communication boxes
or air-sealed boxes
shall be installed.
HVAC register boots HVAC register boots
that penetrate the
building thermal
envelope shall be
sealed.
Concealed sprinklers When required to be
sealed, concealed fire
sprinklers shall only be
sealed in a manner that
is recommended by the
manufacturer. Caulking
or other adhesive
sealants shall not be
used to fill voids
between fire sprinkler
cover plates and walls
or ceilings.
a. In addition, inspection of log walls shall be in accordance with the
provisions of ICC 400.
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1166
N1102.4.1.2 (R402.4.1.2) Testing option. If testing is elected, the
building or dwelling unit shall be tested and verified as having an air
leakage rate of less than five (5) air changes per hour in Zone 4. Testing
shall be conducted in accordance with ASTM E 779 or ASTM E 1827 and
reported at a pressure of 0.2 inches w.g. (50 Pascals). Where required by
the code official, testing shall be conducted by an approved third party. A
written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party
conducting the test and provided to the code official. Testing shall be
performed at any time after creation of all penetrations of the building
thermal envelope.
During testing:
1. Exterior windows and doors, fireplace and stove doors shall be
closed, but not sealed, beyond the intended weather stripping or
other infiltration control measures.
2. Dampers including exhaust, intake, makeup air, backdraft and flue
dampers shall be closed, but not sealed beyond intended
infiltration control measures.
3. Interior doors, if installed at the time of the test, shall be open.
4. Exterior doors for continuous ventilation systems and heat
recovery ventilators shall be closed and sealed.
5. Heating and cooling systems, if installed at the time of the test,
shall be turned off.
6. Supply and return registers, if installed at the time of the test,
shall be fully open.
N1102.4.1.90 Inspection option. The items listed in Table N1102.4.1.1
(402.4.1.1), applicable to the method of construction, are field verified.
(SECTION N1103 SYSTEMS)
N1103.1.1 (R403.1.1) Programmable thermostat. Delete in its
entirety.
N1103.3.3 (R403.3.3) Duct testing (Optional). Ducts may be pressure
tested to determine air leakage by one (1) of the following methods:
1. Rough-in test: Total leakage shall be measured with a pressure
differential of 0.1 inch w.g. (25 Pa) across the system, including
the manufacturer's air handler enclosure if installed at the time of
the test. All registers shall be taped or otherwise sealed during the
test.
2. Postconstruction test: Total leakage shall be measured with a
pressure differential of 0.1 inch w.g. (25 Pa) across the entire
system, including the manufacturer's air handler enclosure.
Registers shall be taped or otherwise sealed during the test.
Exception: A duct air leakage test shall not be required where ducts and
air handlers are located entirely within the building thermal envelope.
A written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party
conducting the test and provided to the code official.
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1167
N1103.3.5 (R403.3.5) Building cavities (Mandatory). Delete in its
entirety.
N1103.4.1 (R403.4.1) Protection of piping insulation. Piping
insulation exposed to weather shall be protected from damage, including
that caused by sunlight, moisture, equipment maintenance and wind, and
shall provide shielding from solar radiation that can cause degradation of
the material. Adhesive tape shall not be permitted.
Exception: Line sets between the structure and the condensing unit.
N1103.5.3 (R405.5.3) Hot water pipe insulation (Prescriptive).
Insulation for hot water pipe with a minimum thermal resistance (R-value)
of R-3 shall be applied to the following:
1. Piping larger than 3/4 inch (19 mm) in nominal diameter.
2. Piping serving more than one (1) dwelling unit.
3. Piping located outside the conditioned space.
4. Piping from the water heater to a distribution manifold.
5. Piping located under a floor slab.
6. Buried in piping.
7. Supply and return piping in recirculation systems other than
demand recirculation systems.
N1103.6 (R403.6) Mechanical ventilation (Mandatory where
required by N1102.4.1.2). If, in accordance with N1102.4.1.2 or
N1102.4.1.90 the resulting air changes per hour (ACH) at 50 pascals is
less than five (5) air changes per hour, the building shall be provided with
ventilation that meets the requirements of Section M1507 of this code or
the International Mechanical Code, as applicable, or with other approved
means of ventilation. Outdoor air intakes and exhausts shall have
automatic or gravity dampers that close when the ventilation system is not
operating.
(SECTION N1104 ELECTRICAL POWER AND LIGHTING SYSTEMS)
N1104.1 (R404.1) Lighting equipment (Optional). Not less than
seventy-five percent (75%) of the lamps in permanently installed lighting
fixtures shall be high-efficacy lamps or not less than seventy-five percent
(75%) of the permanently installed lighting fixtures shall contain only
high-efficacy lamps.
Exception: Low-voltage lighting.
(SECTION N1105 SIMULATED PERFORMANCE ALTERNATIVE)
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1168
TABLE N1105.5.2(1) [R405.5.2(1)]
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE STANDARD REFERENCE AND
PROPOSED DESIGNS
BUILDING
COMPONENT
STANDARD
REFERENCED
DESIGN PROPOSED DESIGN
Above-grade walls Type: mass wall if
proposed wall is mass;
otherwise wood frame
As proposed
Gross area: same as
proposed
As proposed
U-factor: as specified in
Table N1102.1.4
As proposed
Solar absorptance =
0.75
As proposed
Remittance = 0.90 As proposed
Basement and crawl
space walls
Type: same as proposed As proposed
Gross area: same as
proposed
As proposed
U-factor: from Table
N1102.1.4, with
insulation layer on
interior side of walls
As proposed
Above-grade floors Type: wood frame As proposed
Gross area: same as
proposed
As proposed
U-factor: as specified in
Table N1102.1.4
As proposed
Ceilings Type: wood frame As proposed
Gross area: same as
proposed
As proposed
U-factor: as specified in
Table N1102.1.4
As proposed
Roofs Type: composition
shingle on wood
sheathing
As proposed
Gross area: same as
proposed
As proposed
Solar absorptance =
0.75
As proposed
Emittance = 0.90 As proposed
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1169
TABLE N1105.5.2(1) [R405.5.2(1)]
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE STANDARD REFERENCE AND
PROPOSED DESIGNS
BUILDING
COMPONENT
STANDARD
REFERENCED
DESIGN PROPOSED DESIGN
Attics Type: vented with
aperture = 1 ft2 per 300
ft2 ceiling area
As proposed
Foundations Type: same as proposed As proposed
Foundation wall area
above and below grade
and soil characteristics:
same as proposed
As proposed
Opaque doors Area: 40 ft2 As proposed
Orientation: North As proposed
U-factor: same as
fenestration from Table
N1102.1.4
As proposed
Vertical fenestration
other than opaque
doors
Total areab = 15% of
the conditioned floor
area
As proposed
Orientation: equally
distributed to 4
cardinal compass
orientations (N, E, S
and W)
As proposed
U-factor: as specified in
Table N1102.1.4
As proposed
SHGC: as specified in
Table N1102.1.2,
except that for climates
with no requirement
(NR) SHGC = 0.40 shall
be used
As proposed
Interior shade fraction:
0.92 - (0.21 x SHGC for
the standard reference
design)
0.92 - (0.21 x SHGC as
proposed)
External shading: none As proposed
Skylights None As proposed
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1170
TABLE N1105.5.2(1) [R405.5.2(1)]
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE STANDARD REFERENCE AND
PROPOSED DESIGNS
BUILDING
COMPONENT
STANDARD
REFERENCED
DESIGN PROPOSED DESIGN
Thermally isolated
sunrooms
None As proposed
Air exchange rate Air leakage rate of 5 air
changes per hour at a
pressure of 0.2 inches
w.g. (50 Pa). The
mechanical ventilation
rate shall be in addition
to the air leakage rate
and the same as in the
proposed design, but no
greater than 0.01 x CFA
+ 7.5 x (Nbr + 1).
Where:
CFA = conditioned floor
area
Nbr = number of
bedrooms
Energy recovery shall
not be assumed for
mechanical ventilation.
For residences that are
not tested, the same air
leakage rate as the
standard reference
design. For tested
residences, the
measured air exchange
ratea. The mechanical
ventilation rateb shall be
in addition to the air
leakage rate and shall
be proposed.
Mechanical ventilation None, except where
mechanical ventilation
is specified by the
proposed design, in
which case:
Annual vent fan energy
use: kWh/yr = 0.03942
x CFA + 29.565 x (Nbr
+ 1)
Where:
CFA = conditioned floor
area
Nbr = number of
bedrooms
As proposed
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1171
TABLE N1105.5.2(1) [R405.5.2(1)]
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE STANDARD REFERENCE AND
PROPOSED DESIGNS
BUILDING
COMPONENT
STANDARD
REFERENCED
DESIGN PROPOSED DESIGN
Internal gains IGain = 17,900 + 23.8
x CFA + 4104 x Nbr
(Btu/day per dwelling
unit)
Same as standard
reference design
Internal mass An internal mass for
furniture and contents
of 8 pounds per square
foot of floor area
Same as standard
reference design, plus
any additional mass
specifically designed as
a thermal storage
elementc but not integral
to the building envelope
or structure.
Structural mass For masonry floor slabs,
80% of floor area
covered by R-2 carpet
and pad, and 20% of
floor directly exposed
to room air
As proposed
For masonry basement
walls, as proposed, but
with insulation required
by Table R402.1.4
located on the interior
side of the walls
As proposed
For other walls, for
ceilings, floors, and
interior walls, wood
frame construction
As proposed
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1172
TABLE N1105.5.2(1) [R405.5.2(1)]
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE STANDARD REFERENCE AND
PROPOSED DESIGNS
BUILDING
COMPONENT
STANDARD
REFERENCED
DESIGN PROPOSED DESIGN
Heating systemsd, e Fuel type: same as the
proposed design
Efficiencies:
Electric: air-source
heat pump with
prevailing Federal
minimum standards.
Non-electric furnaces:
natural gas furnace
with prevailing Federal
minimum standards.
Non-electric boilers:
natural gas boiler with
prevailing Federal
minimum standards.
Capacity: sized in
accordance with
Section N1103.7.
As proposed
Cooling systemsd, f Fuel type: electric
Efficiency: in
accordance with
prevailing Federal
minimum standards
Capacity: sized in
accordance with
Section N1103.7
As proposed
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1173
TABLE N1105.5.2(1) [R405.5.2(1)]
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE STANDARD REFERENCE AND
PROPOSED DESIGNS
BUILDING
COMPONENT
STANDARD
REFERENCED
DESIGN PROPOSED DESIGN
Service water heatingd,
e, f
Fuel type; same as
proposed design
Efficiency: in
accordance with
prevailing Federal
minimum standards
Use: gal/day = 30 + 10
x Nbr
Tank temperature: 120°
F.
Where:
Nbr = number of
bedrooms
As proposed
Same as standard
reference
Thermal distribution
systems
Duct insulation: from
Section N1103.2.1
A thermal distribution
system efficiency (DSE)
of 0.88 shall be applied
to both the heating and
cooling system
efficiencies for all
systems other than
tested duct systems.
For tested duct
systems, the leakage
rate shall be 4 cfm
(113.3 L/min) per 100
ft2 (9.29 m2) of
conditioned floor area
at a pressure of
differential of 0.1
inches w.g. (25 Pa)
As tested or specified in
Table R405.5.2(2) if not
tested. Duct insulation
shall be as proposed.
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1174
TABLE N1105.5.2(1) [R405.5.2(1)]
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE STANDARD REFERENCE AND
PROPOSED DESIGNS
BUILDING
COMPONENT
STANDARD
REFERENCED
DESIGN PROPOSED DESIGN
Thermostat Type: Manual, cooling
temperature setpoint =
75° F.
Heating temperature
setpoint = 72° F.
Same as standard
reference
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.93 m2; 1 British thermal unit = 1055J; 1 pound
per square foot = 4.88 kg/m2; 1 gallon (US) = 3.785 L; ° C. = (° F-32)/1.8;
1 degree = 0.79 rad
a. Where required by the code official, testing shall be conducted by an
approved party. Hourly calculations as specified in the ASHRAE
Handbook of Fundamentals, or the equivalent, shall be used to
determine the energy loads resulting from infiltration.
b. The combined air exchange rate for infiltration and mechanical
ventilation shall be determined in accordance with Equation 43 of
2001 ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals, page 26.24, and the
"Whole-house Ventilation" provisions of 2001 ASHRAE Handbook of
Fundamentals, page 26.19, for intermittent mechanical ventilation.
c. Thermal storage element shall mean a component not part of the
floors, walls or ceilings that is part of a passive solar system, and that
provides thermal storage such as enclosed water columns, rock beds,
or phase-change containers. A thermal storage element must be in the
same room as fenestration that faces within 15 degrees (0.26 rad) of
true south, or must be connected to such a room with pipes or ducts
that allow the element to be actively charged.
d. For a proposed design with multiple heating, cooling or water heating
systems using different fuel types, the applicable standard reference
design system capacities and fuel types shall be weighted in
accordance with their respective loads as calculated by accepted
engineering practice for each equipment and fuel type present.
e. For a proposed design without a proposed heating system, a heating
system with the prevailing Federal minimum efficiency shall be
assumed for both the standard reference design and proposed design.
f. For a proposed design home without a proposed cooling system, an
electric air conditioner with the prevailing Federal minimum efficiency
shall be assumed for both the standard reference design and the
proposed design.
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1175
g. For a proposed design with a non-storage-type water heater, a fortygallon
storage-type water heater with the prevailing Federal minimum
energy factor for the same fuel as the predominant heating fuel type
shall be assumed. For the case of a proposed design without a
proposed water heater, a forty-gallon storage-type water heater with
the prevailing Federal minimum efficiency for the same fuel as the
predominant heating fuel type shall be assumed for both the proposed
design and standard reference design.
(CHAPTER 13 GENERAL MECHANICAL SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS)
(SECTION M1301 GENERAL)
M1301.2 Identification. Each length of pipe and tubing, as produced by
the manufacturer and prior to use in the field, shall bear the identification
of the manufacturer. Each pipe fitting utilized in a mechanical system
shall bear the identification of the manufacturer.
Exception: Line sets and similar materials provided the installer can
provide documentation related to the material used such as, but not
limited to, a receipt, invoice, or container.
(SECTION M1305 APPLIANCE ACCESS)
M1305.1.4.1 Ground Clearance. Equipment and appliances supported
from the ground shall be level and firmly supported on a concrete slab or
other approved material extending not less than two (2) inches above the
adjoining ground. Such support shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions. Appliances suspended from the
floor shall have clearances of not less than six (6) inches from the ground.
(SECTION M1307 APPLIANCE INSTALLATION)
M1307.2 Anchorage of appliances: Delete in its entirety.
(CHAPTER 14 HEATING AND COOLING EQUIPMENT AND
APPLIANCES)
(SECTION M1411 HEATING AND COOLING EQUIPMENT)
M1411.3.1 Auxiliary and secondary drain systems. In addition to the
requirements of Section M1411.3, a secondary drain or auxiliary drain
pan shall be required for each cooling or evaporator coil where damage to
any building components will occur as a result of overflow from the
equipment drain pan or stoppage in the condensate drain piping. Such
piping shall maintain a minimum horizontal slope in the direction of
discharge or not less than 1/8 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal
(1-percent slope). Drain piping shall be not less than 3/4-inch (19 mm)
nominal pipe size. One (1) of the following methods shall be used:
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1176
1. An auxiliary drain pan with a separate drain shall be installed
under the coils on which condensation will occur. The auxiliary
pan drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to
alert occupants in the event of a stoppage of the primary drain.
The pan shall have a minimum depth of 1.5 inches (38 mm), shall
be not less than 3 inches (76 mm) larger than the unit or the coil
dimensions in width and length and shall be constructed of
corrosion-resistant material. Galvanized sheet steel pans shall
have a minimum thickness of not less than No. 26 Gage. Nonmetallic
pans shall have a minimum thickness of not less than
0.0625 inch (1.6 mm).
2. A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to the drain pan
installed with the equipment. This overflow drain shall discharge
to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event
of a stoppage of the primary drain. The overflow drain line shall
connect to the drain pan at a higher level than the primary drain
connection.
3. An auxiliary drain pan without a separate drain line shall be
installed under the coils on which condensation will occur. This
pan shall be equipped with a water level detection device
conforming to UL 508 that will shut off the equipment served
prior to overflow of the pan. The pan shall be equipped with a
fitting to allow for drainage. The auxiliary drain pan shall be
constructed in accordance with Item 1 of this Section.
4. A water level detection device conforming to UL 508 shall be
installed that will shut off the equipment served in the event that
the primary drain is blocked. The device shall be installed in the
primary drain line, the overflow drain line or the equipment
supplied drain pan, located at a point higher than the primary
drain line connection and below the overflow rim of such pan.
(CHAPTER 15 EXHAUST SYSTEMS)
(SECTION M1502 CLOTHES DRYER EXHAUST)
M1502.4.1 Material and size. Exhaust ducts shall have a smooth
interior finish and be constructed of metal having a minimum thickness of
0.0157 inches (0.3950 mm). The duct shall be 4 inches (102 mm) nominal
in diameter.
M1502.4.2 Duct installation. Exhaust ducts shall be supported at each
joint, at intervals not to exceed 12 feet (3,658 mm) and shall be secured in
place. The insert end of the duct shall extend into the adjoining duct or
fitting in the direction of airflow. Exhaust duct joints shall be sealed in
accordance with Section M1601.4.1. Ducts shall not be joined with
fasteners that protrude more than 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) into the inside of the
duct.
(SECTION M1503 RANGE HOODS)
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1177
M1503.4 Make-up air required. Exhaust hood system capable of
exhausting in excess of four hundred (400) cubic feet per minute shall be
provided with makeup air at a rate approximately equal to the exhaust air
rate. Such makeup air systems shall be equipped with a means of closure
and shall be automatically controlled to start and operate simultaneously
with the exhaust system.
(CHAPTER 16 DUCT SYSTEMS)
(SECTION M1601 DUCT CONSTRUCTION)
M1601.1.1 Above-ground duct systems. Above-ground duct systems
shall conform to the following:
1. Equipment connected to duct systems shall be designed to limit
discharge air temperature to not greater than 250° F. (121° C.).
2. Factory-made ducts shall be listed and labeled, as produced by
the manufacturer and prior to use in the field, in accordance with
UL 181 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
3. Fibrous glass duct construction shall conform to the SMACNA
Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards or NAIMA Fibrous
Glass Duct Construction Standards.
4. Field-fabricated and shop-fabricated metal and flexible duct
constructions shall conform to the SMACNA HVAC Duct
Construction Standards — Metal and Flexible or by Table
M1601.1.1. Galvanized steel shall conform to ASTM A 653.
5. The use of gypsum products to construct return air ducts or
plenums is permitted, provided that the air temperature does not
exceed 125° F. (52° C.) and exposed surfaces are not subject to
condensation.
6. Duct systems shall be constructed of materials having a flame
spread index of not greater than two hundred (200).
7. Stud wall cavities and the spaces between solid floor joists to be
used as air plenums shall comply with the following conditions:
7.1. These cavities or spaces shall not be used as a plenum for supply
air.
7.2. These cavities or spaces shall not be part of a required fireresistance-
rated assembly.
7.3. Stud wall cavities shall not convey air from more than one (1)
floor level. Stud wall cavities shall be sealed at the floor to not
draft air from the living space between the flooring and drywall.
7.4. Stud wall cavities and joist-space plenums shall be isolated from
adjacent concealed spaces by tight-fitting fireblocking in
accordance with Section R602.8.
7.5. Stud wall cavities in the outside walls of building envelope
assemblies shall not be utilized as air plenums.
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1178
M1601.4.1 Joints, seams and connections. Longitudinal and
transverse joints, seams and connections in metallic and non-metallic
ducts shall be constructed as specified in SMACNA HVAC Duct
Construction Standards - Metal and Flexible and NAIMA Fibrous Glass
Duct Construction Standards. Joints of duct systems shall be made
substantially airtight in an unconditioned area by means of tapes, mastics,
liquid sealants, gasketing or other approved closure systems. Closure
systems used with rigid fibrous glass ducts shall comply with UL 181A and
shall be marked 181A-P for pressure-sensitive tape, 181A-M for mastic or
181A-H for heat-sensitive tape. Closure systems used with flexible air
ducts and flexible air connectors shall comply with UL 181B and shall be
marked 181B-FX for pressure sensitive tape or 181B-M for mastic. Duct
connections to flanges of air distribution system equipment or sheet metal
fittings shall be mechanically fastened. Mechanical fasteners for use with
flexible non-metallic air ducts shall comply with UL 181B and shall be
marked 181B-C. Crimp joints for round metal ducts shall have a contact
lap of at least one (1) inch and shall be mechanically fastened with at least
three (3) sheet metal screws or rivets equally spaced around the joint.
Closure systems used to seal metal ductwork shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
Exceptions:
1. Spray polyurethane foam shall be permitted to be applied without
additional joint seals.
2. Where a duct connection is made that is partially inaccessible,
three (3) screws or rivets shall be equally spaced on the exposed
portion of the joint so as to prevent a hinge effect.
3. Continuously welded and locking-type longitudinal joints and
seams in ducts operating at static pressure less than two (2)
inches of water column (500 Pa) pressure classification shall not
require additional closure systems.
M1602.2 Return air openings. Return air openings for heating,
ventilation and air conditioning systems shall comply with all of the
following:
1. Openings shall not be located less than 10 feet (3,048 mm)
measured in any direction from an open combustion chamber or
draft hood of another appliance located in the same room or
space.
2. Return and transfer openings shall be sized in accordance with
the appliance or equipment manufacturers' installation
instructions, Manual D or the design of the registered design
professional.
3. Return air shall not be taken from a closet, bathroom, toilet room,
kitchen, garage, mechanical room, boiler room, furnace room or
unconditioned attic.
Exceptions:
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1179
1. Taking return air from a kitchen is not prohibited where such
return air openings serve the kitchen only, and are located not
less than 10 feet (3,048 mm) from the cooking appliances.
2. Dedicated forced-air systems serving only the garage shall not be
prohibited from obtaining return air from the garage.
3. Taking return air from an unconditioned crawl space shall not be
accomplished through a direct connection to the return side of a
forced-air furnace. Transfer openings in the crawl space
enclosure shall not be prohibited.
4. Return air from one (1) dwelling unit shall not be discharged into
another dwelling unit.
5. Return air may be taken from a bedroom closet over sixty-four
(64) square feet in area.
(CHAPTER 24 FUEL GAS)
(SECTION G2408 INSTALLATION)
G2408.4 Clearance from grade. Equipment and appliances installed at
grade level shall be supported on a level concrete slab or other approved
material extending not less than two (2) inches above adjoining grade or
shall be suspended not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above adjoining
grade. Such supports shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions.
(SECTION G2409 CLEARANCE REDUCTION)
G2409.1 (308.1) Scope. This Section shall govern the reduction in
required clearances to combustible materials, including gypsum board,
and combustible assemblies for chimneys, vents, appliances, devices and
equipment. Clearance requirements for air-conditioning equipment and
central heating boilers and furnaces shall comply with Sections G2409.3
and G2409.4.
Exception: Where allowed by the manufacturer's installation instructions
and approved by the Building Official.
(SECTION G2412 GENERAL)
G2412.9 (401.9) Identification. Each length of pipe and tubing, as
produced by the manufacturer and prior to use in the field, shall bear the
identification of the manufacturer. Each pipe fitting utilized in a fuel gas
system shall bear the identification of the manufacturer.
(SECTION G2439 CLOTHES DRYER EXHAUST)
G2439.7.4.1 (614.8.4.1) Specified length. The maximum length of the
exhaust duct shall be 35 feet (10,688 mm) from the connection to the
transition duct from the dryer to the outlet terminal. Where fittings are
used, the maximum length of the exhaust duct shall be reduced in
accordance with Table G2439.7.4.1. The maximum length of the exhaust
duct does not include the transition duct.
(SECTION G2442 FORCED-AIR WARM-AIR FURNACES)
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1180
G2442.4 (618.4) Prohibited sources. Outdoor or return air for forcedair
heating and cooling systems shall not be taken from the following
locations:
1. Closer than 10 feet (3,048 mm) from an appliance vent outlet, a
vent opening from a plumbing drainage system or the discharge
outlet of an exhaust fan, unless the outlet is 3 feet (914 mm) above
the outside air inlet.
2. Where there is the presence of objectionable odors, fumes or
flammable vapors; or where located less than 10 feet (3,048 mm)
above the surface of any abutting public way or driveway; or
where located at grade level by a sidewalk, street, alley or
driveway.
3. A hazardous or insanitary location or a refrigeration machinery
room as defined in the International Mechanical Code.
4. A room or space, the volume of which is less than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the entire volume served by such system. Where
connected by a permanent opening having an area sized in
accordance with Section G2442.2, adjoining rooms or spaces shall
be considered as a single room or space for the purpose of
determining the volume of such rooms or spaces.
Exception:The minimum volume requirement shall not apply
where the amount of return air taken from a room or space is less
than or equal to the amount of supply air delivered to such room
or space.
5. A room or space containing an appliance where such a room or
space serves as the sole source of return air.
Exception: This shall not apply where:
1. The appliance is a direct-vent appliance or an appliance not
requiring a vent in accordance with Section G2425.8.
2. The room or space complies with the following requirements:
2.1. The return air shall be taken from a room or space having
a volume exceeding one (1) cubic foot for each 10 Btu/h
(9.6L/W) of combined input rating of all fuel-burning
appliances therein.
2.2. The volume of supply air discharged back into the same
space shall be approximately equal to the volume of
return air taken from the space.
2.3. Return-air inlets shall not be located within 10 feet (3,048
mm) of a draft hood in the same room or space or the
combustion chamber of any atmospheric burner
appliance in the same room or space.
3. Rooms or spaces containing solid fuel-burning appliances,
provided that return-air inlets are located not less than 10
feet (3,048 mm) from the firebox of such appliances.
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1181
6. A closet, bathroom, toilet room, kitchen, garage, boiler room,
furnace room or unconditioned attic.
Exceptions:
1. Where return air intakes are located not less than 10 feet
(3,048 mm) from cooking appliances and serve only the
kitchen area, taking return air from a kitchen area shall not
be prohibited.
2. Dedicated forced air systems serving only a garage shall not
be prohibited from obtaining return air from the garage.
3. Return air may be taken from a bedroom closet over sixty-four
(64) square feet in area.
7. A crawl space by means of direct connection to the return side of a
forced-air system. Transfer openings in the crawl space enclosure
shall not be prohibited.
(CHAPTER 25 PLUMBING ADMINISTRATION)
(SECTION P2503 INSPECTION AND TESTS)
P2503.5.1 Rough plumbing. DWV systems shall be tested on
completion of the rough piping installation by water or by air without
evidence of leakage. Either test shall be applied to the drainage system in
its entirety or in sections after rough-in piping has been installed, as
follows:
1. Water test. Each section shall be filled with water to a point not
less than 5 feet (1,524 mm) above the highest fitting connection in
that section, or to the highest point in the completed system.
Water shall be held in the section under test for a period of fifteen
(15) minutes. The system shall prove leak free by visual inspection.
2. Air test. The portion under test shall be maintained at a gauge
pressure of five (5) pounds per square inch (psi) (34 kPa) or ten
(10) inches of mercury column (34 kPa). This pressure shall be
held without introduction of additional air for a period of fifteen
(15) minutes.
P2503.6 Shower liner test. Delete this Section in its entirety.
(CHAPTER 26 GENERAL PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS)
(SECTION P2603 STRUCTURAL AND PIPING PROTECTION)
P2603.5.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage
disposal systems shall be a minimum of 18 inches (453 mm) below
finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall
be a minimum of 30 inches (762 mm) below grade.
(SECTION P2604 TRENCHING AND BACKFILLING)
P2604.90 Tracer wire or other utility location technology. Tracer
wire or other utility location technology shall be installed as required by
Section 319.033, RSMo., and the local utility.
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1182
(SECTION P2609 MATERIALS EVALUATION AND LISTING)
P2609.1 Identification. Each length of pipe and tubing, as produced by
the manufacturer and prior to use in the field, shall bear the identification
of the manufacturer. Each pipe fitting utilized in a plumbing system shall
bear the identification of the manufacturer.
(CHAPTER 28 WATER HEATERS)
(SECTION P2108 GENERAL)
P2801.8 Water heater seismic bracing: Delete in its entirety.
(CHAPTER 29 WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION)
(SECTION P2903 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM)
P2903.5 Water hammer. The flow velocity of the water distribution
system shall be controlled to reduce the possibility of water hammer. A
water-hammer arrestor shall be installed where quick-closing valves are
used. Water-hammer arrestors shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions. Water-hammer arrestors shall
conform to ASSE 1010.
(SECTION P2904 DWELLING UNIT FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS)
P2904.1 General. When installed, the design and installation of
residential fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 13D or
Section 2904, which shall be considered equivalent to NFPA 13D. Partial
residential sprinkler systems shall be permitted to be installed only in
buildings not required to be equipped with a residential sprinkler system.
Section P2904 shall apply to stand-alone and multipurpose wet-pipe
sprinkler systems that do not include the use of antifreeze. A multipurpose
fire sprinkler system shall provide domestic water to both fire sprinklers
and plumbing fixtures. A stand-alone sprinkler system shall be separate
and independent from the water distribution system. A backflow
preventer shall not be required to separate a standalone system from the
water distribution system.
(CHAPTER 30 SANITARY DRAINAGE)
(SECTION P3002 MATERIALS)
P3002.2 Building sewer. Building sewer piping shall be as shown in
Table P3002.2. All sewer laterals will be polyvinyl chloride schedule 40 or
equivalent as determined by the City of O’Fallon. Forced main sewer
piping shall conform to one (1) of the standards for ABS plastic pipe,
copper, or copper-alloy tubing, PVC plastic pipe or pressure rated pipe
indicated in Table P3002.2.
(CHAPTER 31 VENTS)
(SECTION P3103 VENT TERMINALS)
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1183
P3103.1 Roof extension. Open vent pipes that extend through a roof
shall be terminated not less than twelve (12) inches (152 mm) above the
roof or six (6) inches (152 mm) above the anticipated snow accumulation,
whichever is greater. Where a roof is to be used for assembly, as a
promenade, observation deck or sunbathing deck or for similar purposes,
open vent pipes shall terminate not less than seven (7) feet (2134 mm)
above the roof.
(CHAPTER 39 POWER AND LIGHTING DISTRIBUTION)
(SECTION E3902 GROUND-FAULT AND ARC-FAULT CIRCUIT
INTERRUPTER PROTECTION)
E3902.2 Garage and accessory building receptacles. 125-volt, singlephase,
15- or 20-ampere receptacles installed in garage and grade-level
portions of unfinished accessory buildings used for storage or work areas
shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection for personnel.
[210.8(A)(2)]
Exception: Fastened in place garage door openers.
E3902.5 Unfinished basement receptacles. 125-volt, single-phase, 15-
and 20-ampere receptacles installed in unfinished basements shall have
ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection for personnel. For purposes of
this Section, unfinished basements are defined as portions or areas of the
basement not intended as habitable rooms and limited to storage areas,
work areas, and similar areas. [210.8(A)(5)]
Exceptions:
1. A receptacle supplying only a permanently installed fire alarm or
burglar alarm system. Receptacles installed in accordance with
this exception shall not be considered as meeting the
requirements of Section E3901.9.
2. Where a simplex receptacle is installed to serve an installed sump
pump.
E3902.16 Arc-fault circuit-interrupter protection. Branch circuits
that supply 120-volt, single phase, 15- and 20-ampere outlets installed in
bedrooms shall be protected by any of following: [210.12(A)]
1. A listed combination-type arc-fault circuit interrupter, installed to
provide protection of the entire branch circuit. [210.12(A)(1)]
2. A listed branch/feeder-type AFCI installed at the origin of the
branch-circuit in combination with a listed outlet branch-circuit
type arc-fault circuit interrupter installed at the first outlet box on
the branch circuit. The first outlet box in the branch circuit shall
be marked to indicate that it is the first outlet of the circuit.
[210.12(A)(2)]
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1184
3. A listed supplemental arc protection circuit breaker installed at
the origin of the branch circuit in combination with a listed outlet
branch-circuit type arc-fault circuit interrupter installed at the
first outlet box on the branch circuit where all of the following
conditions are met:
3.1 The branch-circuit wiring shall be continuous from the branchcircuit
overcurrent device to the outlet branch-circuit arc-fault
circuit interrupter.
3.2 The maximum length of the branch-circuit wiring from the
branch-circuit overcurrent device to the first outlet shall not
exceed 50 feet (15.2 m) for 14 AWG conductors and 70 feet
(21.3 m) for 12 AWG conductors.
3.3 The first outlet box in the branch circuit shall be marked to
indicate that it is the first outlet of the circuit. [210.12(A)(3)]
4. A listed outlet branch-circuit type arc-fault circuit interrupter
installed at the first outlet on the branch circuit in combination
with a listed branch-circuit overcurrent protective device where all
of the following conditions are met:
4.1 The branch-circuit wiring shall be continuous from the branchcircuit
overcurrent device to the outlet branch-circuit arc-fault
circuit interrupter.
4.2 The maximum length of the branch-circuit wiring from the
branch-circuit overcurrent device to the fist outlet shall not
exceed 50 feet (15.2 m) for 14 AWG conductors and 70 feet
(21.3 m) for 12 AWG conductors.
4.3.The first outlet box in the branch circuit shall be marked to
indicate that it is the first outlet on the circuit.
4.4 The combination of the branch-circuit overcurrent device and
outlet branch-circuit AFCI shall be identified as meeting the
requirements for a system combination-type AFCI and shall be
listed as such. [210.12(A)(4)]
5. Where metal outlet boxes and junction boxes and RMC, IMC, EMT,
Type MC or steel-armored Types AC cables meeting the
requirements of Section E3908.8, metal wireways or metal
auxiliary gutters are installed for the portion of the branch circuit
between the branch-circuit overcurrent device and the first outlet,
a listed outlet branch-circuit type AFCI installed at the first outlet
shall be considered as providing protection for the remaining
portion of the branch circuit. [210.12(A)(5)]
6. Where a listed metal or non-metallic conduit or tubing or Type MC
cable is encased in not less than 2 inches (50.8 mm) of concrete
for the portion of the branch circuit between the branch-circuit
overcurrent device and the first outlet, a listed outlet branchcircuit
type AFCI installed at the first outlet shall be considered as
providing protection for the remaining portion of the branch
circuit. [210.12(A)(6)]
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1185
Exception: AFCI protection is not required for an individual branch
circuit supplying only a fire alarm system where the branch circuit is
wired with metal outlet and junction boxes and RMC, IMC, EMT or
steel-sheathed armored cable Type AC or Type MC meeting the
requirements of Section E3908.8.
E3902.17 Arc-fault circuit interrupter protection for branch circuit
extensions or modifications. Where branch-circuit wiring is modified,
replaced, or extended in any of the areas specified in Section E3902.16,
the branch circuit shall be protected by one (1) of the following:
1. A combination-type AFCI located at the origin of the branch
circuit.
2. An outlet branch-circuit type AFCI located at the first receptacle
outlet of the existing branch circuit. [210.12(B)]
Exception: AFCI protection shall not be required where the extension of
the existing conductors is not more than 30 feet (9.5 m) in length and
does not include any additional outlets or devices. [210.12(B) exception]
(APPENDIX E MANUFACTURED HOUSING USED AS DWELLINGS)
(SECTION AE101 SCOPE)
AE101.1 General. These provisions shall be applicable only to a
manufactured home used as a single dwelling unit installed on any lot and
shall apply to the following:
1. Construction, alteration and repair of any foundation system that is
necessary to provide for the installation of a manufactured home
unit.
2. Construction, installation, addition, alteration, repair or
maintenance of the building service equipment that is necessary
for connecting manufactured homes to water, fuel, or power
supplies and sewage systems.
3. Alterations, additions or repairs to existing manufactured homes.
The construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair and use of
accessory buildings and structures, and their building service
equipment, shall comply with the requirements of the codes
adopted by this jurisdiction. These provisions shall not be
applicable to the design and construction of manufactured homes
and shall not be deemed to authorize either modifications or
additions to manufactured homes where otherwise prohibited.
Exception:
In addition to these provisions, new and replacement manufactured
homes to be located in flood hazard areas as established in Table
R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code shall meet the applicable
requirements of Section R322 of the International Residential Code.
(SECTION AE304 FEES)
AE304.1 Fees. Fees shall be per section 500.470 of the City of O'Fallon,
Municipal Code.
Section
500.340
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1186
AE304.2 Plan review fees. Delete in its entirety.
AE304.3 Other provisions. Delete in its entirety.
AE304.3.1 Expiration of plan review. Delete in its entirety.
AE304.3.2 Investigation fees-work without a permit. Delete in its
entirety.
AE304.3.2.1 Investigation. Delete in its entirety.
AE304.3.2.2 Fee. Delete in its entirety.
AE304.3.3 Fee refunds. Delete in its entirety.
AE304.3.3.1 Permit fee erroneously paid or collected. Delete in its
entirety.
AE304.3.3.2 Permit fee paid when no work done. Delete in its
entirety.
AE304.3.3.3 Plan review fee. Delete in its entirety.
Section 500.345. Saving Clause and Validity. [Ord. No. 5674 § 1,
2-10-2011]
Section 500.350. Penalty.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Article or the code hereby adopted, shall upon conviction, for each offense
be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be punished by
imprisonment in jail not to exceed three (3) months, or be punished by
both fine and imprisonment. Each day's violation of, or refusal or neglect to
comply with, any provision of this Article or the code hereby adopted, shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
A. Nothing in this Article or in the Residential Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed;
nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this Article.
B. If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article. The City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, hereby declares that it would have passed this
Article, and each Section, Subsection, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more Sections, Subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section
500.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.350
100:1187

ARTICLE XI
Fuel Gas Code
Section 500.360. Adoption of Fuel Gas Code. [R.O. 2007 § 500.388;
Ord. No. 4799 §§ 1, 4—5, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4819 § 1, 5-13-2005;
Ord. No. 4839 §§ 1, 4—5, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5675 § 1, 2-10-2011;
Ord. No. 6250 § 10, 9-8-2016]
That certain document, a copy which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, being marked and designated as the
International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the International Fuel Gas Code
of the City of O'Fallon, in the State of Missouri, for regulating and governing
fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code
on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this Article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in Section 500.370 of this Article.
Section 500.370. Additions, Insertions and Changes. [R.O. 2007
§ 500.389; Ord. No. 4799 § 2, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 4839 § 2,
5-16-2005; Ord. No. 5675 § 1, 2-10-2011; Ord. No. 6250 § 10,
9-8-2016]
The following numbered subsections of the International Fuel Gas Code,
2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., are
hereby amended by additions, insertions, deletions and changes so that
such section and subsections read as follows:
(CHAPTER 1 SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION)
(SECTION 101 GENERAL)
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of
the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
(SECTION 103 DEPARTMENT OF INSPECTION)
103.1 General. The Department of Inspection is hereby created and the
executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Building Official.
Where the term "code official" is used in this code, it shall mean the
Building Official or his/her appointee.
103.2 Appointment. The Building Official shall be appointed as provided
by ordinance.
(SECTION 106 PERMITS)
106.6.2 Fee schedule. Fees related to administration of this code shall
be as set forth elsewhere in this Chapter of the Municipal Code.
106.6.3 Fee refunds. Delete this Section in its entirety.
(SECTION 107 INSPECTIONS AND TESTING)
Section
500.360
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.370
100:1189
107.90 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner in
compliance with this code, in accordance with industry standards, and in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
(SECTION 108 VIOLATIONS)
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates
any provisions of this code, or fails to comply with any of the requirements
thereof, or erects, constructs, alters or repair a structure in violation of an
approved plan or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code or previous ordinance,
or who shall continue any work in or about a structure after having been
served a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, or any owner or
tenant of a building or premises in which such violation shall exist, shall
upon conviction thereof be punishable by a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official that work is
being performed contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous
or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be
in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, the owner's
authorized agent, or the person doing the work. The notice shall state the
conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an
emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written
notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work
on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
108.5.90 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to penalties as specified in
Section 108.4 of this code.
(SECTION 109 MEANS OF APPEAL)
109.1 Application for appeal. For the purposes of this code, all appeals
shall be in accordance with the procedure established for the Building
Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
109.2 Membership of board. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.1 Qualifications. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.2 Alternate members. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.3 Chairman. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.4 Disqualification of member. Delete in its entirety.
Section
500.370
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.370
100:1190
109.2.5 Secretary. Delete in its entirety.
109.2.6 Compensation of members. Delete in its entirety.
109.3 Notice of meeting. Delete in its entirety.
109.4 Open hearing. Delete in its entirety.
109.4.1 Procedure. Delete in its entirety.
109.5 Postponed hearing. Delete in its entirety.
109.6 Board decision. Delete in its entirety.
109.6.1 Resolution. Delete in its entirety.
109.6.2 Administration. Delete in its entirety.
109.7 Court review. Delete in its entirety.
Section 500.375. Saving Clause and Validity. [Ord. No. 5675 § 1,
2-10-2011]
Section 500.380. Penalty. [Ord. No. 5675 § 1, 2-10-2011]
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall install fuel gas piping,
appliances and related accessories in violation of an approved plan or
directive of the Building Official or of a permit or certificate issued under
the provisions of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by
a fine not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not
exceeding three (3) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
A. Nothing in this Article or in the Fuel Gas Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed;
nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this Article.
B. If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article. The City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, hereby declares that it would have passed this
Article, and each Section, Subsection, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more Sections, Subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section
500.370
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.380
100:1191

ARTICLE XII
Miscellaneous Building Regulations
Section 500.390. Alterations To Property Without Permit
Prohibited. [R.O. 2007 § 500.390; Ord. No. 1130 §§ 1—2, 7-17-1984]
Section 500.400. (Reserved)124
Section 500.410. Installation of Satellite Dish. [R.O. 2007
§ 500.420; Ord. No. 1142 §§ 1—5, 8-21-1984; Ord. No. 1878 §§ 2—3,
2-7-1991; Ord. No. 3440 § 2, 10-16-1996; Ord. No. 3696 § 1,
5-21-1998; Ord. No. 3886 § 1, 5-19-1999]
A. Any person, firm or corporation making an alteration to real property
within the City limits of O'Fallon, Missouri, including, but not limited to,
driveways, fences, additions to homes and businesses, and any building
activity regulated by City ordinance or Code, who fails to obtain the
proper permits prior to commencing construction shall be in violation of
this Chapter.
B. The Building Official or his/her designated representative is responsible
for the enforcement of this Chapter.
C. Any person, firm or corporation, upon conviction of being in violation of
this Article, shall be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars
($500.00), but a minimum of ten dollars ($10.00) per day after notice of
violation. Each day's violation of or refusal or neglect to comply with
any provision of this Article or the code hereby adopted shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
A. The Missouri Cities of the Third Class, O'Fallon being such, have the
authority under provisions of Section 89.010, RSMo., as amended, to
regulate and restrict the location of building structures and the use of
land to promote the public health, safety and welfare. The City of
O'Fallon recognizes the authority of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) to promulgate rules regarding direct broadcast
satellite services. The City, through its authority granted by State law
and within the parameters of FCC-96-328, intends to assure its
residents and businesses access to satellite services, and promote fair
and effective competition in the satellite industry, while protecting the
public health and safety of its citizens and encouraging the aesthetic
characteristics of our local community. For the purposes of this Section,
"Satellite Dish Receiving Antenna" is hereby defined as follows: A
receiving earth station antenna for the reception of satellite-delivered
communication services, whether received only or transmitted and
received.
124. Editor’s Note: Former Section 500.400, Numbering of Houses, Mobile Homes or Buildings,
adopted and/or amended R.O. 2007 § 500.410; Ord. No. 1170 §§ 2––4, 11-1-1984; was
repealed 6-14-2019 by Ord. No. 6577.
Section
500.390
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.410
100:1193
Section 500.420. Construction Hours. [R.O. 2007 § 500.430; Ord.
No. 3429 § 1, 9-17-1996]
Construction work shall only be allowed during the following hours:
B. Any satellite dish receiving antenna shall not be located within ten (10)
feet of a power line; they must be properly secured and grounded in
order to protect the public health and safety. Installations shall be in
accordance with the dish manufacturer's, National Electrical Code and
Building Code standards.
C. Any satellite dish receiving antenna or other structure shall not be
located within ten (10) feet of a public street so as not to obstruct traffic
or otherwise pose a safety hazard.
D. Satellite dish antenna of one (1) meter or smaller in diameter and other
structures, whether detached and freestanding or attached to the
principal building on the lot, shall be permitted in all zoning districts.
Such dishes shall be situated in locations which have the least possible
visual impact on surrounding properties and should be:
1. In the side yard, but not extending forward of the front exterior
wall of the structure and screened by landscape plant material at
street eye level.
2. In front of the structure, only if incorporated as part of a significant
landscape theme and screened through the use of dense plant
material at street eye level.
3. Mounted on the sides of the structure, however, it should not be
mounted on the face of a structure facing a public right-of-way.
4. On the roof of a structure, not facing a public right-of-way and not
extending above the ridge of the roof at street eye level.
5. In addition, such dishes and other structures shall be set back a
minimum of six (6) feet from all side property lines and a minimum
of ten (10) feet from all rear property lines where utility easements
do not exist. Where utility easements do exist, satellite dish
receiving antennas shall not be placed within these easements. On
a corner lot, both street frontages will be considered front yards
with all satellite dish antenna being located in the rear yard area of
the interior side.
E. Entities desiring to locate a satellite dish in an area not allowed under
this Section may do so only upon showing that: placement within the
authorized locations is not possible and that the authorized locations
will impair the applicant's ability to receive satellite programming as
verified in writing to the Planning Department by an authorized
satellite dish antenna dealer or by an installer that the proposed
location is necessary to obtain an acceptable quality signal, or that
compliance would be an unreasonable expense.
Section
500.410
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.420
100:1194
October 1 — May 31 7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M.
June 1 — September
30
6:00 A.M. to 8:00 P.M. Monday—Friday
7:00 A.M. to 8:00 P.M. Saturday and Sunday
Construction work to be done outside of these hours requires prior written
approval from the City Administrator or City Engineer.
Section 500.430. Grading and Drainage Plans.125 [R.O. 2007
§ 500.450; Ord. No. 4486 § 1, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 4866 § 1,
7-20-2005]
Section 500.440. Information Required On All Publicly Funded
Projects Within City. [R.O. 2007 § 500.470; Ord. No. 4949 §§ 1—3,
1-30-2006; Ord. No. 5301 § 1, 3-13-2008]
A. At the time of application for a building permit, the applicant shall
acknowledge in writing and with his/her signature, that the applicant is
responsible for assuring that the lot for which the building permit is
issued complies with the approved grading and drainage plans.
B. (Reserved)126
A. All contractors seeking a permit for the construction of any project that
is funded with public money shall be required to sign an affidavit
stating:
1. The contractor and its subcontractors have Workers' Compensation
insurance that covers its employees working on the project.
2. The contractor and its subcontractors have verified the U.S.
citizenship or lawful status of the workers employed on the project.
3. The contractor and its subcontractors will pay the prevailing wages
of the area to its workers.
4. The contractor and its subcontractors are in compliance with
Federal law requiring an accredited apprenticeship program if
such law applies to the project.
B. Upon request of the City, the contractor will produce proof of
compliance with the above laws within thirty-six (36) hours.
125. Note—Ord. no. 5454 § 1, adopted May 14, 2009, sets out the grading permit applications
and checklists and matters related thereto. Said checklist and related information is on
file in the city offices.
126. Note: With the approval of Section 405.127 as amended by Ord. No. 6207, former
Subsection 500.430(B) requiring grading letters and escrows has been removed in
accordance with Subsection (15) of said ordinance.
Section
500.420
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.440
100:1195
Section 500.450. Lawn Irrigation Sprinkler Systems that Encroach
Upon City-Owned Right-of-Way. [Ord. No. 5189 § 1, 6-14-2007]
Section 500.455. Methamphetamine Contamination Abatement.
[Ord. No. 5809 § 1, 9-13-2012]
C. All contractors bidding on construction projects within the City of
O'Fallon are encouraged and urged, to the extent possible, to employ
residents of the City of O'Fallon to work on such projects.
A. Lawn irrigation sprinkler systems may be placed within City-owned
right-of-way, provided that the sprinkler heads shall not be placed
within one (1) foot of curbs or other paved surfaces.
B. The installation of lawn irrigation sprinkler systems within City-owned
right-of-way is at the property owner's risk, and resulting damage
related to being installed within said right-of-way shall not be the
responsibility of the City to repair. Maintenance and repair of lawn
irrigation sprinkler systems placed within City-owned right-of-way shall
be the responsibility of the adjacent property owner(s).
C. Backflow prevention is required per Section 700.370(C)(14) of the
Municipal Code.
D. A plumbing permit is required to install lawn irrigation sprinkler
systems per Section 500.470(D)(12) of the Municipal Code.
A. Title. This Section is entitled and may be known as "The
Methamphetamine Contamination Abatement Protocol".
B. Purpose. The purposes of this Section are:
1. To adopt standards for identifying dangerous levels of toxic
chemicals and residue associated with the presence or production
of methamphetamine; and
2. To establish protocols whereby the Building and Code Enforcement
Division ("Division") may cooperate with and rely on law
enforcement and emergency agencies when applying property
maintenance and safety standards to order or cause the abatement
of contamination in structures due to the presence or production of
methamphetamine.
C. Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the words or terms listed
below are defined as follows:
DIVISION — The Building and Code Enforcement Division of the City of
O'Fallon.
METHAMPHETAMINE — Dextro methamphetamine, levo
methamphetamine, and unidentified isomers of the same, any racemic
mixture of dextro/levo methamphetamine, or any mixture of
unidentified isomers of methamphetamine. The term includes
Section
500.440
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.455
100:1196
derivatives, conjugates, oxides and reduced forms of the basic structure
associated with the formation of methamphetamine. For the purposes
of this protocol, this term includes amphetamine, ephedrine and
pseudoephedrine.
QUALIFIED COMPANY OR QUALIFIED CONTRACTOR — A company
or contractor that tests structures for the presence of unsafe
contamination and/or abates such unsafe contamination and that:
UNSAFE CONTAMINATION — The presence of chemicals in a structure
at levels exceeding the levels for such chemicals as provided in
Subsection (D) below.
Complies with the guidelines of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency Voluntary Guidelines for Methamphetamine Laboratory
Cleanup (August 2009);
1.
Complies with the regulations of the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration of the United States Department of Labor
relating to hazardous waste operations and emergency response,
including 29 Code of Federal Regulations Section 1910.120;
2.
Requires that at least one (1) employee or supervisor assigned
to and on duty at any work site shall have completed the forty
(40) hour Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response
(HASWOPER) training [Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910]; and
3.
Requires its personnel to complete a clandestine drug lab
assessment and decontamination course offered by a sponsor
acceptable to the Division.
4.
D. Unsafe Contamination. A structure will be considered unsafe if it is
found to contain any of the chemicals listed below at exposure limits
above the levels listed below referenced by the National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH):
1. Red Phosphorus—any amount.
2. Iodine Crystals C0.1 ppm (1 mg/m3).
3. Sulfuric Acid TWA 1 mg/m3.
4. Hydrogen Chloride C 5 ppm (7 mg/m3).
5. Hydrochloric Acid (Hcl gas)—C 5 ppm (7 mg/m3).
6. Methamphetamine—in a concentration equal to or greater than 1.5
µgram/100 cm2
7. Lead and Mercury—If it is determined that the phenyl-2-propanone
(P2P) method of methamphetamine manufacturing was used,
surface levels for lead in excess of 20 µg/ft2 and vapor samples for
Mercury in excess of 50 ng/m3.
Section
500.455
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.455
100:1197
E. Closure And Abatement Orders Upon Report And Investigation By Law
Enforcement Or Emergency Agencies.
1. When a law enforcement or emergency agency reports to the
Division that a structure in the City has been used for the
production of methamphetamine or as a storage facility for
methamphetamine or chemicals used in the manufacturing of
methamphetamine, the Division may order that structure closed
pursuant to the emergency measures provided in the City's
property maintenance and/or safety codes. The Division shall
rescind such an order if the law enforcement or emergency agency
later reports that after testing and investigation it has not found
unsafe contamination in that structure.
2. When a law enforcement or emergency agency reports to the
Division that it has found unsafe contamination in a structure in the
City that has been used for the production of methamphetamine or
as a storage facility for methamphetamine or chemicals used in the
manufacturing of methamphetamine, the Division shall order that
structure closed pursuant to the emergency measures provided in
the City's property maintenance and/or safety codes.
F. Supplementary Notice and Instructions.
1. While closure and abatement orders pursuant to the emergency
measures provided in the City's property maintenance and/or
safety codes may be posted, the Division shall also attempt to
contact the owner of record of the affected property, or the owner's
agent, by personal service, first class mail or by posting on the
property or publication if mail is returned as undelivered.
2. Such notice shall direct the owner to contact the Division within
twenty (20) calendar days to establish a schedule for
decontaminating the structure, and further advise the owner that
failure to contact the Division within that time specified may result
in a request to disconnect utility services in order to ensure that the
structure is not re-occupied until it is decontaminated.
3. Such notice shall also inform the owner that if the owner contacts
the Division within the time specified in the notice, the owner may
request to have the structure retested, but such retesting must be
performed as follows.
a. The owner must employ the services of a qualified company or
contractor having no financial or ownership interest or
occupancy right in the subject property to perform sampling
and to analyze the samples.
b. An inspector for the Division must be present when the
qualified company or contractor takes samples and the owner
shall pay an inspection fee of forty dollars ($40.00), payment of
Section
500.455
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.455
100:1198
which must be made prior to the appointment for taking
samples.
c. Sampling and testing shall be performed in accordance with
the appropriate Sections of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency Voluntary Guidelines for Methamphetamine
Laboratory Cleanup (August 2009).
d. The qualified company or contractor engaged by the owners
must report the results of its analysis of the samples taken to
the Division.
G. Decontamination.
1. If unsafe contamination exists in a structure, the owner shall hire a
qualified contractor or company to decontaminate the structure
and advise the Division of the schedule for decontamination.
2. The schedule for the work and evidence that the qualified
contractor or company meets the requirements of this Section must
be submitted for approval to the Division within twenty (20)
calendar days of the receipt of notice. Approval will be based solely
on the timeliness of the schedule and the qualifications of the
contractor. Approval or rejection of the schedule will be provided
within a reasonable time of submission. If rejected the owner will
be informed, in writing, of specific reasons for the rejection and will
be required to amend the schedule or the proposed qualified
contractor or company. Decontamination shall be performed in
accordance with the appropriate Sections of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency Voluntary Guidelines for
Methamphetamine Laboratory Cleanup (August 2009).
3. If the owner of property determined to have unsafe contamination
fails to voluntarily abate that contamination, the Division may serve
a notice of violation and proceed in accordance with provisions for
abatement of unsafe conditions or structures in the City's property
maintenance and/or safety codes. The Division may request
disconnection of the utility services until the decontamination is
complete.
4. Post decontamination sampling. Following the completion of the
work the owner shall notify the Division that work is complete and
the owner must provide written test results as evidence that the
property is compliant with this regulation. The post remediation
sampling and testing must be performed by a qualified contractor
or company other than and independent of the contractor or
company that performed the decontamination, and that sampling
and testing must be done in accordance with the appropriate
Sections of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Voluntary
Guidelines for Methamphetamine Laboratory Cleanup (August
2009).
Section
500.455
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.455
100:1199
Section 500.460. Penalty. [R.O. 2007 § 500.440]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Article
shall, upon conviction, for each offense be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or be punished by imprisonment in Jail not to exceed
three (3) months, or be punished by both fine and imprisonment. Each day's
violation of, or refusal or neglect to comply with, any provision of this Article
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
H. Final Action. After the property has been decontaminated and the
Division is in possession of evidence that the pertinent chemical levels
are below unsafe contamination levels, the structure will be considered
safe and suitable for performance of a full inspection for an occupancy
permit. If utility services have been disconnected, the Division will
notify the utilities that the unsafe condition has been mitigated and
service can be restored. The property owner shall be responsible for
any re-connection fees.
Section
500.455
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.460
100:1200
ARTICLE XIII
Fees
Section 500.470. Permit and Plan Review Fees. [Ord. No. 5087 §7,
11-1-2006; Ord. No. 6622, 11-14-2019]
A. The City of O'Fallon hereby adopts the most recent Building Valuation
Data issued by the International Code Council, which shall be filed with
and available at the office of the Building and Code Enforcement
Manager. Whenever the International Code Council issues an updated
or revised Building Valuation Data report, the Building and Code
Enforcement Manager is hereby authorized to administratively adopt
the new valuation and utilize it for the purposes hereinafter provided if
the Manager is satisfied in the exercise of the Managers administrative
discretion that such data is reasonable with respect to construction in
the O'Fallon area. Additionally, where the Building Valuation Data does
not include cost estimation based on a particular type of construction or
project, the City of O'Fallon hereby adopts the current data supplied by
the Marshall Valuation Service as published by the Marshall and Swift
Publication Company, Los Angeles, California.
B. The City of O'Fallon hereby adopts permit fee multiplier of .0065 for
issuance of all building permits for use in determining fees based upon
cost of construction as hereinafter provided.
C. The fees for plan review and building permits for all new commercial
and residential construction, and all new additions to commercial and
residential construction, and any and all other permits governed by the
codes adopted in Articles I and X of this Chapter shall be calculated as
follows: the applicable Cost of Construction shall be multiplied by the
factor adopted in Subsection (B) above to determine the building permit
fee, provided, however, that there shall be minimum permit fees as
adopted in Subsection (E). A minimum charge of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) or a charge of twenty percent (20%) of the permit fee,
whichever is greater, shall be collected for the plan examination and
administrative processing of a building permit application that has been
canceled or abandoned by the applicant for any reason prior to a
building permit being issued.
D. Rental Occupancy Permit Fees. Fees shall be paid prior to scheduling an
occupancy inspection. One (1) re-inspection shall be provided for each
initial compliance inspection within ninety (90) days of the date of the
original inspection. Each additional re-inspection shall be thirty-five
dollars ($35.00). Fees are as follows:
1. Single-family: Seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
2. Multi-family: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per unit.
E. The minimum building permit fees for the following construction shall
be as specified herein:
Section
500.470
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.470
100:1201
1. A minimum fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall apply to all of
the following permits:
a. Fences and similar barriers.
2. A minimum fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall apply to all of the
following permits:
a. Shed.
b. Gazebo/pergola.
c. Residential furnace/air conditioner.
d. Residential water heater.
e. Temporary pools.
3. A minimum fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall apply to all of
the following permits:
a. Mechanical.
b. Electrical.
c. Plumbing.
d. Sewer install/repair.
e. Water service.
f. Lawn sprinkler.
g. Retaining walls.
h. Deck.
i. Patio cover.
j. Pavilion.
k. Above-ground pool.
l. Hot tub.
m. Mobile home.
n. Solar panels.
4. A minimum fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall apply to all of
the following permits:
a. Demolition.
b. Deck with cover.
c. Finished basement.
Section
500.470
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.470
100:1202
d. In-ground pool.
e. Residential remodel/kitchens/bathrooms.
f. Miscellaneous construction not defined elsewhere.
g. Flag poles over thirty-five (35) feet.
h. Commercial fire suppression system/sprinklers/hoods.
i. Communication tower antenna installation.
5. A minimum fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall apply to
all of the following permits:
a. Barn.
b. Detached garage.
c. Miscellaneous building.
d. Room addition.
e. Commercial repairs.
f. Commercial remodel.
g. Commercial tenant finish.
h. Temporary structures/tents.
6. A minimum fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall apply to
all of the following permits:
a. Commercial new buildings.
b. Commercial additions.
c. Communication tower.
d. Detached single-family.
e. Attached single-family.
f. Multi-family residential.
g. Modular homes.
F. "Master Plans" for new residential construction that undergo a plan
review shall be charged twenty percent (20%) of the total permit fee.
Each subsequent permit thereafter issued by the Division of Building
and Code Enforcement shall be charged an eighty percent (80%) permit
fee that uses the approved Master Plans without modification to build
the same model or product at or on different lots or parcels.
G. In calculating fees based on total cost of construction, whenever the
Building and Code Enforcement Manager believes information relating
Section
500.470
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.470
100:1203
Section 500.480. through Section 500.490. (Reserved)
to the total cost of construction provided by an applicant is inaccurate,
unrealistic, incomplete or insufficient for the work involved, the
Manager may require additional information, including, but not limited
to, copies of signed contracts, and/or may utilize such figures which
will, in the Managers professional experience and judgment, more
accurately reflect the value of the materials to be utilized and the work
to be performed.
H. "Estimated cost of construction," as used in this Subsection, means the
higher of the following: estimated cost of construction as stated by
applicant for permit, the square footage cost based on the ICC Building
Valuation Data, or the cost of labor and material for the work to be
permitted as estimated by a plans examiner of the Division of Building
and Code Enforcement according to current data supplied by the
Marshall Valuation Service as published by the Marshall and Swift
Publication Company, Los Angeles, California.
I. The fees provided in this Section shall include one (1) original
inspection of the relevant work and one (1) re-inspection. Any
additional re-inspections reasonably required to complete oversight
and approval of the relevant work will be charged to the permit holder
at the rate of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per inspection as an additional
fee.
J. The fees provided in this Section shall include one (1) plan review of the
relevant work and one (1) re-review. Any additional re-reviews
reasonably required to complete permit approval and issuance will be
charged to the permit holder at the rate of twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
per residential permit review and one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
commercial review as an additional fee.
K. The Building and Code Enforcement Manager at his/her discretion may
issue integrated building, plumbing, electrical and/or mechanical
permits on a single permit application. The total integrated permit fee
shall be the cumulative total of the fees applicable to each permit and/
or plan review separately.
L. Permit applications shall include the name, signature and license
number of the appropriate licensed subcontractor. Any change in the
identity of the named subcontractor after issuance of the permit must
be made, in writing, noting the project, owner, subcontractor, license
number and shall result in the assessment of a transfer fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each change.
M. All fees must be paid in full prior to issuance of the relevant permit. Any
additional fees charged must be paid in full before the relevant work
being approved and/or occupancy of the relevant construction is
permitted.
Section
500.470
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.480
100:1204
ARTICLE XIV
International Existing Building Code
Section 500.500. Adoption of Existing Building Code. [Ord. No.
6250 § 11, 9-8-2016]
That certain document, a copy which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, being marked and designated as
the International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the International
Existing Building Code of the City of O'Fallon, in the State of Missouri, for
regulating and governing existing buildings as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said Existing Building
Code on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri,
are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out
in this Article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in Section 500.510 of this Article.
Section 500.510. Additions, Insertions and Changes. [Ord. No. 6250
§ 11, 9-8-2016]
The following numbered subsections of the International Existing Building
Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
are hereby amended by additions, insertions, deletions and changes so that
such section and subsections read as follows:
(CHAPTER 1 SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION)
(SECTION 101 GENERAL)
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Existing Building
Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this
code."
101.2 Scope. The provisions of the International Existing Building Code
shall apply to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition to and
relocation of existing buildings.
Exception:
Residential buildings and their accessory structures within the scope of
the International Residential Code shall utilize the existing building
provisions provided in Appendix J of that code.
(SECTION 103 DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY)
103.1 General. The Department of Inspection is hereby created and the
executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Building Official.
Where the term "code official" is used in this code, it shall mean the
Building Official or his/her appointee.
103.2 Appointment. The Building Official shall be appointed as provided
by ordinance.
(SECTION 105 PERMITS)
Section
500.500
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.510
100:1205
105.1 Required. Required permits shall comply with Section 105.1 of the
Building Code of O'Fallon, Missouri.
105.2 Work exempt from permits. Work exempt from permits shall
comply with Section 105.2 of the Building Code of O'Fallon, Missouri.
(SECTION 106 CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS)
106.2 Construction Documents. Construction documents shall be in
accordance with all subsections of 106.2.
106.2.90 Professionally prepared plans. All plans and specifications
shall be prepared, signed and sealed by an architect or engineer licensed
and registered in the State of Missouri to render this service.
Exceptions:
The following exceptions are at the discretion of the Building Official:
1. Miscellaneous residential structures such as room additions,
carports, garages, sheds, etc.
106.2.91 Elevations certified. Any building addition in the flood plain
shall provide an elevation certificate by a Registered Engineer or Land
Surveyor, licensed in the State of Missouri, before final approval of
foundation.
(SECTION 108 FEES)
108.2 Schedule of permit fees. Fees related to administration of this
code shall be as set forth elsewhere in this Chapter of the Municipal Code.
108.2.90 Integrated permits. The Building Official, at his/her
discretion, may issue integrated building, plumbing, electrical and/or
mechanical permits shall be as described in Section 108.2.91.
108.2.91 Integrated permit fees. The total integrated permit fee and
the portions applicable to the building, plumbing, electrical and/or
mechanical permits shall be as described in Section 109.2.90.
108.2.3 Applicant responsibility. Integrated permit applications shall
include the name, original signature and license number of the
appropriate licensed sub-contractor.
Exception:
Online permit applications where a licensed contract is defined.
(SECTION 109 INSPECTIONS)
109.90 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner in
compliance with this code, in accordance with industry standards, and in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
(SECTION 112 MEANS OF APPEAL)
112.1 General. For the purposes of this code, all appeals shall be in
accordance with the procedure established for the Building Code of the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
Section
500.510
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.510
100:1206
112.2 Limitations on authority. Delete in its entirety.
112.3 Qualifications. Delete in its entirety.
(SECTION 113 VIOLATIONS)
113.2 Notice of violation. When the Building Official determines that a
violation of this code exists, other than a violation of a stop work order,
he/she shall immediately notify the violator. The notification shall be in
writing and shall be delivered to the violator or his/her legally authorized
representative or mailed 1st Class U.S. Mail to his/her last known address.
Any person having been notified that a violation, other than a violation of
a stop work order, exists and who fails to abate the violation within ten
(10) days after notification shall be subject to the penalties enumerated in
Section 113.4.
113.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates
any provisions of this code, or fails to comply with any of the requirements
thereof, or erects, constructs, alters or repairs a structure in violation of
an approved plan or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code or previous ordinance,
or who shall continue any work in or about a structure after having been
served a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, or any owner or
tenant of a building or premises in which such violation shall exist, shall
upon conviction thereof be punishable by a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(SECTION 114 STOP WORK ORDER)
114.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who continues any work in or
about the structure after having been served with a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove said
violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to penalties as specified in
Section 113.4 of this code.
(CHAPTER 14 PERFORMANCE COMPLIANCE METHODS)
(SECTION 1401 GENERAL)
1401.2 Applicability. Structures existing prior to December 17, 1963, in
which there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of
occupancy shall be made to conform to the requirements of this Chapter
or the provisions of Chapters 5 through 13. The provisions of Sections
1401.2.1 through 1401.2.5 shall apply to existing occupancies that will
continue to be, or are proposed to be, in Groups A, B, E, F, I-2, M, R and S.
These provisions shall not apply to buildings with occupancies in Group H
or I-1, I-3 or I-4.
Section 500.520. Saving Clause and Validity. [Ord. No. 6250 § 11,
9-8-2016]
Section
500.510
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.520
100:1207
Section 500.530. Penalty. [Ord. No. 6250 § 11, 9-8-2016]
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Article or the code hereby adopted shall, upon conviction, for each offense
be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be punished by
imprisonment in jail not to exceed three (3) months, or be punished by
both fine and imprisonment. Each day's violation of, or refusal or neglect to
comply with, any provision of this Article or the code hereby adopted shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
A. Nothing in this Article or in the Existing Building Code hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any
court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance
hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this Article.
B. If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article. The City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, hereby declares that it would have passed this
Article, and each Section, Subsection, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more Sections, Subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section
500.520
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.530
100:1208
ARTICLE XV
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
Section 500.550. Adoption of Swimming Pool and Spa Code. [Ord.
No. 6250 § 12, 9-8-2016]
That certain document, a copy which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, being marked and designated as
the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of O'Fallon, in the
State of Missouri, for regulating and governing new and existing aquatic
vessels and their associated systems as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said Swimming Pool
and Spa Code on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this Article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in Section 500.560 of this Article.
Section 500.560. Additions, Insertions and Changes. [Ord. No. 6250
§ 12, 9-8-2016; Ord. No. 6577, 6-14-2019]
The following numbered subsections of the International Swimming Pool
and Spa Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Code
Council, Inc., are hereby amended by additions, insertions, deletions and
changes so that such section and subsections read as follows:
(CHAPTER 1 SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION)
(SECTION 101 GENERAL)
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Swimming Pool and
Spa Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this
code."
(SECTION 103 DEPARTMENT OF INSPECTION)
103.1 General. The Department of Inspection is hereby created and the
executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Building Official.
Where the term "code official" is used in this code, it shall mean the
Building Official or his/her appointee.
103.2 Appointment. The Building Official shall be appointed as provided
by ordinance.
(SECTION 105 PERMITS)
105.6.2 Fee schedule. Fees related to administration of this code shall
be as set forth elsewhere in this Chapter of the Municipal Code.
105.6.3 Fee refunds. Delete this Section in its entirety.
(SECTION 106 INSPECTIONS)
Section
500.550
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.560
100:1209
106.90 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner in
compliance with this code, in accordance with industry standards, and in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
(SECTION 107 VIOLATIONS)
107.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates
any provisions of this code, or fails to comply with any of the requirements
thereof, or erects, constructs, alters or repair a structure in violation of an
approved plan or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code or previous ordinance,
or who shall continue any work in or about a structure after having been
served a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, or any owner or
tenant of a building or premises in which such violation shall exist, shall
upon conviction thereof be punishable by a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
107.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official that work is
being performed contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous
or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be
in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, the owner's
authorized agent, or the person doing the work. The notice shall state the
conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an
emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written
notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work
on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
107.5.90 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to penalties as specified in
Section 108.4 of this code.
(SECTION 108 MEANS OF APPEAL)
108.1 Application for appeal. For the purposes of this code, all appeals
shall be in accordance with the procedure established for the Building
Code of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
108.2 Membership of board. Delete in its entirety.
108.2.1 Qualifications. Delete in its entirety.
108.2.2 Alternate members. Delete in its entirety.
108.2.3 Chairman. Delete in its entirety.
108.2.4 Disqualification of member. Delete in its entirety.
Section
500.560
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.560
100:1210
108.2.5 Secretary. Delete in its entirety.
108.2.6 Compensation of members. Delete in its entirety.
108.3 Notice of meeting. Delete in its entirety.
108.4 Open hearing. Delete in its entirety.
108.4.1 Procedure. Delete in its entirety.
108.5 Postponed hearing. Delete in its entirety.
108.6 Board decision. Delete in its entirety.
108.6.1 Resolution. Delete in its entirety.
108.6.2 Administration. Delete in its entirety.
108.7 Court review. Delete in its entirety.
(CHAPTER 3 GENERAL COMPLIANCE)
(SECTION 305 BARRIER REQUIREMENTS)
305.2 Outdoor swimming pools and spas. Outdoor pools and spas and
indoor swimming pools shall be surrounded by a barrier that complies
with Sections 305.2.1 through 305.7.
Exception: Where a pool with a chain link fence, a minimum of forty-two
(42) inches in height, was erected prior to April 5, 1999, the fence shall be
allowed to remain as an approved barrier.
305.2.4 Mesh fence as a barrier. Delete in its entirety.
305.2.5 Closely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is
composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between
the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1143 mm), the
horizontal members shall be located on the pool or spa side of the fence.
Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1 3/4 inches (44 mm)
in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members,
spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1 3/4 inches (44 mm) in width.
Exception:
Any fence that is 54 inches in height or greater.
Section 500.570. Saving Clause and Validity. [Ord. No. 6250 § 12,
9-8-2016]
A. Nothing in this Article or in the Swimming Pool and Spa Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending
in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause
or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance
hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this Article.
B. If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article. The City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, hereby declares that it would have passed this
Section
500.560
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.570
100:1211
Section 500.580. Penalty. [Ord. No. 6250 § 12, 9-8-2016]
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Article or the code hereby adopted shall, upon conviction, for each offense
be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be punished by
imprisonment in jail not to exceed three (3) months, or be punished by
both fine and imprisonment. Each day's violation of, or refusal or neglect to
comply with, any provision of this Article or the code hereby adopted shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Article, and each Section, Subsection, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more Sections, Subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section
500.570
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
500.580
100:1212
Chapter 502
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Section 502.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 6497, 9-13-2018]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, including,
without limitation, because of enumeration, buildings for any occupancy
or use whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes,
railings, water tanks, towers, open-grade steps, sidewalks, or stairways,
tents or anything erected and framed of component parts which is fastened,
anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground.
Section 502.020. Nuisance Declared. [Ord. No. 6497, 9-13-2018]
Pursuant to Sections 67.400 through 67.450, RSMo., the buildings or
structures which are determined to be detrimental to the health, safety or
welfare of the residents of the City of O'Fallon are hereby declared to be a
public nuisance.
Section 502.030. Conditions Detrimental To The Public Health,
Safety And Welfare. [Ord. No. 6497, 9-13-2018]
A. Buildings and structures as hereinafter described are declared to be
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of City residents:
1. Those buildings or structures which have been damaged by fire,
wind, or any other cause whatsoever, thus rendering them
dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare
of any occupant or any other person.
2. Those buildings or structures which have parts thereof which are
attached or have deteriorated in such a way that they constitute a
threat of falling upon public ways or upon the property of others or
which may constitute a threat of injury to members of the public or
the occupants thereof.
3. Those buildings or structures which have become so dilapidated,
decayed, unsafe, or unsanitary so that they are unfit for human
habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease to the
occupants thereof or to any other person.
4. Those buildings or structures which, because of their condition,
become harboring places for rats, stray animals, vermin or other
disease-bearing creatures, and which are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of any person.
Section
500.580
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
502.030
100:1213
Section 502.040. Open Buildings Declared A Nuisance. [Ord. No.
6497, 9-13-2018]
Those buildings or structures which are uninhabited, but which remain
open or unlocked or have openings in any door, window, wall or roof, so that
the same may be entered by animals, children or unauthorized persons are
declared to be detrimental to the health safety and welfare of City residents
and nuisances. Such buildings or structures shall be required to be secured.
Section 502.050. Standards For Repair, Vacation Or Demolition.
[Ord. No. 6497, 9-13-2018]
5. Those occupied buildings or structures having light, air, or sanitary
facilities that are inadequate to protect the health, safety or
general welfare of any person who may live or work therein.
6. Those buildings or structures, whether occupied or unoccupied,
having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or other
catastrophe, or those buildings with structures having insufficient
stairways, elevators or fire escapes to allow adequate egress
therefrom.
7. Those buildings or structures which, because of their condition, are
unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or
welfare of any person.
8. Those buildings or structures whose interior walls or other vertical
structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a
plumb line passed through the center of gravity of such wall or
vertical structural member falls outside of the middle one-third (1/
3) of its base.
9. Those buildings or structures which, exclusive of the foundation,
show thirty-three percent (33%) or more damage or deterioration
of the supporting member or members or fifty percent (50%) of
damage or deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside
walls or covering.
10. Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or
roofs or in which the floors or roofs are overloaded, or those having
floors or roofs of insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the
purpose for which they are being used or intended to be used.
11. Partially constructed buildings upon which no substantial work
shall have been performed for ninety (90) days.
12. Those in the process of demolition upon which no substantial work
shall have been performed for a period of fourteen (14) days.
A. The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Building
Inspector or other designee of the Building Official in ordering repair,
vacation, or demolition:
Section
502.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
502.050
100:1214
Section 502.060. Duties Of Building Inspector. [Ord. No. 6497,
9-13-2018]
1. If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will
no longer exist in violation of the terms of this Chapter, it shall be
ordered repaired.
2. If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it
dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its
occupants, it shall be ordered vacated.
3. In any case where a dangerous building is fifty-percent damaged or
decayed, or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall
be demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired
so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this
Chapter it shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous
building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms
of this Chapter or any ordinance of the City or Statute of the State,
it shall be demolished.
A. The Building Inspector shall:
1. Inspect any building, wall or structure that may be existing in
violation of this Chapter.
2. Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent
and all other persons having an interest in the building as shown by
the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county, or any
building found by him to be a dangerous building within the
standards set forth in this Chapter, that:
a. The owner must vacate, repair, or demolish the building in
accordance with the terms of the notice and this Chapter;
b. The occupant or lessee must vacate the building or may have it
repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in
possession;
c. The mortgagee, agent or other persons having an interest in
the building as shown by the land records of the recorder of
deeds for the county may at his own risk repair, vacate, or
demolish the building or have such work or act done;
provided, that any person notified under this Subsection to
repair, vacate, or demolish any building shall be given such
reasonable time as may be necessary to commence the work or
act as required by the notice provided for herein.
3. Set forth in the notice provided for in Subsection (A)(2) hereof, a
description of the building, or structure deemed unsafe, a
statement of the particulars which make the building or structure a
dangerous building and an order requiring the same to be put in
Section
502.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
502.060
100:1215
Section 502.070. Duties Of The Building Official. [Ord. No. 6497,
9-13-2018]
such condition as to comply with the terms of this Chapter within
such length of time as is reasonable.
4. Set forth in the notice provided for in Subsection (A)(2) hereof, the
date, time and place for a hearing to be held before the Building
Official or his designee which shall be not less than ten (10) days
following service of the notice.
5. Such notice shall be serviced either by personal service, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by a private delivery
service that is substantially equivalent to certified mail; but if
service cannot be had by any of these modes of service, then
service shall be had by publication.
6. Report to the Building Official and the City Administrator any noncompliance
with the notice provided for in Subsections (A)(2) and
(3) hereof.
7. Appear at all hearings conducted by the Building Official, or his
designee, and testify as to the condition of dangerous buildings.
A. The Building Official or his designee shall:
1. Hold a hearing and hear such testimony and receive such evidence
as the Building Inspector or the owner, occupant, mortgagee,
lessee, or any other person having an interest in the building, as
shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds for the county,
shall offer relative to the dangerous building. At such hearing, any
party may be represented by counsel, and all parties shall have an
opportunity to be heard.
2. Consider the evidence offered and make written findings of fact,
based on competent and substantial evidence, as to whether the
building or structure is a nuisance and detrimental to the health,
safety, or welfare of the residents of the City.
3. Issue an order based upon findings of fact made pursuant to
Subsection (A)(2) above commanding the owner, occupant,
mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest
in the building, as shown by the land records of the recorder of
deeds for the county, to repair, vacate, or demolish any building
found to be a dangerous building within the terms of this Code. If
the evidence does not support a finding that the building or
structure is a nuisance or detrimental to the health, safety, or
welfare of the residents of the City, no order shall be issued.
4. If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, or lessee fails to comply with
the order provided for in Subsection (A)(3) above within the time
prescribed in the original notice or in the order, the Building
Section
502.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
502.070
100:1216
Section 502.080. Appeal Of Building Official's Order. [Ord. No.
6497, 9-13-2018]
Section 502.090. Special Tax Bills And Lien Against Property. [Ord.
No. 6497, 9-13-2018]
Official shall cause such building or structure to be repaired,
vacated, or demolished as the facts may warrant, under the
standards provided for in Section 502.050.
5. Certify the cost of any repair, vacation or demolition to the Finance
Director. The costs and expenses incurred by the City shall include
the actual costs billed by third parties performing the abatement
and paid by the City, costs billed by the City Attorney related to the
abatement and paid by the City; and costs related to time spent by
City personnel in performing tasks related to the abatement and in
preparation of the tax bill, lien, or other paperwork (these costs
shall be based on the time spent in one-quarter-hour increments
multiplied by the hourly rate of pay for the employee). All City
departments shall provide invoices and other necessary
documentation to the Building Official in order to determine the
costs and expenses related to the abatement of a dangerous
building or structure.
A. Any interested party may appeal the decision and order of the Building
Official or his designee rendered under this Chapter.
B. The decision and order of the Building Official or his designee may be
appealed by filing an appeal, on such forms as prescribed by the City,
with the City Administrator within seven (7) days from the date of the
decision. The appeal form shall set forth, at a minimum, the detailed
grounds for such appeal and such further information as requested on
the appeal form. The City Administrator shall review the decision of the
Building Official either, within the Administrator's sole discretion, upon
the record previously made or upon a new hearing and shall issue a
written decision to all parties.
C. The decision of the City Administrator may be subject to judicial review
in the Circuit Court of St. Charles County by filing an appropriate
petition for judicial review. If a proper record as defined in Section
536.130, RSMo., is maintained of the hearing before the Building
Official, then such appeal shall be made to the St. Charles County
Circuit Court pursuant to Sections 536.100 to 536.140, RSMo. If such a
record is not maintained, the appeal shall be made to the St. Charles
County Circuit Court within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision
and order pursuant to Section 536.150, RSMo.
A. The Finance Director shall prepare a special tax bill or assessment for
the costs related to the demolition, repair or vacation of property. The
tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be deemed a personal debt of
the property owner and shall also be a lien on the property until paid.
Section
502.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
502.090
100:1217
Section 502.100. Violations And Penalties. [Ord. No. 6497,
9-13-2018]
B. If the building or structure is demolished or repaired by a contractor
pursuant to an order issued by the City and such contractor files a
mechanic's lien against the property, the contractor may enforce this
lien as provided in Sections 429.101 to 429.360, RSMo.
C. At the request of the property owner, the tax bill may be paid in annual
equal installments over a period of not more than ten (10) years.
Installments with interest thereon to date on the unpaid balance shall
be due annually on the anniversary of the date of issuance of the bill or
such other date as determined in writing by the Finance Director.
Interest shall be at the statutory rate on the unpaid balance of the tax
bill computed from the date of issuance. If any annual payment of
principal or interest shall not be paid within thirty (30) days of its due
date, the entire remaining balance of the tax bill shall immediately
become due and payable. If request for installment is not made to the
City, the tax bill shall be due and payable thirty (30) days from its date
of issuance with interest thereon at the statutory rate until paid.
D. The tax bill may be collected in any manner provided by law. Tax bills
issued under this Section shall be prima facie evidence of the validity of
the bill, the doing of the work and the liability of the property and
property owner for the charges stated in the bill.
A. The owner of any dangerous building who shall maintain a dangerous
building or fail to comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate, or
demolish such building given pursuant to this Chapter or who fails to
proceed continuously without unnecessary delay shall be guilty of a
violation and subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or, if the owner of the property is not also a resident of the
property, then a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00),
and/or imprisonment in accordance with the general penalty provisions
for ordinance violations as set forth in this Code.
B. The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any
notice to vacate and who fails to repair the building in accordance with
any notice given as provided for in this Chapter shall be guilty and
subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars and/or
imprisonment in accordance with the general penalty provisions for
ordinance violations as set forth in this Code.
C. Any person removing any notice or placard prohibiting entry or
occupancy of the dangerous building shall be guilty of a violation and
subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or
imprisonment in accordance with the general penalty provisions for
ordinance violations as set forth in this Code.
Section
502.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
502.110
100:1218
Section 502.110. Emergency Cases. [Ord. No. 6497, 9-13-2018]
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the
life, safety or health of any person unless a dangerous building as defined
herein is immediately vacated, and/or made secure against unauthorized
entry, and/or repaired, and/or demolished, the Building Inspector shall
report such facts to the Building Official or his designee. The Building
Official shall immediately cause the dangerous building to be vacated, and/
or be made secure against unauthorized entry, and/or repaired, and/or
demolished as the circumstances warrant. The cost to the City to cause
the emergency repair, vacation, securing, or demolition of such dangerous
building shall be collected in the same manner as provided in Section
502.090.
Section 502.120. Administrative Liability. [Ord. No. 6497,
9-13-2018]
No officer, agent, or employee of the City shall render himself personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this
Chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent, or employee of the
City as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
duties under this Chapter shall be defended by the City until the final
determination of the proceedings therein.
Section 502.130. Insurance Proceeds. [Ord. No. 6497, 9-13-2018]
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, if there are
proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered claim payment
made for damage or loss to a building or other structure caused by or
arising out of any fire, explosion or other casualty loss, the payment of
twenty-five percent (25%) of the insurance proceeds shall be paid to the
City. This Section shall apply only to a covered claim payment which is
in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the face value of the policy covering a
building or other structure.
B. The insurer shall withhold from the covered claim payment twenty-five
percent (25%) of the covered claim payment and shall pay such monies
to the City to deposit into an interest-bearing account. Any named
mortgagee on the insurance policy shall maintain priority over any
obligation under this Chapter.
C. The City shall release the proceeds and any interest thereon received
under Subsection (A) of this Section to the insured or as the terms of
the policy and endorsements thereto provide within thirty (30) days
after receipt of such insurance monies, unless the City has instituted
legal proceedings under the provisions of this Chapter. If the City
proceeded under the provisions of this Chapter, all monies in excess of
that necessary to comply with the provisions of this Chapter for the
removal, securing, repair and cleanup of the building or structure and
Section
502.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
502.130
100:1219
Chapter 505
CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS, GUTTERS
Section 505.010. Permit Required. [R.O. 2007 §505.010; CC 1978
§535.010; Ord. No. 153 §4, 11-14-1957]
Before any sidewalks, curbs or gutters, or driveway entrances are
constructed or installed, a permit shall be obtained from the Engineering
Department of the City of O'Fallon by each property owner. In his/her
discretion, the Engineering Department may issue one (1) permit for curb
and gutter or sidewalk or both for an entire block, or he/she may issue
a permit for either curb and gutter or sidewalk or driveway only. No
constructions or installations shall be made or started without such permit.
Section 505.020. Sidewalks Required Before Final Inspection. [R.O.
2007 §505.020; CC 1978 §535.030; Ord. No. 551 §§2—3, 10-19-1976;
Ord. No. 1360 §2, 8-11-1986; Ord. No. 4487 §3, 3-3-2003]
the lot on which it is located, less salvage value, shall be paid to the
insured.
D. This Section shall apply to fire, explosion or other casualty loss claims
arising on all buildings and structures.
E. This Section does not make the City a party to any insurance contract,
and the insurer is not liable to any party for any amount in excess of the
proceeds otherwise payable under its insurance policy.
A. On all new construction on any lot or building plot within the City limits
of O'Fallon, sidewalks shall be installed prior to the final inspection and
issuance of certificate of occupancy by the Building Official or his/her
representative. If sidewalks are not installed at the time of final
inspection, the Building Official may issue a certificate of temporary
occupancy and the builder shall escrow with the City a cash amount,
certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit in an amount
determined by the Building Official to be equal to the material and
installation cost. If the sidewalks are not installed within six (6) months
of issuance of a certificate of temporary occupancy, it shall be the
responsibility of the City Council to have such work completed and
reimburse the City for the cost and expense thereof by appropriating
funds in the escrow.
B. The Building Official is not authorized to issue a certificate of
occupancy until the installation of sidewalks has been completed and
verified.
C. The installation of sidewalks shall apply on new construction in all
zoning districts with the exception of the "I-1" Light Industrial and "I-2"
Heavy Industrial Zones.
Section
502.130
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
505.030
100:1220
Section 505.030. Specifications For Construction of Sidewalks.
[R.O. 2007 §505.030; CC 1978 §535.040; Ord. No. 551 §4,
10-19-1976]
Section 505.040. Violators Subject To Tax Lien. [R.O. 2007
§505.040; CC 1978 §535.050; Ord. No. 551 §5, 10-19-1976]
Should any person occupy a newly constructed structure on a tract of real
estate within the City limits of O'Fallon prior to the completion of sidewalks
in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, or other ordinances of the City
of O'Fallon, that person shall be subject to a special tax lien.
Section 505.050. Penalty For Violation By Builder. [R.O. 2007
§505.050; CC 1978 §535.060; Ord. No. 551 §6, 10-19-1976]
Should any contractor or builder of a new structure within the City limits
of O'Fallon permit or allow any person to occupy said structure in violation
of the provisions of this Chapter or other ordinance, he/she shall be subject
to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or to imprisonment in the
County Jail for up to three (3) months, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day's violation of, or refusal or neglect to comply with, any provision
of this Article or the code hereby adopted, shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
A. Sidewalks shall be installed along all portions of streets that border the
tract of real estate upon which any new structure is erected, except that
sidewalk shall be required only on peripheral streets in industrial
tracts. All sidewalks shall not be less than four (4) feet in width, of
portland cement concrete, and shall comply with specifications of the
Building Official as to grade, slope and related matters. Sidewalks shall
be located in the street right-of-way, one foot from the property line. In
cases where topography, trees or structures prevent strict compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter, the Building Official shall have some
discretion to modify requirements so long as there is compliance with
the intent of this Chapter. As a minimum the following construction
standards must be addressed:
1. All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete and broom finished.
2. Sidewalks in driveway approaches shall be six (6) inches thick. All
other sidewalks shall be four (4) inches thick.
3. All sidewalks including those in driveway approaches shall have a
one-fourth (¼) inch per foot cross slope from the property line to
the street.
4. Sidewalks shall be placed to ensure that no obstructions such as
fire hydrants, street lights, etc., are in the walkway.
5. All sidewalks shall be terminated at every intersection with an ADA
approved ramp.
Section
505.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.060
100:1221
Section 505.060. City Engineer To Supervise Construction By
Owner. [R.O. 2007 §505.060; CC 1978 §535.070; Ord. No. 440 §4,
10-18-1972]
Whenever the owner of any addition or subdivision shall construct or
improve any street thereof by grading or paving the same, or shall make any
sewer, water, or gas connection, or lay any pipes therein for that purpose, it
shall be a condition precedent that all such work be done under the general
supervision of the City Engineer for his/her inspection and approval.
Section 505.070. Specifications For Construction of Curbs and
Gutters. [R.O. 2007 §505.070; CC 1978 §535.080; Ord. No. 153 §2,
11-14-1957; Ord. No. 268 §1, 11-16-1964; Ord. No. 4157 §1,
1-15-2001]
Section 505.080. Specifications For Construction of Driveway
Entrances. [R.O. 2007 §505.080; CC 1978 §535.090; Ord. No. 153 §3,
11-14-1957; Ord. No. 4276 §1, 11-15-2001]
A. All curbs and gutters built by property owners in the City of O'Fallon
shall meet the following specifications:
1. All curbs and gutters shall be of concrete;
2. All vertical curbs and gutters shall have a twelve (12) inch back and
six (6) inch face;
3. All non-integral curbs shall:
a. Have a one (1) inch fall from the street line to the water line;
b. Have a two (2) foot overall width and shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications for the City of O'Fallon
Standard Roll Lip Curb as set forth in exhibit "D" which is
attached to Ordinance No. 268 and is on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
c. Have a one (1) inch expansion joint installed every one
hundred (100) feet;
d. Have a contraction joint constructed every twenty (20) feet.
e. Curbing installations outside the maintenance responsibility of
the City of O'Fallon may have the option to install Perma-Curb
or its equal in lieu of standard integral curbing as approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
A. All driveway entrances constructed within the public right-of-way in the
City of O'Fallon shall meet the following specifications and conform to
site plan requirements:
1. All driveway entrances shall be built to grade;
Section
505.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
505.080
100:1222
Section 505.090. Property Owner — Defined. [R.O. 2007 §505.090;
CC 1978 §535.100; Ord. No. 153 §6, 11-14-1957]
The words "property owner" as herein used shall also include tenants and
lessees and all persons, firms and corporations who install or construct
sidewalks, curbs and gutters or driveway entrance.
Chapter 510
(RESERVED)
Chapter 515
EROSION AND STORM WATER RUN-OFF CONTROL
2. If a culvert is necessary in the opinion of the Engineering
Department, no culvert smaller than twelve (12) inches in diameter
shall be installed and no culvert shorter than sixteen (16) feet shall
be installed; a larger culvert shall be installed wherever, in the
opinion of the Engineering Department, it is necessary.
3. No driveway entrances shall be constructed or built or partially
constructed or built within two (2) feet from the side or rear
property lines.
Exceptions:
a. Residential entrances that do not abut adjacent residential
entrances.
b. Multi-family dwellings.
c. Side entry entrances on corner lots.
d. City staff may allow minor alterations in special circumstances.
4. All driveway entrances shall be six (6) inches in depth from the
curb line to the property line.
5. All driveway approaches constructed in conjunction with a
sidewalk shall give the appearance that the sidewalk is continuous.
That portion of the driveway approach that doubles as a sidewalk
shall have a one-fourth (¼) inch per foot cross slope the same as
the abutting sidewalk.
6. A one (1) inch expansion joint is required between the street and
driveway approach. One (1) additional one (1) inch expansion joint
is required between this expansion joint and the termination of the
driveway.
Section
505.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
515.010
100:1223
Section 515.010. Plan and Permit Required. [R.O. 2007 §520.010;
CC 1978 §565.010; Ord. No. 742 §2, 12-8-1979]
It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity to construct, alter or
erect any building or structure where any land is disturbed on any tract
within the City limits without an approved Erosion and Storm Water Run-Off
Control Plan, and permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter, said
permit to be included on Building Permit form.
Section 515.020. Removing Topsoil or Changing Contour of Land
Prohibited. [R.O. 2007 §520.020; CC 1978 §565.020; Ord. No. 742
§3, 12-8-1979]
It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity to clear, grade,
excavate, fill or remove topsoil from or change the contour of any land in
the City (except for gardens, trees and shrubs) without an approved Erosion
and Storm Water Run-Off Plan and permit issued under the provisions of
this Chapter.
Section 515.030. Permit Application. [R.O. 2007 §520.030; CC 1978
§565.030; Ord. No. 742 §4, 12-8-1979]
Permit applications for approval of Erosion and Storm Water Run-Off
Control Plans shall be submitted to and filed with the City Engineer, or his/
her designate prior to the time any work subject to this Chapter is begun
on land within the City limits. After the City Engineer has reviewed the
application and plan, he/she will either approve or deny such permit, stating
reasons for denial or conditions of approval as modified.
Section 515.040. Decisions of City Engineer — How Determined.
[R.O. 2007 §520.040; CC 1978 §565.040; Ord. No. 742 §5,
12-8-1979]
The decision of the City Engineer shall be based on criteria intended
to protect residents and property downstream from water flows, but is
balanced with a realization that landowners have a right to develop their
property, therefore approval of such plans should not be interpreted as a
bar to claims against developing landowners.
Section 515.050. Corporate Surety Bonds. [R.O. 2007 §520.050; CC
1978 §565.050; Ord. No. 742 §6, 12-8-1979]
A Corporate Surety Bond, conditioned upon carrying out each and every
part of approved plans for at least the sum estimated to be the full costs of
carrying out such plans or a cash escrow, upon the same conditions and in
the same amount, shall be furnished the City whenever such costs exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00). The bond or escrow shall be released upon
proper completion of all of the requirements of such approved plans.
Section
515.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
515.060
100:1224
Section 515.060. Plans To Be Updated — When. [R.O. 2007
§520.060; CC 1978 §565.060; Ord. No. 742 §7, 12-8-1979]
Any approved Erosion and Storm Water Run-Off Control Plan shall become
null and void one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of approval
and no further work subject to this Chapter shall be allowed unless and
until additional or updated plans have been submitted and approved in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter or unless all requirements of
the approved control plans have been completed in less than one hundred
eighty (180) days in accord with said plans and verified by an on-site
inspection by the City Engineer or his/her designate. When no change in
conditions has occurred since the date of approval an updated plan shall
be approved in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter with no
additional requirements.
Section 515.070. Penalties. [R.O. 2007 §520.070; CC 1978 §565.070;
Ord. No. 742 §8, 12-8-1979]
Any person or business entity violating the provisions of this Chapter, either
by not obtaining a permit or not complying with its terms, shall be subject to
a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00); and each day of such violation
shall constitute a separate offense. Further, violations of this Chapter may
also be restrained, prohibited or enjoined by appropriate proceedings.
Chapter 520
REGULATIONS FOR MOBILE HOMES AND RESIDENTIAL
TRAILERS
Section 520.010. Anchorage Devices To Be Provided. [R.O. 2007
§525.010; CC 1978 §555.010; Ord. No. 433 §2, 7-18-1972]
Every Parking space for mobile homes or residential trailers within the
City limits shall be provided with devices for anchoring the unit to prevent
overturning or uplift. Where concrete platforms are provided for the
parking of units, anchorage may be eyelets imbedded in the concrete with
adequate anchor plates or hooks; or other suitable means. The anchorage
shall be adequate to withstand wind forces and uplift as required in the
Building Code and for buildings and structures based upon the size and
weight of the units.
Section 520.020. Specifications For Tie-Downs. [R.O. 2007
§525.020; CC 1978 §555.020; Ord. No. 433 §3, 7-18-1972]
Tie-downs for residential trailers and mobile homes within the city limits
shall be accomplished by the use of three-eighths (3/8) inch cable to fasten,
or its equal. The approved tie-down means shall be by: six (6) four (4) inch
blade one thousand five hundred (1,500) pound tie-downs: or four (4) six (6)
inch blade two thousand five hundred (2,500) pound tie-downs; or by threefourths
(¾) inch shell set in concrete after pad is poured with three (3) tie-
Section
515.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
520.020
100:1225
downs being placed on each side of trailer and each shell having a one-half
(½) inch lag; or by eye bolts to be set when pouring pad or pier, being fortyeight
(48) inches deep and twelve (12) inches in diameter.
Section 520.030. Trailer Footings. [R.O. 2007 §525.030; CC 1978
§555.030; Ord. No. 433 §4, 7-18-1972]
Trailer footings within the City limits shall be by piers eighteen (18) inches,
by thirty (30) inches deep by eighteen (18) inches for base under blocks; or
thirty-six (36) inch deep footings with piers five (5) inches by twelve (12)
inches, and runners thirty (30) inches by twelve (12) inches; or by a pad
five (5) inches thick and ten (10) feet by sixty (60) feet with screen or rod
reinforcement.
Section 520.035. Age of Mobile Homes. [Ord. No. 6577, 6-14-2019]
Section 520.040. Supervision By Building Official — Penalties. [R.O.
2007 §525.040; CC 1978 §555.040; Ord. No. 433 §5, 7-18-1972]
The provisions of this Chapter are to be supervised by the Building Official;
and anyone locating, or causing to be located a mobile home or travel trailer
not in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to
a fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment up to three
(3) months if upon being warned by the Building Official they intentionally
refuse to comply within a reasonable period of time.
Section 520.050. Permit Fees For Mobile Homes Within Mobile
Home Parks. [R.O. 2007 §525.050; Ord. No. 1229 §§1—8, 8-21-1985]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place a mobile home within the
corporate limits of the City of O'Fallon that is more than ten (10) years
old when placed. No permit shall be issued for any mobile home more
than ten (10) years old from the date that a permit is sought for its
placement within the City.
B. A mobile home that is more than ten (10) years old may not be moved
from its existing location to another location within the City.
A. The codes and ordinances of the City of O'Fallon allow for the
development of mobile home parks within its City limits and establish
regulations governing their establishment as well as the placement of
individual mobile homes upon lots therein.
B. Although the codes and ordinances of the City of O'Fallon require
inspection of placement of these mobile homes and their
appurtenances, and their connection to necessary services for the
purposes of safety and conformance with said codes and ordinances,
the City also recognizes that certain cost savings are realized through
the unified nature of mobile homes and their appurtenances when
erected as an organized whole.
Section
520.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
520.050
100:1226
Chapter 525
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL INSPECTION AND OCCUPANCY
REQUIREMENTS
Section 525.010. Purpose. [Ord. No. 5551 §1, 1-14-2010]
This Chapter is intended to protect the public health, safety and welfare
of the community of residents of the City of O'Fallon; assure occupants of
rental property of a safe living environment that meets minimum health and
safety standards; maintain the safety and quality of the City's housing stock
and property values; deter conditions which lead to neighborhood blight
and deterioration; prevent the construction of additions or alterations to
existing dwelling units that could be injurious to the life, health, safety or
general welfare of occupants or neighboring properties and to preserve the
habitable condition of rental residential dwellings throughout the City.
C. There is hereby adopted a permit fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00)
which shall cover all electrical and plumbing inspections made relating
to the initial placement or replacement of any mobile home, as well as
any porch, deck, shed or any other outbuilding, piers, pads, awnings, or
flag poles that may be erected with the initial placement or replacement
of any mobile home or erected within six (6) months (one hundred
eighty (180) days) following issuance of the permit.
D. The aforementioned permit fee shall not be considered to include, or
waive, sanitary sewer or water system connection fees, charges
incurred in the purchase of water meters or inspection thereof,, fences,
satellite dish antennas, above ground pools, carports, or any other
appurtenance not specifically referenced.
E. The responsibility of completing any necessary application forms,
submitting any required plans, payment of fees, and scheduling of
inspections involving the initial placement or replacement of any mobile
home and its appurtenances shall rest with the mobile home owner.
F. The mobile home park owner shall, at the time of proposed placement
or replacement of any mobile home in his/her park, advise the mobile
home owner in writing, that said mobile home owner must obtain the
aforementioned City permit.
G. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this Chapter shall
be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). Written
notice of the violation shall be served via a stop-work order which shall
be posted in a prominent location upon the work site, and thereafter no
further work shall proceed. Each day following posting of the notice in
which the proper permit is not secured shall be considered a separate
offense.
Section
520.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
525.020
100:1227
Section 525.020. Definitions. [Ord. No. 5551 §1, 1-14-2010]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CODE — The adopted Property Maintenance Code for the City of O'Fallon.
CODE OFFICIAL — The Code Official designated in the Code.
MULTI-FAMILY — Residential occupancies containing two (2) or more
dwelling units.
RENTAL DWELLING — A separate living facility for one (1) or more persons
which includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking
and sanitation which is rented, leased or otherwise not occupied by the
owner thereof.
Section 525.030. Rental Dwelling Inspection — Authorization. [Ord.
No. 5551 §1, 1-14-2010]
The Code Official is hereby authorized to make inspections of all rental
dwelling units within the City of O'Fallon for the purpose of carrying out and
enforcing the requirements and standards of this Chapter and to determine
whether dwelling units and common areas, if any, conform to the health and
safety requirements of the Property Maintenance Code of the City in force
at the time of the inspection.
Section 525.040. Occupancy Permit Required. [Ord. No. 5551 §1,
1-14-2010]
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or agent to occupy or use
or to permit the occupancy, re-occupancy or use of any rental dwelling,
structure or unit for any purpose, including the movement of furniture or
other personal property into said premises, until the Code Official shall
have issued a permit to occupy the dwelling attesting that the occupancy
complies with all of the provisions of the Code as far as can be determined
by a visual inspection of the premises. This requirement shall not apply to
any occupancy in existence at the time of the adoption of this Chapter until
a change of occupancy occurs.
Section 525.050. Application. [Ord. No. 5551 §1, 1-14-2010]
An application for a rental occupancy permit may be submitted by the
property owner, agent or prospective tenant and shall be on forms provided
for that purpose by the Code Official. No action shall be taken with respect
to an application until it is complete and all required fees have been paid. It
shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement on
an application.
Section 525.060. Action On An Application. [Ord. No. 5551 §1,
1-14-2010]
The Code Official shall examine or cause to be examined all premises for
which applications for permits have been filed within a reasonable time
Section
525.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
525.060
100:1228
after filing. No occupancy permit shall be issued until an inspection of the
premise has been completed and a property maintenance inspection report
has been filed. Approved property maintenance inspections shall be valid
for twelve (12) months.
Section 525.070. Issuance of Rental Occupancy Permit — Maximum
Occupancy. [Ord. No. 5551 §1, 1-14-2010]
If all fees are paid and the Code Official is satisfied that the premise and
its occupancy are in compliance with the Code and all laws and ordinances
applicable thereto, the Code Official shall issue the rental occupancy permit
as soon as practical. The permit shall state the maximum number of persons
who may be more persons than specified in the occupancy permit.
Section 525.080. Temporary Conditional Occupancy Permit. [Ord.
No. 5551 §1, 1-14-2010]
Occupancy may be permitted on a temporary conditional basis when, in
the judgment of the Code Official, practical difficulties interfere with
completing all repairs required to bring the premises into full compliance
with the Code prior to permitting occupancy and there are no conditions
on the premises which threaten the health or safety of an occupant or the
general public and the Code Official is satisfied that the premises will be
brought into compliance with the requirements of the Code within a ninety
(90) day period. No temporary conditional permit shall be issued when,
in the judgment of the Code Official, there is a condition on the premises
which poses an undue risk to the health or safety of an occupant and
until an escrow has been established with an approved financial institution
which guarantees that the premises will be brought into full compliance
within ninety (90) days. Temporary conditional occupancy permits may
be extended for up to one (1) additional ninety (90) day period, when
in the opinion of the Code Official practical difficulties prevent complete
compliance within the first ninety (90) day period. The escrow amount
shall be determined by the Code Official in an amount up to the amount
necessary to complete the work by a licensed contractor at prevailing
prices, but in no case less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
Section 525.090. Revocation of Permit. [Ord. No. 5551 §1,
1-14-2010]
A. Upon written notice to the holder of a permit and a hearing before the
Director of Community Development or his designee, a permit issued
hereunder may be revoked in case of:
1. Any false statement or misrepresentation of facts in the application
on which a permit was based; or
2. If the rental dwelling has been allowed to no longer comply with
standards required by the Code; or
Section
525.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
525.090
100:1229
Section 525.100. Fees. [Ord. No. 5551 §1, 1-14-2010; Ord. No. 6622,
11-14-2019]
Fees related to Rental Occupancy Permits shall be as set forth in Section
500.470, Permit and Plan Review Fees, Subsection (D).
Section 525.110. Penalties — Equitable Remedies and Delinquent
Applicants. [Ord. No. 5551 §1, 1-14-2010]
Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punished as provided
in Section 100.010 of this Code of Ordinances. In addition to any penalties
under Section 100.010, equitable relief shall also be available to enforce
compliance pursuant to Section 100.011 of this Code or Ordinances. The
restrictions of Section 100.012 of this Code of Ordinances with respect to
delinquent applicants shall also be applicable to owners of rental dwellings
for which an occupancy permit is sought.
Chapter 600
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section 600.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §600.010; CC 1978
§600.010; Ord. No. 237 §2, 11-7-1961]
Unless the context indicates that a different meaning is intended, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
CLOSED PLACE — A place where all doors are locked and where no patrons
are in the place or about the premises.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR — Alcohol for beverage purposes, alcoholic,
spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt, or other liquors, or combination of
liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous, or fermented, and all
preparations or mixtures for beverage purposes, containing in excess of
one-half of one percent (0.5%) by volume except for non-intoxicating beer
as defined in Section 312.010, RSMo. All beverages having an alcoholic
content of less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) by volume shall be
exempt from the provisions of this Chapter, but subject to inspection as
provided by Sections 196.365 to 196.445, RSMo.
NON-INTOXICATING BEER — Any beer manufactured from pure hops or
pure extract of hops, and pure barley malt or other wholesome grains or
cereals, and wholesome yeast, and pure water, and free from all harmful
3. If a nuisance is found to exist on the premises and not abated
within the time allowed; or
4. If a structure or part thereof is condemned as unsafe or for being in
violation of the Code; or
5. If the rental dwelling is occupied by more persons than specified in
the occupancy permit.
Section
525.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
600.010
100:1230
substances, preservatives and adulterants, and having an alcoholic content
of more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) by volume and not exceeding
three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) by weight.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE — Any package containing 50 milliliters or more of
intoxicating liquor excepting malt liquor, or any package containing three
(3) or more standard bottles of malt liquor or non-intoxicating beer.
PERSON — Any individual, association, joint stock company, syndicate,
co-partnership, corporation, receiver, trustee, conservator or other Officer
appointed by any State or Federal Court.
Section 600.020. License Required. [R.O. 2007 §600.020; CC 1978
§600.020; Ord. No. 237 §10, 11-7-1961]
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell or expose for sale,
intoxicating liquor, or to manufacture, brew or sell any non-intoxicating
beer, in any quantity in the City without first having obtained such license
from the City as may be provided for in this Chapter. A separate license shall
be required for each place of business.
Section 600.030. Kinds of Licenses and Annual License Charges.
[R.O. 2007 §600.030; CC 1978 §600.030; Ord. No. 237 §11,
11-7-1961; Ord. No. 409 §§1—3, 3-21-1972; Ord. No. 1113 §§1—2,
6-7-1984; Ord. No. 4993 §1, 4-13-2006; Ord. No. 5037 §1, 7-18-2006;
Ord. No. 5863 §1, 3-14-2013]
A. The kinds of licenses required which shall be issued by the City and the
annual license fees therefor by the City shall be as follows:
1. Sunday sales original package. Retail sold direct to the consumer,
not for resale and not for consumption on the premises during the
hours allowed for Sunday sales: $300.00.
2. Sunday sales by the drink. Retail liquor by the drink for
consumption on the premises where sold during the hours allowed
for such Sunday sales: $300.00.
3. Liquor by the drink—full liquor license. Retail all intoxicating liquor
and original package for consumption on the premises where sold:
$450.00.
4. 5% beer and light wine. Fourteen percent (14%) by weight for
consumption on the premises where sold by the drink: $75.00.
5. 5% beer and light wine—original package. Fourteen percent (14%)
by weight in the original package not for consumption on the
premises sold direct to the consumer, not for resale: $75.00.
6. Original package retail—full liquor license. Retail, not for
consumption on the premises, sold direct to the consumer, but not
for resale: $450.00.
Section
600.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.030
100:1231
7. Liquor wholesale—solicitor license. Selling to duly licensed
wholesalers and soliciting orders: $300.00.
8. Microbrewery license. For a business whose primary activity is the
brewing and selling of beer, with an annual production of ten
thousand (10,000) barrels or less: $150.00.
9. Beer/liquor by the drink caterer's license. Retail for consumption
on the premises: $10.00/day.
10. 5% beer by the drink. (Includes Sunday sales) not to exceed five
percent (5%) by weight for consumption on premises where sold:
$75.00.
11. 5% beer original package. (Includes Sunday sales) not for
consumption on the premises and not for resale: $75.00.
12. Beer/liquor by the drink picnic license. Liquor by the drink for
consumption on the premises where sold. Issued to any church,
school, civic service, fraternal, veteran, political or charitable club
or organization for the sale at a picnic, bazaar, fair or similar
gathering: $37.50.
13. Liquor by the drink extension of premise. Retail all intoxicating
liquor for consumption on the premises. Extension of premises
shall be for special events to be held in the area touching the front
door of the establishment only: $37.50.
14. Beer only original package. Original packages, sold directly to
consumer, not for consumption on the premises and not for resale
(includes Sundays): $75.00.
15. COL—consumption liquor license. Permits a person operating a
business where food, beverages, entertainment and/or use of the
facility are provided for compensation to allow others who use such
premises to consume intoxicating liquor: $90.00.
16. Wine tasting. Permits a person licensed to sell intoxicating liquor in
the original package at retail to conduct wine and distilled spirit
tastings on the licensed premises: $37.50.
17. Missouri wine by the drink. Permits a person to sell intoxicating
liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises where
sold, but seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the intoxicating
liquor sold by such licensed person shall be Missouri-produced
wines received from manufacturers licensed under Missouri State
Statute 311.190. Such premises may remain open between the
hours of 6:00 A.M. and Midnight, Monday through Saturday, and
between the hours of 11:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M. on Sundays:
$450.00.
B. The fees for liquor licenses set forth in this Section shall be waived for
organizations that have been designated as one (1) of the following
Section
600.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
600.030
100:1232
Section 600.040. Qualifications of Licensees. [R.O. 2007 §600.040;
CC 1978 §600.040; Ord. No. 237 §12, 11-7-1961; Ord. No. 5863 §2,
3-14-2013]
Section 600.050. Assignment and Transfer—Sales By Executors,
Etc. [R.O. 2007 §600.050; CC 1978 §600.050]
organizations by the Internal Revenue Service: 501(c)(3) (charitable
and religious organizations), 501(c)(4) (civic and social welfare
organizations), 501(c)(8) (fraternal beneficiary societies, orders or
associations), 501(c)(10) (domestic fraternal societies, orders or
associations), and 501(c)(19) (a post or organization of past or present
members of the Armed Forces of the United States).
C. Any restaurant bar, without an on-site brewery, that serves twenty (20)
or more different types of draft beer may sell thirty-two (32) fluid
ounces or more of such beer to customers for consumption off the
premises of such restaurant. As used in this Section, the term
"restaurant bar" means any establishment having a restaurant or
similar facility on the premises at least fifty percent (50%) of the gross
income of which is derived from the sale of meals or food both prepared
on the premises and consumed on such premises.
A. No person shall be granted a license under this Chapter unless such
person has obtained a business license from the City of O'Fallon and has
maintained such business license in good standing. No person shall be
granted a license under this Chapter unless such person has received
all required land use approvals, including a conditional use permit,
from the City of O'Fallon.
B. No person shall be granted a license under this Chapter unless such
person is of good moral character and a qualified legal voter and
taxpaying citizen of a County, Town, City or Village where he/she
resides in this State. No partnership or corporation shall be granted a
license under this Chapter unless the managing partner or officer of
such partnership or corporation is of good moral character and a
qualified voter of this State. No person shall be granted a license under
this Chapter whose license as such dealer has been revoked, or who has
been convicted since the ratification of the 21st Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States of a violation of the provisions of any
law applicable to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating
beer, or who employs in his/her business as such dealer any
person whose license has been revoked or who has been convicted of
violating such law since the date aforesaid.
A. No license issued under this Chapter shall be transferable or assignable
except as provided in this Section. In the event of the death of the
licensee the surviving spouse or next of kin of such deceased licensee,
who shall meet the other requirements of this Chapter, may make
application and the City Council may order the transfer of such license
Section
600.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.050
100:1233
Section 600.060. Term — Proration, Renewal, License Date. [R.O.
2007 §600.060; CC 1978 §600.060; Ord. No. 237 §14, 11-7-1961;
Ord. No. 5863 §3, 3-14-2013; Ord. No. 6411, 12-14-2017127]
Section 600.070. Application — Prerequisite To Grant of License.
[R.O. 2007 §600.070; CC 1978 §600.070; Ord. No. 237 §15,
11-7-1961; Ord. No. 6411, 12-14-2017]
No license required by this Chapter shall be granted unless application has
been made as required in this Chapter.
to permit the operation of the business of the deceased for the
remainder of the period for which a license fee has been paid by the
deceased. No executor, administrator, receiver, assignee, trustee or
guardian may sell any intoxicating liquor belonging to the estate over
which he/she has control except to a licensed wholesaler or retailer.
B. Whenever one (1) or more members of a partnership withdraw from the
partnership, the City Council, upon request, shall permit the remaining
one (1) or more partners originally licensed to continue to operate for
the remainder of the period for which the license fee was paid.
A. Each license issued in compliance with this Chapter shall expire on
June thirtieth (30th) next succeeding the beginning date of such license
of the annual license tax to be paid for any such license, the applicant
shall pay as many twelfths (12ths) as there are months, part of a month
to be counted as one (1) month, remaining from the date of the license
to the next succeeding July first (1st).
B. Applications for renewal of licenses must be filed on or before the first
(1st) day of May of each calendar year.
C. In case of failure to submit the completed renewal application required
under Subsection (B) of this Section on or before the first (1st) day of
May, there shall be added to the amount of the renewal fee a late charge
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) from the second (2nd) day of May to
the last day of May; a late charge of two hundred dollars ($200.00) if
the renewal application is submitted on the first (1st) day of June to the
last day of June; or a late charge of three hundred dollars ($300.00) if
the renewal application is submitted after the last day of June.
D. All licenses granted in renewal of a license expiring on June thirtieth
(30th) of any year shall be granted and issued for the period of one (1)
year beginning on July first (1st) of the year in which granted and issued
and shall expire on June thirtieth (30th) of the next succeeding year.
E. No license shall be given a beginning date prior to the day of approval
of application and granting of such license as provided in this Chapter.
127. Editor's Note: The title of this Section was also changed from "Term — Proration, Renewal,
Dating License Prior To Grant By City Council" to "Term — Proration, Renewal, License
Date."
Section
600.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
600.080
100:1234
Section 600.080. Application — Form and Contents. [R.O. 2007
§600.080; CC 1978 §600.080; Ord. No. 237 §16, 11-7-1961; Ord. No.
5863 §4, 3-14-2013; Ord. No. 6411, 12-14-2017]
Section 600.090. Investigation Required. [R.O. 2007 §600.090; CC
1978 §600.090; Ord. No. 237 §17, 11-7-1961; Ord. No. 6411,
12-14-2017128]
A. All applications for licenses under the provisions of this Chapter shall
be made in writing and submitted to the City Clerk. Each application
shall set forth the following information:
1. Designation of the kind of license desired;
2. Description of the premises to which such license is to apply and
the location or address thereof;
3. Name, place of residence and mailing address of the person,
individual, association, partnership, or corporation for whom a
license is sought;
4. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name, place of
residence and mailing address for each partner or member of the
Board of Directors;
5. Name, place of residence and mailing address of the managing
officer who shall be responsible for the day-to-day operation of the
establishment;
6. Dates and places of all revocation of liquor licenses and all
convictions of any law applicable to the manufacture or sale of
intoxicating liquor, if any;
7. Term of license;
8. Signature of applicant;
9. Such other information as required by the Sate of Missouri or
required by the City Clerk for the purpose of proper administration.
A. The Chief of Police shall supervise an investigation which is focused on
the propriety of granting a new license or renewing an existing license
considering the validity of the statements made in the application, the
applicant's history of compliance with applicable law, violations
attributed to the establishment, and other factors relating to the
standards of issuance. The investigation for each application shall be in
a form and as extensive as the Chief of Police deems appropriate. The
Police Department is not required to conduct an investigation of any
person who has submitted an incomplete application packet.
128. Editor's Note: The title of this Section was also changed from "Application — Filing and
Presentation To City Council" to "Investigation Required."
Section
600.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.090
100:1235
Section 600.100. Application — Deposit of License Fee —
Disposition of Such Deposit. [R.O. 2007 §600.100; CC 1978
§600.100; Ord. No. 237 §18, 11-7-1961; Ord. No. 6411, 12-14-2017]
At the time of filing application for a license under the provisions of this
Chapter, the applicant shall place in the hands of the City Clerk the amount
of license fee for the license applied for, either in cash, or bank draft,
money order, certified check or cashier's check, made payable to the City.
No license shall be granted unless such deposit of the license fee has been
made. If the license is not granted, the amount of license fee shall be
refunded to the applicant. If the license is granted, such amount deposited
with the application shall be turned over to the Director of Finance whose
receipt therefor shall be given to the applicant, together with the license
issued.
Section 600.110. Application — Consideration and Issuance of
License. [R.O. 2007 §600.110; CC 1978 §600.110; Ord. No. 237 §19,
11-7-1961; Ord. No. 6411, 12-14-2017129]
B. Upon conclusion of the investigation on applications where no concerns
were found, the Police Department will convey that fact to the City
Clerk. For each application presenting concerns the Police Chief shall
report that in writing to the City Clerk and shall indicate a
recommendation for approval or denial. Any recommendation for denial
of the application shall include a justification based on the standards for
approval and issuance.
C. The Police Department's findings shall be provided to the City Clerk no
later than thirty (30) days from the date that the application was
submitted to the City Clerk.
A. All applications for new liquor licenses together with the Police Chief's
report, shall be presented to the City Council immediately upon receipt
of the Police Chief's report and scheduled for action at the Council's
next meeting. Upon approval of an application by a majority of the
members elected to the City Council, the City Clerk shall issue the
license. If the City Council fails to approve such license no license shall
be issued.
B. With respect to all renewals of existing liquor licenses where no
concerns were revealed in the Police Department's investigation the
City Clerk shall renew such liquor licenses except that the City Clerk, in
his or her discretion, may refer one (1) or more such renewals to the
City Council for action. Any such referral shall be made to the City
Council and scheduled for action at a Council meeting prior to
expiration of the existing license. Upon approval of a referred
application by a majority of the members elected to the City Council,
129. Editor's Note: The title of this Section was also changed from "Application — When
Considered By City Council" to "Application — Consideration and Issuance of License."
Section
600.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
600.110
100:1236
Section 600.120. Contents of License. [R.O. 2007 §600.120; CC
1978 §600.120; Ord. No. 237 §20, 11-7-1961; Ord. No. 6411,
12-14-2017130]
Each license granted shall describe the kind of license, the license fee, the
premises on which sale is to be made, the name of the license holder, the
date of issuance and period of time for which such license is granted.
Section 600.130. Sales of Liquor Prohibited Near Schools and
Churches. [Ord. No. 5421 §1, 2-12-2009]
the City Clerk shall issue the license. If the City Council fails to approve
a renewal, no license shall be issued.
C. All applications for renewal of existing liquor licenses that involve
concerns noted in the Police Department's investigation shall be
referred to the City Council immediately upon receipt of the Police
Chief's report and scheduled for action at the Council's next meeting.
Upon approval of a renewal application by a majority of the members
elected to the City Council, the City Clerk shall issue the license. If the
City Council fails to approve a renewal, no license shall be issued.
A. No license shall be granted for the sale of intoxicating liquor, as defined
in this Chapter, within three hundred (300) feet of any school, church,
or other building regularly used as a place of religious worship, unless
the applicant for the license shall first obtain the consent in writing of
the City Council, except that when a school, church or place of worship
shall hereafter be established within three hundred (300) feet of any
place of business licensed to sell intoxicating liquor, the license shall
not be denied for this reason. Such consent shall not be granted until at
least ten (10) days' written notice has been provided to all owners of the
property within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed licensed
premises.
B. Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to a license issued by the
Supervisor of Alcohol and Tobacco Control for the sale of intoxicating
liquor pursuant to Section 311.218, RSMo., or to a license issued to any
church, school, civic, service, fraternal, veteran, political or charitable
club or organization which has obtained an exemption from the
payment of Federal taxes.
C. Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to any premises holding a
license issued before January 1, 2009, by the Supervisor of Alcohol and
Tobacco Control for the sale of intoxicating liquor. To retain a license
under this Subsection, the licensed premises shall not change license
type, amend the legal description, or be without a liquor license for
more than ninety (90) days.
130. Editor's Note: The title of this Section was also changed from "Grant and Issuance —
Contents" to "Contents of License."
Section
600.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.140
100:1237
Section 600.140. Revocation or Suspension. [R.O. 2007 §600.140;
CC 1978 §600.150; Ord. No. 237 §23, 11-7-1961; Ord. No. 5863 §5,
3-14-2013]
A. The City Council, following a hearing, may suspend, revoke or
otherwise discipline any license issued under this Chapter for any of the
following reasons:
1. Failure to keep an orderly place or house or causing, maintaining
or assisting in the cause or maintenance of a nuisance, whether
public or private;
2. Failure to comply or any violation of any provision of this Chapter
or the regulations promulgated under the authority of this Chapter;
3. Violation of the terms and conditions upon which the license was
issued;
4. Violation of any ordinance of the City regulating the licensee;
5. Violation of any other Federal, State or local law or regulation
pertaining to the licensee or the activities associated with the sale
of alcoholic beverages;
6. Failure of the licensee to pay any tax, fee, fine or other
governmental charge required by law;
7. Illegal or improper issuance of the license;
8. Any misrepresentation or false statement in the application for
such license;
9. Failure to maintain an appropriate business license issued by the
City; or
10. Failure to obtain a similar license from the State or County
Supervisor of Liquor Control or suspension, revocation or other
discipline of licensee's State or County liquor license.
B. Prior to the imposition of any discipline, the City Council shall first,
upon motion of the City Council, direct a notice of the date, time and
place of such hearing, setting forth the grounds upon which such
license is sought to be revoked, and commanding the licensee to appear
and show cause why such license should not be revoked. Such notice
shall be served by the Chief of Police upon the licensee, or upon an
officer of the licensee if a corporation, or upon any employee of the
licensee at the time of service in charge of the place of business
licensed. The licensee shall have the right to have counsel and to
produce witnesses in his/her own behalf in such hearing. Such hearing
shall be conducted as other City Council proceedings are conducted. No
license shall be revoked or suspended except upon vote therefor by a
majority of the members elected to the City Council, the Mayor having
Section
600.140
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
600.140
100:1238
Section 600.150. Refund of License Fee Prohibited. [R.O. 2007
§600.150; CC 1978 §600.160; Ord. No. 237 §24, 11-7-1961]
In case any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter is revoked,
surrendered or forfeited by the licensee, not used or used for only part of
the license period, after the effective beginning date of such license, no
refund of any license fee or part thereof shall be made.
Section 600.160. When Sale of Intoxicating Liquor Prohibited. [R.O.
2007 §600.160; CC 1978 §600.180; Ord. No. 453 §1, 9-6-1973; Ord.
No. 1184 §10, 1-17-1985; Ord. No. 1591 §2, 5-17-1988; Ord. No.
3564 §1, 7-21-1997; Ord. No. 3585 §1, 9-8-1997; Ord. No. 3978 §1,
11-8-1999; Ord. No. 4568 §§1—2, 9-26-2003; Ord. No. 5863 §6,
3-14-2013]
Section 600.165. Licensees Responsible For Conduct of Their
Businesses. [R.O. 2007 §600.165; Ord. No. 4891 §§1—3, 8-16-2005]
no vote except in case of a four (4) to four (4) tie vote by the members
elected to the City Council.
A. Operating Hours, Days. No person having a license issued pursuant to
this Chapter, nor any employee of such person shall sell, give away or
permit the consumption of, any intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating
beer in any quantity between the hours of 1:30 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on
weekdays, and between the hours of 1:30 A.M. on Sunday and 6:00
A.M. on Monday, upon or about his/her premises, except as otherwise
authorized and licensed for Sunday sales. Any person licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer by the drink shall keep a
closed place during the aforementioned prohibited times.
B. Where such licenses authorizing the sale of intoxicating liquor by the
drink are held by clubs or hotels, this Section shall apply only to the
room or rooms in which intoxicating liquor is dispensed; and where
such licenses are held by restaurants whose business is conducted in
one (1) room only and substantial quantities of food and merchandise
other than intoxicating liquors are dispensed, then the licensee shall
keep securely locked during the hours and on the days herein specified
all refrigerators, cabinets, cases, boxes and taps from which
intoxicating liquor is dispensed. Any person violating any provision of
this Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
C. Establishments for which a Sunday sales license has been granted may
sell intoxicating liquor between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and Midnight on
Sunday.
A. At no time, under any circumstances, shall any licensee or his/her
employees immediately fail to prevent or suppress any violent quarrel,
disorder, brawl, fight or other improper or unlawful conduct of any
person upon the licensed premises, nor shall any licensee or his/her
employees allow any indecent, profane or obscene language, song,
Section
600.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.165
100:1239
entertainment, literature or advertising material upon the licensed
premises.
B. In the event that a licensee or his/her employees knows or should have
known that an illegal or violent act has been committed on or about the
licensed premises, they immediately shall report the occurrence to the
O'Fallon Police Department and shall cooperate with the O'Fallon Police
Department during the course of any investigation into an occurrence.
C. No retail licensee or his/her employee shall permit in or upon his/her
licensed premises: [Ord. No. 6294 §1, 1-12-2017]
1. The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or
any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
2. The displaying of any portion of the areola of the female breast or
the failure to cover the entire areola and entire front of a female
breast with opaque clothing;
3. The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breast, buttocks, anus or genitals;
4. The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or
genitals or the failure to cover pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals
with opaque clothing;
5. The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon the
licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of his/her
genitals or anus or has failed at any time to have and keep opaque
clothing over all parts of his/her genitals and anus; and
6. The displaying of films, video programs or pictures depicting acts,
the live performances of which are prohibited by this Chapter.
D. Licensees at all times are responsible for the conduct of their business
and at all times are directly responsible for any act or conduct of any
employee on the premises which is in violation of any of the provisions
of this Chapter.
E. All licensees shall allow the licensed premises and all portions of the
buildings of the premises, including all rooms, cellars, outbuildings,
passageways, closets, vaults, yards, attics and all buildings used in
connection with the operations carried on under the license and which
are in their possession or under their control, and all places where they
keep or have liquor stored to be inspected by the City Clerk and his/her
agents. Licensees shall cooperate fully with the City Clerk and his/her
agents during the inspection.
Section
600.165
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
600.170
100:1240
Section 600.170. Sale To Minors — Certain Other Persons —
Exceptions. [R.O. 2007 §600.170]
Any licensee under this Chapter, or his/her employee, who shall sell, vend,
give away or otherwise supply any intoxicating liquor in any quantity
whatsoever to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, or to
any person intoxicated or appearing to be in a state of intoxication, or to
a habitual drunkard, and any person whomsoever except his/her parent
or guardian who shall procure for, sell, give away or otherwise supply
intoxicating liquor to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years,
or to any intoxicated person or any person appearing to be in a state of
intoxication, or to a habitual drunkard, shall be deemed guilty of an offense,
except that this Section shall not apply to the supplying of intoxicating
liquor to a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years for medical
purposes only, or to the administering of such intoxicating liquor to any
person by a duly licensed physician. No person shall be denied a license or
renewal of a license issued under this Chapter solely due to a conviction
for unlawful sale or supply to a minor when serving in the capacity as an
employee of a licensed establishment.
Section 600.180. Persons Eighteen Years of Age or Older May Sell
or Handle Liquor or Beer, When. [R.O. 2007 §600.180]
A. Except as provided in Subsections (B) and (C) of this Section, no person
under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall sell or assist in the sale or
dispensing of intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer.
B. In any place of business licensed in accordance with Section 311.200,
RSMo., or Section 312.040, RSMo., persons at least eighteen (18) years
of age may stock, arrange displays, operate the cash register or scanner
connected to a cash register and accept payment for, and sack for
carryout, intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer. Delivery of
intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer away from the licensed
business premises cannot be performed by anyone under the age of
twenty-one (21) years. Any licensee who employs any person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years, as authorized by this Subsection, shall,
when at least fifty percent (50%) of the licensee's gross sales does not
consist of non-alcoholic sales, have an employee twenty-one (21) years
of age or older on the licensed premises during all hours of operation.
C. In any distillery, warehouse, wholesale distributorship, or similar place
of business which stores or distributes intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating
beer but which does not sell intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating
beer at retail, persons at least eighteen (18) years of age
may be employed and their duties may include the handling of
intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer for all purposes except
consumption, sale at retail, or dispensing for consumption or sale at
retail.
D. Persons eighteen (18) years of age or older may, when acting in the
capacity of a waiter or waitress, accept payment for or serve
Section
600.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.180
100:1241
Section 600.190. Misrepresentation of Age By Minor To Obtain
Liquor or Non-Intoxicating Beer. [R.O. 2007 §600.190; CC 1978
§600.220; Ord. No. 237 §7a, 11-7-1961]
Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and under the age of twentyone
(21) years who shall represent that he/she has attained the age of
twenty-one (21) years for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any
way receiving any intoxicating liquor, except in cases authorized by law,
shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person under
the age of seventeen (17) years who shall represent that he/she has attained
the age of twenty-one (21) years for the purpose of purchasing, asking for
or in any way receiving any intoxicating liquor, except in cases authorized
by law, may be considered a delinquent child and may be dealt with in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 211, RSMo.
Section 600.200. Purchase or Possession By A Minor. [R.O. 2007
§600.200; CC 1978 §600.230; Ord. No. 237 §7b, 11-7-1961; Ord. No.
4574 §1, 10-15-2003; Ord. No. 5153 §1, 3-8-2007]
intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer in places of business which
sell food for consumption on the premises if at least fifty percent (50%)
of all sales in those places consists of food; provided that nothing in this
Section shall authorize persons under twenty-one (21) years of age to
mix or serve across the bar intoxicating beverages or non-intoxicating
beer.
A. Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, who purchases or
attempts to purchase or has in his/her possession any intoxicating
liquor as defined in Section 600.010, or who is visibly in an intoxicated
condition as defined in Section 342.010, or has a detectable blood
alcohol content of two-hundredths of one percent (0.02%) or more by
weight of alcohol in such person's blood is guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. For purposes of prosecution under this Section or any other provision of
this Chapter involving an alleged illegal sale or transfer of intoxicating
liquor to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age, a manufacturersealed
container describing that there is intoxicating liquor therein
need not be opened or the contents therein tested to verify that there is
intoxicating liquor in such container. The alleged violator may allege
that there was not intoxicating liquor in such container, but the burden
of proof of such allegation is on such person, as it shall be presumed
that such a sealed container describing that there is intoxicating liquor
therein contains intoxicating liquor.
Section
600.180
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
600.210
100:1242
Section 600.210. Consumption, Etc., of Intoxicating Liquor On
Premises When Sold At Retail in Original Package. [R.O. 2007
§600.210; CC 1978 §600.240; Ord. No. 237 §8, 11-7-1961]
Intoxicating liquor sold at retail in original packages only shall not be
consumed on the premises where sold, nor shall the original packages be
opened on the premises of the vendor.
Section 600.220. Druggists May Sell and Physicians Prescribe
Liquor. [R.O. 2007 §600.220; CC 1978 §600.250; Ord. No. 237 §9,
11-7-1961]
Any druggist may have in his/her possession intoxicating liquor purchased
by him/her from a licensed vendor under a license pursuant to this law, or
intoxicating liquor lawfully acquired at the place of acquisition and legally
transported into this State, and lawfully inspected, gauged and labeled as
provided for in this law; such intoxicating liquor to be used in connection
with the business of a druggist, in compounding medicines or as a solvent
or preservant; provided, that nothing in this law shall prevent a regularly
licensed druggist, after he/she procures a license therefor in compliance
with this law, from selling intoxicating liquor in the original packages, but
not to be drunk or the packages opened on the premises where sold; and
provided further, that nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting
the right of a physician to prescribe intoxicating liquor in accordance with
his/her professional judgment for any patient at any time, or prevent a
druggist from selling intoxicating liquor to a person on prescription from a
regularly licensed physician as above provided.
Section 600.230. Violation, Penalty. [R.O. 2007 §600.230; CC 1978
§600.260; Ord. No. 237 §10, 11-7-1961]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter, except where
some penalty is otherwise provided, shall upon conviction thereof be
adjudged guilty of an offense and punished by a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed three (3) months
or both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 605
LICENSING AND REGULATION OF OCCUPATIONS
Section 605.010. "Merchant" Defined. [R.O. 2007 §605.010; CC
1978 §605.010; Ord. No. 709 §3, 7-9-1979]
For purposes of this Chapter a "merchant" is defined as a person, business
or other legal entity doing business within the City of O'Fallon except for
ministers, teachers, professors, priests, lawyers, doctors, or accountants.
Section 605.015. Persons Not To Be Charged For Business License.
Section
600.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.015
100:1243
Section 605.020. Merchant's License Required. [R.O. 2007
§605.020; CC 1978 §605.020; Ord. No. 709 §2, 7-9-1979]
All merchants doing business within the City of O'Fallon shall be required
to purchase and keep on display at their usual place of business a City of
O'Fallon merchant's license.
Section 605.030. Purchase Procedure. [R.O. 2007 §605.030; CC
1978 §605.030; Ord. No. 1178 §§3—4, 12-10-1984; Ord. No. 3631
§§1—4, 12-29-1997; Ord. No. 5038 §1, 7-18-2006]
A. No person following for a livelihood the profession or calling of minister
of the gospel, duly accredited Christian Science practitioner, teacher,
professor in a college, priest, lawyer, certified public accountant,
dentist, chiropractor, optometrist, chiropodist, or physician or surgeon
in this City shall be taxed or made liable to pay any municipal or other
corporation tax or license fee of any description whatever for the
privilege of following or carrying on such profession or calling, and
after December 31, 2003, no investment funds service corporation as
defined in Section 143.451, RSMo., may be required to pay any such
license fee in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
annually, any law, ordinance or Charter to the contrary
notwithstanding.
B. No person following for a livelihood the profession of insurance agent
or broker, veterinarian, architect, professional engineer, land surveyor,
auctioneer, or real estate broker or salesman in this City shall be taxed
or made liable to pay any municipal or other corporation tax or license
fee for the privilege of following or carrying on his/her profession
unless that person maintains a business office within the City of
O'Fallon.
A. The initial merchant's license and each subsequent renewal shall be
purchased at City Hall at a cost of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the initial
license and fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each renewal of such license.
However, the license fee required by this Section shall be waived for
any organization which has been designated as a 501(c)(3) organization
by the Internal Revenue Service. All purchases of such licenses shall be
made annually no later than July 1. For new businesses or first-time
applicants who file between January 1 and June 30 of their initial year of
operation, renewal of said license shall not be due until July 1 of the
following year. A lost, stolen or destroyed merchant's license shall be
replaced upon payment of a replacement fee of one dollar ($1.00). In
the event that an applicant fails to submit a paid real estate tax receipt
and/or personal property tax receipt, the City may verify the payment of
real estate taxes and/or personal property taxes for the applicant upon
payment of a fee of one dollar ($1.00). Merchant licenses are not
transferable, and are required at each business location. A new license
must be purchased if the business changes ownership. The fee for a
new license shall be waived if the sole reason for the new license is due
Section
605.015
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
605.030
100:1244
Section 605.040. Taxes To Be Paid. [R.O. 2007 §605.040; CC 1978
§605.040; Ord. No. 709 §7, 7-9-1979]
No license or permit provided for or required under any ordinance of
the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, shall hereafter be issued by the City to
any person, firm or corporation until the current Municipal Taxes of the
applicant for such license or permit shall have first been paid; and as to
future years, no license or permit shall be issued to such applicant until all
Municipal Taxes for the future years next preceding the year for which such
license is issued shall first have been paid.
to the fact that the business moves to a new address within the City.
For late renewals, the cost shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) up to July
31, thirty dollars ($30.00) from August 1 to August 31, and fifty dollars
($50.00) on September 1 or later. [Ord. No. 6007 §1, 6-12-2014]
B. The administrative costs for this fee for a merchant's license are as
follows:
Labor:
Administration $3.00
Finance (1 hr) $16.41
Planning (.5 hr) $14.22
Building (.25 hr) $6.72
Police $3.00
Supplies:
Forms (4) $2.00
Letters/Env/
Labels
$2.50
Stamp/Phone $1.50
Miscellaneous $3.00
Total $52.34
C. The benefits of a merchant's license are as follows:
1. Review prospective businesses for proper zoning.
2. Ensure businesses obtain Sales Tax I.D. and Workers'
Compensation insurance, if necessary.
3. Ensure emergency contact information is on file with Police
Department.
4. Allow measure of recourse if businesses are out of compliance with
ordinances.
5. Provide complete database listing of all businesses operating
within City limits.
Section
605.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.050
100:1245
Section 605.050. Director of Finance To Provide Method of
Checking Unpaid Taxes. [R.O. 2007 §605.050; CC 1978 §605.050;
Ord. No. 709 §8, 7-9-1979]
It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to establish and promulgate
rules and regulations relative to an orderly method of checking whether all
Municipal Taxes are paid by such applicant.
Section 605.060. Suspension, Revocation and Other Discipline of
Licenses. [Ord. No. 6000 §1, 4-24-2014131]
A. Any license issued by the City under this Chapter may be suspended,
revoked or otherwise disciplined or sanctioned for good cause.
Suspension, revocation or other form of discipline or sanction shall be
in addition to any other penalty or penalties prescribed in this Chapter
or available to the City by law. Good cause shall include, but not be
limited to, any of the following reasons:
1. Any failure to comply or any violation of any provision of this
Chapter or the regulations promulgated under the authority of this
Chapter by the licensee;
2. Violation of the terms and conditions upon which the license was
issued;
3. Violation of any ordinance of the City regulating the licensee;
4. Violation of any other Federal, State or local law or regulation
pertaining to the licensee or the activities associated with the
business subject to the license or occurring upon the property
where the establishment is located or the business is conducted;
5. Failure of the licensee to pay any tax, fee, fine or other
governmental charge required by law, including the payment of
municipal taxes and the remission of sales taxes;
6. Illegal or improper issuance of the license;
7. Any misrepresentation, misleading statement of fact, or false
statement in the application for such license;
8. Causing, maintaining, or failing to address any condition
constituting a nuisance, whether public or private;
9. Failure to obtain or maintain any license from the State or other
regulatory authority which is required for the operation of the
business subject to the license.
B. Procedure.
131. Editor's Note: Section 1 of this ordinance also repealed former Section 605.060,
Licenses — Revoked When Taxes Not Paid, as adopted and amended by R.O. 2007
§ 605.060; CC 1978 § 605.060; Ord. No. 709 § 6, 7-9-1979.
Section
605.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
605.060
100:1246
1. In any case in which there is reason to believe a license issued
pursuant to this Chapter may be subject to suspension, revocation
or other discipline, the notice of violation shall be issued to the
business or establishment of the violations or other grounds
warranting suspension, revocation or other discipline. The notice
shall order the licensee or owner or operator of the business (if
different than the licensee) to appear before the Director of
Finance, or his or her designee, at such time and place as
determined by the Director of Finance, to show cause, if any, why
the business license or other permit should not be suspended,
revoked or otherwise disciplined or sanctioned. Every person
required to appear shall have at least ten (10) days' notice thereof.
2. Such notice shall be signed by the Director of Finance, or his or her
designee. The notice shall be served upon that person by delivering
a copy thereof to the person, or by leaving a copy at his/her
residence with some member of the family or household over
fifteen (15) years of age, or upon any corporation by delivering the
copy thereof to the registered agent or to any other officer at any
business office of the corporation within the City. If the notice
cannot be given for the reason that the person named in the notice
or his/her agent cannot be found in the City, of which fact the
return upon such notice of the officer serving the same shall be
conclusive evidence, such notice shall be mailed to such person and
posted at the property which is the site of the business or mailed to
such person and published in a newspaper within the City once at
least seven (7) days before the time fixed for the parties to appear.
The cost of the mailing and publication shall be assessed against
the licensee.
3. During the period the hearing is pending before the Director of
Finance, the licensee shall be permitted to continue the operation
of the business; provided, however, that the pending nature of such
hearing shall not preclude prosecution for violation of the
ordinances of the City occurring during such period.
4. If, after hearing all the evidence, it is determined that there are
grounds for suspension, revocation or other discipline of the
business license, the Director of Finance, or his or her designee,
shall make such order as he or she deems reasonable. The order
shall be served in the manner provided in this Section for service of
the notice of violation.
5. The decision of the Director of Finance may be appealed by filing
an appeal, on such forms as prescribed by the City, with the City
Administrator within seven (7) days from the Director's decision.
The appeal form shall set forth, at a minimum, the detailed grounds
for such appeal and such further information as requested on the
appeal form. The filing of a request for review by the City
Administrator shall not stay the outcome of the Director's
Section
605.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.060
100:1247
Section 605.070. Failure To Obtain or Display License - Penalty.
[R.O. 2007 §605.070; CC 1978 §605.070; Ord. No. 709 §5, 7-9-1979]
Any merchant doing business in the City of O'Fallon who does not obtain
and/or display an O'Fallon Merchant's License shall be liable in the
Municipal Court of the City of O'Fallon for a fine of not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus the cost of
the license and Court costs. Each day such violation continues shall be a
separate offense and the violator shall be liable for separate fines therefor.
Section 605.080. Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers. [Ord. No.
5159 §1, 3-22-2007; Ord. No. 5879 §1, 5-9-2013]
determination unless the Administrator shall suspend the effect of
the determination upon request of the aggrieved party.
6. The City Administrator shall review the decision of the Director of
Finance either, within the Administrator's sole discretion, upon the
record previously made or upon a new hearing and shall issue a
written decision to all parties.
7. The Administrator's decision may be subject to judicial review in
the Circuit Court of St. Charles County if an aggrieved party files
an appropriate petition for judicial review within fifteen (15) days
of the Administrator's decision.
8. Upon suspension or revocation of a business license, the owner
and/or operator of the business shall immediately cease operation
of the business at the location set forth in the order.
9. In the event that a licensee whose license has been revoked
pursuant to this Section, or a related entity of a licensee whose
license has been revoked pursuant to this Section, shall thereafter
apply for a substantially similar license, the licensing official may
take into account the act(s) and circumstances which led to the
revocation in considering the new application.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following words have the
meaning indicated:
CANVASSER — A person who attempts to make personal contact with
a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or
appointment from the resident for the primary purpose of:
Attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion,
philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate, even if
incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts the donation of
money for or against such cause, or
1.
Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a non-commercial event
or service.
2.
Section
605.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
605.080
100:1248
ISSUING OFFICER — The finance officer for the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri, or his/her designee.
PEDDLER — A person who attempts to make personal contact with
a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or
appointment from the resident for the primary purpose of attempting
to sell a good or service. A "peddler" does not include a person who
distributes handbills or flyers for a commercial purpose, advertising
an event, activity, good or service that is offered to the resident for
purchase at a location away from the residence or at a time different
from the time of visit. Such a person is a "solicitor".
SOLICITOR — A person who attempts to make personal contact with
a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or
appointment from the resident for the primary purpose of:
Attempting to obtain a donation to a particular patriotic,
philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational,
civic, fraternal, charitable, political or religious purpose, even if
incidental to such purpose there is the sale of some good or service,
or
1.
Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a commercial event or
service.
2.
B. Exception. Section 605.080 shall not apply to a Federal, State or local
government employee or a public utility employee in the performance
of his/her duty for his/her employer.
C. Identification Card Required For Peddlers And Solicitors, Available For
Canvassers. No person shall act as a peddler or as a solicitor within the
City without first obtaining an identification card in accordance with
Section 605.080. A canvasser is not required to have an identification
card but any canvasser wanting an identification card for the purpose of
reassuring City residents of the canvasser's good faith shall be issued
one upon request.
D. Fee. The fee for the issuance of each identification card shall be:
1. For a peddler or solicitor: $7.50 per day.
2. For a canvasser requesting an identification card: No fee.
Provided however, that any merchant as defined in Section
605.010 above,
a. Having a place of business in the City of O'Fallon; and
b. Paying property, sales or gross receipts taxes to the City of
O'Fallon, and
c. Having a current, valid business license in accord with Section
605.020 above, or exempt from the obligation to have a City
license by reason of Section 605.015 above, shall be entitled to
Section
605.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.080
100:1249
the issuance of peddler or solicitor identification cards valid
for up to twenty (20) solicitation days (i.e. the combined total
of the number of cards and the number of days for which they
are valid) per calendar year without paying the per-day fee
set forth above, if all other requirements for the issuance of
such cards are satisfied. The partial waiver of per-day fees
provided herein shall not be applicable to licensees operating
under Chapters 607, 610, 615, 625, 630 or 635 below.
E. Application For Identification Card. Any person or organization (formal
or informal) may apply for one (1) or more identification cards by
completing an application form at the office of the issuing officer during
regular office hours.
F. Contents Of Application. The applicant (person or organization) shall
provide the following information:
1. Name of applicant.
2. Number of identification cards required.
3. The name, physical description and photograph of each person for
whom a card is requested. In lieu of this information, a driver's
license, State identification card, passport, or other governmentissued
identification card (issued by a government within the
United States) containing this information may be provided, and a
photocopy taken. If a photograph is not supplied, the City will take
a photograph of each person for which a card is requested at the
application site. The actual cost of the photograph will be paid by
the applicant.
4. The permanent and (if any) local address of the applicant.
5. The permanent and (if any) local address of each person for whom a
card is requested.
6. A brief description of the proposed activity related to this
identification card. (Copies of literature to be distributed may be
substituted for this description at the option of the applicant.)
7. Date and place of birth for each person for whom a card is
requested and (if available) the Social Security number of such
person.
8. A list of all infraction, offense, misdemeanor and felony convictions
of each person for whom a card is requested for the seven (7) years
immediately prior to the application, the application shall also be
accompanied by a "criminal history records" name search report
from the Missouri Highway Patrol issued not more than one (1)
year prior to the date of application, and by a substantially similar
report from each State in which the applicant has been a resident
within the preceding seven (7) years.
Section
605.080
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
605.080
100:1250
9. The motor vehicle make, model, year, color and State license plate
number of any vehicle which will be used by each person for whom
a card is requested.
10. If a card is requested for a peddler:
a. The name and permanent address of the business offering the
event, activity, good or service (i.e., the peddler's principal).
b. A copy of the principal's current and valid sales tax license as
issued by the State of Missouri, provided that no copy of a
license shall be required of any business which appears on the
City's annual report of sales tax payees as provided by the
Missouri Department of Revenue. The principal must also be
current in any obligations to the City, including, but not limited
to, any necessary business license or other fees or permits, if
the principal has any such obligations.
c. The location where books and records are kept of sales which
occur within the City and which are available for City
inspection to determine that all City sales taxes have been
paid.
11. If a card is requested for a solicitor:
a. The name and permanent address of the organization, person,
or group for whom donations (or proceeds) are accepted.
b. The web address for this organization, person or group (or
other address) where residents having subsequent questions
can go for more information.
12. Any other information the applicant wishes to provide, perhaps
including copies of literature to be distributed, references to other
municipalities where similar activities have occurred, etc.
G. Issuance Of Identification Card. The identification card(s) shall be
issued promptly after application but in all cases within sixteen (16)
business hours of completion of an application, unless it is determined
within that time that:
1. The applicant has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude within the past seven (7) years; or
2. With respect to a particular card, the individual for whom a card is
requested has been convicted of any felony or a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude within the past seven (7) years; or
3. Any statement upon the application is false, unless the applicant
can demonstrate that the falsehood was the result of excusable
neglect.
H. Investigation.
Section
605.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.080
100:1251
1. During the period of time following the application for one (1) or
more identification cards and its issuance, the City shall investigate
as to the truth and accuracy of the information contained in the
application. If the City has not completed this investigation within
the sixteen (16) business hours provided in Section 605.080(G), the
identification card will nonetheless be issued, subject, however, to
administrative revocation upon completion of the investigation.
2. If a canvasser requests an identification card, the investigation will
proceed as described above, but if the City refuses to issue the
identification card (or revokes it after issuance), the canvasser will
be advised that the failure to procure an identification card does
not prevent him/her from canvassing the residents of the City.
I. Denial—Administrative Revocation. If the issuing officer denies (or
upon completion of an investigation revokes) the identification card to
one (1) or more persons, he/she shall immediately convey the decision
to the applicant orally and shall within sixteen (16) working hours after
the denial prepare a written report of the reason for the denial which
shall be immediately made available to the applicant. Upon receipt of
the oral notification, and even before the preparation of the written
report, the applicant shall have at his/her option an appeal of the denial
of his/her application before the City Administrator.
J. Hearing On Appeal. If the applicant requests a hearing under Section
605.080(I), review from the decision (on the record of the hearing) shall
be had to the Circuit Court of St. Charles County.
K. Display Of Identification Card. Each identification card shall (when the
individual for whom it was issued is acting as a peddler or solicitor) be
worn on the outer clothing of the individual, as so to be reasonably
visible to any person who might be approached by said person.
L. Validity Of Identification Card. An identification card shall be valid
within the meaning of Section 605.080 for the length of the license
period requested, up to a maximum period of two (2) months, from its
date of issuance.
M. Revocation Of Card. In addition to the administrative revocation of an
identification card, a card may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
1. Any violation of this Section 605.080 by the applicant or by the
person for whom the particular card was issued.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement made in the
course of carrying on the activity.
3. Conviction of any felony or a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude within the last seven (7) years.
Section
605.080
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
605.080
100:1252
4. Conducting the activity in such a manner as to constitute a breach
of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
The revocation procedure shall be initiated by the filing of a
complaint by the issuing officer and a hearing before the City
Administrator in accord with Section 605.080(I) above.
N. Distribution Of Handbills And Commercial Flyers. In addition to the
other regulations contained in Section 605.080 and this Code of
Ordinances, a solicitor or canvasser leaving handbills or commercial
flyers about the community shall observe the following regulations:
1. No handbill or flyer shall be left at, or attached to any sign, utility
pole, transit shelter or other structure within the public right-ofway.
The Police are authorized to remove any handbill or flyer
found within the right-of-way.
2. No handbill or flyer shall be left at, or attached to any privately
owned property in a manner that causes damage to such privately
owned property.
3. No handbill or flyer shall be left at, or attached to any of the
property having a "no solicitor" sign of the type described in
Section 605.080(O)(1) or (2).
4. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill or flyer
upon private premises which are inhabited except by handing or
transmitting same directly to some person then present upon such
private premises. Provided however, that in the case of inhabited
private premises which are not posted against solicitors or
solicitors and canvassers, a solicitor or canvasser, unless requested
not to do so by someone on such premises, may place or deposit any
such handbill or flyer in or upon such premises if such handbill or
flyer is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill
or flyer from being blown away or drifting about such premises or
sidewalks, streets or other public places; and further provided that
mailboxes may not be used for handbills or flyers unless specifically
allowed by Federal law.
5. Any person observed distributing handbills or flyers shall be
required to identify himself/herself to the Police (either by
producing an identification card or other form of identification).
This is for the purpose of knowing the likely identity of the
perpetrator if the City receives a complaint of damage caused to
private property during the distribution of handbills or flyers.
O. General Prohibitions. No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall:
1. Enter upon any private property where the property has clearly
posted in the front yard a sign visible from the right-of-way (public
or private) indicating a prohibition against peddling, soliciting and/
Section
605.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.080
100:1253
Section 605.090. Tents For Commercial Use. [R.O. 2007 §605.090;
CC 1978 §605.090; Ord. No. 301 §1, 11-2-1967; Ord. No. 4205
§§1—2, 6-14-2001]
or canvassing as the case may be. Such sign need not exceed one
(1) square foot in size and may contain words "no soliciting" or "no
solicitors", "no peddling" or "no peddlers", or "no canvassing" or
"no canvassers", or any combination thereof, in letters of at least
two (2) inches in height.
2. Remain upon any private property where a notice in the form of a
sign or sticker is placed upon any door or entrance way leading into
the residence or dwelling at which guests would normally enter,
which sign contains the words similar to that specified in
Subparagraph (1) above, and which is clearly visible to the peddler,
solicitor or canvasser.
3. Use or attempt to use any entrance other than the front or main
entrance to the dwelling or step from the sidewalk or indicated
walkway (where one exists) leading from the right-of-way to the
front or main entrance, except by express invitation of the resident
or occupant of the property.
4. Remove any yard sign, door or entrance sign that gives notice to
such person that the resident or occupant does not invite visitors.
5. Use or attempt to use any entrance other than the front or main
entrance to the dwelling or step from the sidewalk or indicated
walkway (where one exists) leading from the right-of-way to the
front or main entrance, except by express invitation of the resident
or occupant of the property.
6. Enter upon the property of another except between the hours of
9:00 A.M. and 8:00 P.M. in the hours of Central Standard Time and
9:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M. in the hours of Central Daylight Time.
Except that the above prohibitions shall not apply when the
peddler, solicitor or canvasser has an express invitation from
the resident or occupant of a dwelling allowing him/her to
enter upon any posted property.
P. Penalty. Any person violating any part of this Section shall be
prosecuted under the general penalty Section of the City of O'Fallon as
set forth at Section 100.010 of the Code of Ordinances.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to regulate the location,
placement and duration of temporary tents in commercial areas.
B. Exceptions. The following regulations shall not apply to construction
trailers or any other sort of temporary shelter as otherwise regulated
within the Municipal Code of the City of O'Fallon.
Section
605.080
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
605.090
100:1254
C. Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, the following definitions
apply:
COMMERCIAL USE — Areas zoned "C-O", "C-1", "C-2", C-3", "I-1", I-2"
and "HTCD" occupied by an existing non-residential land use.
TENT — A temporary shelter of any kind, typically without a foundation
and/or able to be removed by means of, but not limited to,
transportation and/or disassembly.
D. Permits. No person or persons, company or corporation shall construct
a tent of any type material within the corporate limits of the City of
O'Fallon for commercial use without first obtaining a permit from the
City of O'Fallon. No tents shall be erected prior to the issuance of an
approved permit.
1. Permit length. Thirty (30) days. Additional time may only be
granted through the approval of a conditional use permit.
2. Frequency. One (1) permit per calendar year shall be issued per
commercial business. In the case of multiple-tenant buildings, only
one (1) permit shall be allowed at a time.
3. Cost of permit. Two hundred dollars ($200.00). One hundred
dollars ($100.00) of the permit fee is to be held as a refundable
deposit, payable to the applicant if all the conditions of the permit
are met to the satisfaction of the City of O'Fallon.
E. Information Required For Permit. The following information is required,
at a minimum, to process a tent permit:
1. Site plan or location map drawn to scale showing the placement of
the tent;
2. Location of on-site parking facilities; and
3. Size of tent.
F. Uses For Tents. Tents may be only used as an accessory use to an
existing primary use permitted within the applicable zoning district.
G. Conditions For Tent Approval. The following conditions, at a minimum,
are to be considered by staff for approval of a tent permit:
1. May not be located within any required yards or bufferyards;
2. May not be located within the sight triangles for any intersections,
public or private;
3. May not reduce the available parking spaces below what is
required for the site through the Zoning Code;
4. Shall be located upon a hard surfaced area;
Section
605.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.090
100:1255
Section 605.100. Use of Right-Of-Way, Streets, Highways, Alleys or
Thoroughfares For The Purpose of Selling or Offering For Sale
Services or Merchandise — Prohibited. [R.O. 2007 §605.100; Ord.
No. 4507 §1, 4-21-2003]
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to conduct or be engaged
directly or indirectly in peddling, hawking, huckstering, selling, soliciting or
offering to sell by direct solicitation any service or merchandise of any kind
or nature in any right-of-way, City streets, highways, alleys or thoroughfares
within the City, or by their conduct to invite any person or persons to come
into the right-of-way for such purpose. No provision of this Section shall
pertain to the sale of newspapers and news periodicals as provided by law
from racks.
Section 605.110. New and Used Automobile Sales.
5. Are subject to any applicable building or Fire Department codes or
regulations;
6. All signage must be compliant with the Sign Code of the City of
O'Fallon; and
7. May be subject to additional conditions as deemed necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare by the applicable fire
district, the O'Fallon Police Department and/or the City of O'Fallon.
H. Removal. Tents must be dismantled and removed within twenty-four
(24) hours from the expiration date of the permit. Failure to comply
with the removal provisions will result in an automatic forfeiture of the
refundable deposit. Failure to comply with the removal provisions
within seventy-two (72) hours from the expiration date of the permit
may result in citation from the City of O'Fallon, subject to a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent day of
non-compliance.
A. In addition to any requirements imposed by zoning or other ordinances
of the City, businesses operating within the City limits of O'Fallon and
which are involved in the sale of new and used automobiles and other
motor vehicles shall be subject to the following licensing and regulatory
requirements:
1. Obtain a merchant's license for such use of the business premises
which shall be subject to renewal requirements.
2. Submit a plat to the City Planner delineating the location on the
business premises where the vehicles will be located.
3. Not display in open view any used cars or trucks in a dismantled or
inoperable condition.
4. Not obstruct traffic or endanger ingress or egress from the
business premises or from adjoining streets.
Section
605.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
605.110
100:1256
Section 605.120. License Fee On Hauling of Commercial Waste.
[Ord. No. 5545 §1, 1-14-2010; Ord. No. 5584 §2, 4-20-2010; Ord. No.
5706 §1, 6-9-2011]
A business license fee of three dollars ($3.00) is hereby levied on those
engaged in the business of collecting or hauling trash or waste materials
from commercial or industrial facilities in the City per year for each cubic
yard or portion thereof of rated capacity for each container located in the
City.
Chapter 607
PAWNBROKERS
Section 607.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §607.010; Ord. No. 3878
§1, 5-19-1999]
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to have
the meanings indicated below:
CLAIMANT — A person who claims that property in the possession of a
pawnbroker is misappropriated from the claimant and fraudulently pledged
or sold to the pawnbroker.
5. Not obstruct or encroach upon sidewalk or walkway areas of the
business premises or road right-of-way.
6. Obtain and display on the business premises a current State license
to sell motor vehicles.
7. Display only such signs or advertisements on or about the vehicles
for which permits have been obtained from the City.
8. Maintain a list of the owners of the used vehicles for sale together
with their vehicle inspection numbers and permit the inspection
thereof by O'Fallon Police Officers.
9. Not park any used vehicles for sale off of a paved or concrete
surface.
10. Display Missouri dealer tags if more than two (2) vehicles are sold
from the premises during any calendar year.
11. Have a background check conducted by the Police Department of
the City of O'Fallon with results being submitted to the City Council
for consideration of status as conditional use.
12. Any person placing, or allowing to be placed, on the property of
another any vehicle marked advertised for sale, without the real
property owner's permission, shall be subject to prosecution under
this Chapter.
Section
605.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
607.010
100:1257
HOLD ORDER — A written legal instrument issued to a pawnbroker by
a Law Enforcement Officer commissioned by the law enforcement agency
of the municipality that licenses and regulates the pawnbroker, ordering
the pawnbroker to retain physical possession of pledged goods in the
possession of a pawnbroker or property purchased by and in the possession
of a pawnbroker and not to return, sell or otherwise dispose of such
property as such property is believed to be misappropriated goods.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Police Chief or Police Officer
designated by the Police Chief of the municipality in which the
pawnbroker's pawnshop is located.
MISAPPROPRIATED — Stolen, embezzled, converted or otherwise
wrongfully appropriated or pledged against the will of the rightful owner or
party holding a perfected security interest.
PAWNBROKER — Any person engaged in the business of lending money
on the security of pledged goods or engaged in the business of purchasing
tangible personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or
repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time.
PLEDGOR — A person who pledges property to the pawnbroker.
SELLER — A person who sells property to a pawnbroker.
Section 607.020. Register To Be Kept. [R.O. 2007 §607.020; Ord.
No. 3878 §2, 5-19-1999]
Every pawnbroker shall keep a register of all loans and purchases of all
articles effected or made by him. This register shall show the date of loans
or purchases, and the names of all persons who have left any property on
deposit as a collateral security or as a delivery on sale thereof. Opposite
such name and date shall be written the person's date of birth, driver's
license number, social security number, or other identification record
capable of identifying the person. A full description of all such property
purchased or received on deposit as collateral security, the manufacturer's
identifying insignia or serial number (if applicable), the time when the
loan falls due, the amount of purchase money or the amount loaned, the
interest charged and the picture number. The pawnbroker shall give the
party negotiating or selling the property a plain written or printed ticket for
the loan, and a plain written or printed receipt of the articles purchased,
having on each a copy of the entries required by this Section to be kept
in his/her register. For the ticket or receipt, he/she shall not be entitled
to make any charge. A third (3rd) copy of such register shall be made
available, on a weekly basis, to the Detective Bureau Commander of the City
of O'Fallon Police Department.
Section 607.030. Photographing of Persons Pawning or Selling
Articles Required. [R.O. 2007 §607.030; Ord. No. 3878 §3,
5-19-1999]
No pawnbroker shall accept any article or property as collateral security, or
purchase any article or property, unless he/she shall make a photograph of
Section
607.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
607.030
100:1258
the person from whom such article or property is being received, along with
the receipt or pawn ticket given to such person; nor shall any pawnbroker
refuse to deliver such photograph to any Law Enforcement Officer upon
request. Every pawnbroker shall display a notice to his/her customers in a
prominent place to the effect that he/she is required, by City ordinance, to
photograph every person pawning or selling an item to him.
Section 607.040. Stolen Goods. [R.O. 2007 §607.040; Ord. No. 3878
§4, 5-19-1999]
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the Police any article
pledged with him, or which is sought to be pledged with him, if he/she shall
have reason to believe that the article was stolen.
Section 607.050. Inspection of Property, No Search Warrant
Required — Hold Order, Probable Cause, Contents, Expiration —
Confidentiality. [R.O. 2007 §607.050; Ord. No. 3878 §5, 5-19-1999]
A. Upon request of a Law Enforcement Officer to inspect property that is
described in information furnished by the pawnbroker, the Law
Enforcement Officer shall be entitled to inspect the property described,
without prior notice or the necessity of obtaining a search warrant,
during regular business hours in a manner so as to minimize
interference with or delay to the pawnbroker's business operation.
When a Law Enforcement Officer has probable cause to believe that
goods or property in the possession of a pawnbroker are
misappropriated, the officer may place a hold order on the property.
The hold order shall contain the following:
1. The name of the pawnbroker;
2. The name and mailing address of the pawnshop where the property
is held;
3. The name, title and identification number of the Law Enforcement
Officer placing the hold order;
4. The name and address of the agency to which the Law Enforcement
Officer is attached and the claim or case number, if any, assigned by
the agency to the claim regarding the property;
5. A complete description of the property to be held including model
and serial numbers; and
6. The expiration date of the holding period.
Section
607.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
607.050
100:1259
The hold order shall be signed and dated by the issuing officer
and signed and dated by the pawnbroker or the pawnbroker's
designee as evidence of the hold order's issuance by the officer,
receipt by the pawnbroker and the beginning of the initial
holding period. The officer issuing the hold order shall provide
an executed copy of the hold order to the pawnbroker for
the pawnbroker's record-keeping purposes at no cost to the
pawnbroker.
B. Upon receiving the hold order and subject to the provisions of Section
367.047, RSMo., the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the
property subject to the order in a secured area. The initial holding
period of the hold order shall not exceed two (2) months, except that
the hold order may be extended for up to two (2) successive one (1)
month holding periods upon written notification prior to the expiration
of the immediately preceding holding period. A hold order may be
released prior to the expiration of any holding period or extension
thereof by written release from the agency placing the initial hold
order. The initial hold order shall be deemed expired upon the
expiration date if the holding period is not extended pursuant to this
Subsection.
C. Upon the expiration of the initial holding period or any extension
thereof, the pawnbroker shall deliver written notice to the Law
Enforcement Officer issuing the hold order that such order has expired
and that title to the property subject to the hold order will vest in the
pawnbroker in ten (10) business days. Ownership shall only vest in the
pawnbroker upon the expiration of the ten (10) day waiting period
subject to any restriction contained in the pawn contract and subject to
the provisions of Sections 367.044 to 367.053, RSMo. Vesting of title
and ownership shall be subject to any claim asserted by a claimant
pursuant to Section 367.044, RSMo.
D. Gross negligence or willful non-compliance with the provisions of this
Section by a pawnbroker shall be cause for the licensing authority to
suspend or revoke the pawnbroker's license. Any imposed suspensions
or revocation provided for by this Subsection may be appealed by the
pawnbroker to the licensing authority or to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
E. All records and information that relate to a pawnbroker's pawn,
purchase or trade transactions and that are delivered to or otherwise
obtained by an appropriate Law Enforcement Officer pursuant to this
Chapter are confidential and may be used only by such appropriate Law
Enforcement Officer and only for the following official law enforcement
purposes:
1. The investigation of a crime specifically involving the item of
property delivered to the pawnbroker in a pawn, purchase or trade
transaction;
Section
607.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
607.050
100:1260
Section 607.060. Hold Order in Effect, Pawnbroker May Release
Property To Peace Officer, Not Waiver of Property Rights — Sale of
Property Under Hold Order Prohibited. [R.O. 2007 §607.060; Ord.
No. 3878 §6, 5-19-1999]
Section 607.070. Criminal Charges Filed and Disposition of Case,
Notice To Pawnbroker, Duty of Prosecutor — Release of Hold Order,
Procedure. [R.O. 2007 §607.070; Ord. No. 3878 §7, 5-19-1999]
2. The investigation of a pawnbroker's possible specific violation of
the record-keeping or reporting requirements, but only when the
appropriate Law Enforcement Officer, based on a review of the
records and the information received, has probable cause to
believe that such a violation occurred; and
3. The notification of property crime victims of where property that
has been reported misappropriated can be located.
A. Upon written notice from a Law Enforcement Officer indicating that
property in the possession of a pawnbroker and subject to a hold order
is needed for the purpose of furthering a criminal investigation and
prosecution, the pawnbroker shall release the property subject to the
hold order to the custody of the Law Enforcement Officer for such
purpose, and the officer shall provide a written acknowledgment that
the property has been released to the officer. The release of the
property to the custody of the Law Enforcement Officer shall not be
considered a waiver or release of the pawnbroker's property rights or
interest in the property. Upon completion of the criminal investigation,
the property shall be returned to the pawnbroker who consented to its
release; except that if the Law Enforcement Officer has not completed
the criminal investigation within one hundred twenty (120) days after
its release, the officer shall immediately return the property to the
pawnbroker or obtain and furnish to the pawnbroker a warrant for the
continued custody of the property.
B. Except as provided in Subsection (A) of this Section, the pawnbroker
shall not release or dispose of the property except pursuant to a court
order or the expiration of the holding period of the hold order, including
all extensions.
A. The Prosecuting Attorney shall notify the pawnbroker in writing in
cases where criminal charges have been filed and the property may be
needed as evidence. The notice shall contain the case number, the style
of the case and a description of the property.
B. The pawnbroker shall hold such property until receiving notice of the
disposition of the case from the Prosecuting Attorney. The Prosecuting
Attorney shall notify the pawnbroker and claimant in writing within
fifteen (15) days of the disposition of the case.
Section
607.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
607.080
100:1261
Section 607.080. Minors. [R.O. 2007 §607.080; Ord. No. 3878 §8,
5-19-1999]
No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with
any unemancipated minor under the age of eighteen (18) years. No
pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who is not eighteen (18)
years of age or over. No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be an
agent for any pawnbroker.
Section 607.090. Compliance With Chapter Required. [R.O. 2007
§607.090; Ord. No. 3878 §9, 5-19-1999]
No person or corporation shall conduct or operate a business of pawnbroker
in violation of any provisions of this Chapter.
Section 607.100. License Required — Qualifications — Oath —
Bond. [R.O. 2007 §607.100; Ord. No. 3878 §10, 5-19-1999]
A. No person or corporation shall conduct or operate the business of
pawnbroker without having first obtained a license as provided in this
Chapter.
1. No person shall operate a pawnshop unless such person obtains a
municipal pawnshop license issued pursuant to this Section. The
City of O'Fallon may issue a pawnshop license to any person who
meets the qualifications of this Section. To be eligible for a
pawnshop license, an applicant shall:
a. Be of good moral character;
b. Have net assets of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
readily available for use in conducting business as a pawnshop
for each licensed pawnshop; and
c. Show that the pawnshop will be operated lawfully and fairly
within the purposes of this Chapter.
2. If the City of O'Fallon is unable to verify that the applicant meets
the net assets requirement for a licensed pawnshop, the City of
O'Fallon may require a finding, including the presentation of a
current balance sheet, by an independent certified public
accountant that the accountant has reviewed the books and
records of the applicant and that the applicant meets the net assets
requirement of this Section.
3. An application for a new pawnshop license, the transfer of an
existing pawnshop license, or the approval of a change in the
ownership of a licensed pawnshop shall be under oath and shall
state the full name and place of residence of the applicant, the
place where the business is to be conducted and other relevant
information required by the City of O'Fallon. If the applicant is a
partnership, the application shall state the full name and address of
Section
607.080
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
607.100
100:1262
Section 607.110. Application — Investigation. [R.O. 2007 §607.110;
Ord. No. 3878 §11, 5-19-1999]
Application for a pawnbroker's license shall be made to the City Clerk and
shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the place of business and
the number of employees intended to be engaged. The Chief of Police or
his/her designee shall investigate each applicant for such license and shall
report back to the City Council whether or not such applicant is a person
of good character. No license shall be issued to a person who has been
convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor which directly relates to the duties
and responsibilities of the occupation of pawnbroker, or otherwise makes
the applicant presently unfit for a pawnshop license.
each member. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall
state the full name and address of each officer, shareholder and
director. The application shall be accompanied by:
a. An investigation fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) if the
applicant is unlicensed at the time of applying for the
pawnshop license or two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) if the
application involves a second (2nd) or additional license to an
applicant previously licensed for a separate location or
involves substantially identical principals and owners of a
licensed pawnshop at a separate location;
b. Proof of general liability; and
c. An annual fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
4. Each applicant for a pawnshop license at the time of filing
application shall file with the City of O'Fallon a bond satisfactory to
the City and in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) for each license with a surety company qualified to do
business in this State. The aggregate liability of such surety shall
not exceed the amount stated in the bond. The bond shall run to the
City of O'Fallon for the use of the City and of any person or persons
who may have a cause of action against the obligor of such bond
under the provisions of this Chapter. Such bond shall be
conditioned that the obligor will comply with the provisions of this
Chapter and will pay to the City of O'Fallon and to any such person
or persons any and all amounts of money that may become due or
owing to the City or to such person or persons from such obligor
under and by virtue of the provisions of this Chapter during the
time such bond is in effect.
5. No person who is lawfully operating a pawnshop prior to the
passage of this Chapter shall be required to obtain a license under
this Section in order to continue operating such pawnshop, so long
as such person does not violate any other provision of this Chapter.
Section
607.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
607.120
100:1263
Section 607.120. Prerequisite Agreement. [R.O. 2007 §607.120;
Ord. No. 3878 §12, 5-19-1999]
The applicant for a pawnbroker's license shall have agreed not to accept
as collateral security or to purchase any camera, radio, television, stereo
equipment, lawn mower, typewriter, computer equipment, cellular
telephone, electronic paging device, calculating machine, copying machine,
duplicating machine, power tool, cash register, still or moving picture
projector, video camera or firearm, unless such item shall have plainly
visible thereon the manufacturer's serial number.
Section 607.130. Separate License For Each Location. [R.O. 2007
§607.130; Ord. No. 3878 §13, 5-19-1999]
Section 607.140. Change of Address. [R.O. 2007 §607.140; Ord. No.
3878 §14, 5-19-1999]
In the event a licensee under this Chapter shall change any of the addresses
stated in the application during the term for which the license is issued,
such licensee shall notify the license collector of such change not later than
five (5) business days after such change.
Section 607.150. Penalties. [R.O. 2007 §607.150; Ord. No. 3878 §15,
5-19-1999]
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter may, upon conviction,
have his or her license revoked and be subject to a fine of up to five hundred
dollars ($500.00), as well as imprisonment of up to three (3) months, or both
such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 610
LICENSING AND REGULATION OF MASSAGE
ESTABLISHMENTS
Section 610.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §610.010; CC 1978
§610.010; Ord. No. 535 §2, 6-15-1976]
Certain terms referred to in this Chapter are defined as follows:
EMPLOYEE — Any person, other than a masseur or masseuse, who renders
any service to the permittee, who receives compensation or any
consideration, and who has no physical contact with the permittee's
customers or clients.
A. No pawnbroker shall be allowed to have more than one (1) place for
transacting the business of a pawnbroker without having first obtained
a license for such place of business.
B. No person shall act as agent for a pawnbroker at any other place than
the place of business stated in the application for a license.
Section
607.120
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
610.010
100:1264
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed place of
business, wherein massage is given, engaged in or carried on, or permitted
to be given, engaged in, or carried on, for any form of consideration. It may
include, but is not limited to massage parlors or reading rooms.
MASSEUR OF MASSEUSE — Any person who administers to another
person, for any form of consideration, massage.
OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICE — Any business not licensed as a massage
establishment under the provisions of this Chapter wherein massage is
given, engaged in or carried on, or permitted to be given, engaged in, or
carried on, for any form of consideration, not at a fixed location but at a
location designated by the masseur or masseuse, customer or client.
PERMITTEE — Any person receiving a permit to operate a massage
establishment or outcall massage service under the provisions of this
Chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, copartnership, firm, association, company,
corporation, or combination of individuals of whatever form or character.
Section 610.020. Permit Required. [R.O. 2007 §610.020; CC 1978
§610.020; Ord. No. 535 §3, 6-15-1976]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to
permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises
in the City of O'Fallon, the operation of a massage establishment or an
out-call massage service as herein defined without first having obtained a
permit duly issued by the City Clerk as set forth herein.
Section 610.030. Application. [R.O. 2007 §610.030; CC 1978
§610.030; Ord. No. 535 §4, 6-15-1976]
A. An application for a permit to engage in the business of a massage
establishment or outcall massage service shall be obtained from the
City Clerk and shall contain the following information:
1. The two (2) previous addresses (if any) within the three (3) years
immediately prior to the present address of applicant;
2. Written proof that the individual or partnership applicant is over
the age of eighteen (18) years;
3. Individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color eyes,
hair and sex;
4. Two (2) portrait photographs at least two (2) inches by two (2)
inches;
5. Businesses, occupations, or employments of the applicant for the
three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application;
Section
610.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
610.030
100:1265
Section 610.040. Investigation Fee. [R.O. 2007 §610.040; CC 1978
§610.040; Ord. No. 535 §5, 6-15-1976]
All applications for a massage establishment or outcall massage service
permit, shall be accompanied by an investigation fee of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00), no part of which shall be refundable.
Section 610.050. Application Referred To Police Department. [R.O.
2007 §610.050; CC 1978 §610.050; Ord. No. 535 §6, 6-15-1976]
Upon the receipt of said application, the City Clerk shall refer the
application to the Police Department which shall within thirty (30) days
from the date of said application review records or make an inspection of
the premises proposed to be used as a massage establishment and shall
make a written recommendation to the City Clerk concerning compliance
with the respective requirements.
Section 610.060. Issuance of Permit. [R.O. 2007 §610.060; CC 1978
§610.060; Ord. No. 535 §7, 6-15-1976]
6. The history of applicant in the operation of a massage
establishment, outcall massage service or similar business or
occupation;
7. All criminal violations, other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
and lawful pardons or rehabilitative activity related thereto;
8. The name and address of each masseur, masseuse, or employee
who is or will be employed in said establishment or service or work
as an independent contractor therein, the terms and conditions of
such employment or contract, and the background of all employees
including their height, weight, age, education and police record if
any;
9. Such other identification and information necessary to discover the
truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set
forth in the application;
10. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and residence of each of
the officers and directors of said corporation and of each
stockholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the
corporation.
A. The City Clerk shall issue said permit if it is found:
1. That the operation, as proposed by applicant, complies or would
comply with all applicable laws and ordinances, including but not
limited to, the City's Building Code, zoning laws and health
regulations.
Section
610.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
610.060
100:1266
Section 610.070. Permits To Be Displayed — Logs To Be Kept. [R.O.
2007 §610.070; CC 1978 §610.070; Ord. No. 535 §8, 6-15-1976]
The permittee shall display the massage establishment or outcall massage
service permit issued in an open and conspicuous location on the premises
or in the principal place of business. The permittee shall maintain a written
listing of all masseurs, masseuses or employees, whether employed by him
or her or as independent contractors. Such written list shall be available
for inspection during regular business hours. The permittee shall display
licenses of all employees in a prominent place in the establishment. The
permittee shall keep a bound log of the name, address, date, time and
service performed on each customer, and said log shall be available for
inspection by the Chief of Police.
Section 610.080. Suspension or Revocation of Permit. [R.O. 2007
§610.080; CC 1978 §610.080; Ord. No. 535 §9, 6-15-1976]
Any massage establishment's or outcall massage services permit issued
under this Chapter shall be subject to suspension for up to ninety (90)
days or revocation by the City Clerk for violation of any provision of this
Chapter or for any grounds that should warrant the denial of the issuance
of such permit in the first (1st) instance. The permittee shall be entitled to
a hearing before the City Clerk prior to the suspension or revocation of any
permit under this Chapter. At such hearing evidence will be received for the
purpose of determining whether or not such permit shall be suspended or
revoked or whether the permit may be retained.
Section 610.090. Operating Requirements. [R.O. 2007 §610.090; CC
1978 §610.090; Ord. No. 535 §10, 6-15-1976]
2. That applicant, or if applicant is a corporation, the officers,
directors and stockholders and employees as stated herein, be of
good moral character.
Otherwise, said permit shall be denied. In the event of denial,
notification and reasons for denial shall be set forth in writing and
shall be sent to the applicant by means of certified mail or hand
delivery. An appeal may be taken by any aggrieved party under the
provisions of Chapter 536, RSMo., as amended.
A. The operation of any massage establishment shall be subject to the
following regulations:
1. Massage establishment shall be closed and operations shall cease
between the hours of 12:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. each day.
2. In any massage shop it shall be unlawful for customers of opposite
sex to receive treatment in the same room or the same quarters at
the same time.
Section
610.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
610.090
100:1267
Section 610.100. Business Performed On Premises — Exceptions.
[R.O. 2007 §610.100; CC 1978 §610.100; Ord. No. 535 §11,
6-15-1976]
All business or activity provided for under this Chapter shall be conducted
and performed on the respective premises; provided, however that massage
shop licensees or employees, at the direction of a duly licensed physician,
may perform their services in behalf of a physically incapacitated patient in
such patient's home, residence or other designated place, or such licensee
or employee may render such treatment to persons who are bedfast or are
so physically incapacitated that it is impractical to provide same to such
persons at a licensed location, and provided further that all such services
so rendered shall have received the prior approval of the City License
Inspector.
Section 610.110. Inspections. [R.O. 2007 §610.110; CC 1978
§610.110; Ord. No. 535 §12, 6-15-1976]
The City Marshal and O'Fallon Police are hereby authorized to enter and
inspect any massage shop at any reasonable time to ascertain whether the
provisions of this Chapter, any other City ordinance, or State law, are being
violated.
Section 610.120. Not Pertaining To Hospitals, Etc. [R.O. 2007
§610.120; CC 1978 §610.120; Ord. No. 535 §13, 6-15-1976]
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to massage therapy
businesses or massage therapists licensed by the State of Missouri,
hospitals, nursing homes, sanitarium, persons holding an unrevoked
certificate of entitlement to practice the healing arts under the laws of
the State of Missouri, barbers and beauticians duly licensed by the State
of Missouri, athletic trainers, or persons working under the direction and
control of such persons or in any such establishments.
3. No service shall be given in any massage shop which is clearly
dangerous or harmful in the opinion of the Chief of Police to the
safety or health of such person, and after such notice in writing to
the licensee from such Officer.
4. No alcoholic beverages, nor the consumption thereof, shall be
allowed, permitted or suffered to be done in or upon any premises
licensed under the provisions of this Chapter.
5. All operators licensed under the provisions of this Chapter shall at
all times be responsible for the conduct of his/her or any of his/her
employees which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this
Chapter. Any violation of the City, State or Federal laws committed
on the licensed premises by any such licensee or employee
affecting the eligibility or suitability of such person to hold a license
or permit may be grounds for suspension or revocation of same.
Section
610.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
610.120
100:1268
Chapter 615
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT CENTERS
Section 615.010. Definition. [R.O. 2007 §615.010; CC 1978
§615.010; Ord. No. 862 §2, 10-1-1981]
A "mechanical amusement center" is defined as any establishment which
provides five (5) or more mechanical amusement devices for use or
operation by the public as a recreational service; and the term "mechanical
amusement device" is defined as any machine which, upon the insertion
of a coin, slug, token, plat, disc, or any other insertion device, may be
operated by the public for use as a game, video or other entertainment, or
amusement, of any kind or description whatever.
Section 615.020. License Required — Application For. [R.O. 2007
§615.020; CC 1978 §615.020; Ord. No. 862 §3, 10-1-1981]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or to permit to be operated
on any premises in the City of O'Fallon an amusement center, without first
securing a license duly issued by the City Council as set forth herein. An
application for the operation of an amusement center or penny arcade in the
City of O'Fallon shall be obtained from the City Clerk. Each such application
shall be verified and shall contain the name of the proposed operator (if a
partnership, the names of all partners, and if a corporation, the names of all
Officers and stockholders), the proposed location of the amusement center,
and the number and types of machines to be provided. Such application
shall be accompanied by accurately scaled and fully dimensioned plans of
the premises, showing the location of the machines. Each such application
shall be accompanied by an application fee of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00), no part of which shall be returnable due to the administrative
costs involved. Each such application shall be referred by the City Clerk to
the O'Fallon Chief of Police, who shall investigate the character and fitness
of the proposed operator as well as any other persons listed as having an
interest in the proposed license. The term of said license shall be for one
(1) year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed as provided herein.
Each applicant shall be notified by mail or by hand delivery of the issuance
or non-issuance of a license by the City Administrator.
Section 615.030. Issuance of License. [R.O. 2007 §615.030; CC 1978
§615.030; Ord. No. 862 §4, 10-1-1981]
A. A license shall not be issued if any of the following conditions occur:
1. Material misstatements or misleading statements of fact in the
application;
2. The proposed operation would be within two hundred (200) feet
(from property line to property line) of a residence, or any business
Section
610.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
615.030
100:1269
Section 615.040. Renewal Application. [R.O. 2007 §615.040; CC
1978 §615.040; Ord. No. 862 §5, 10-1-1981]
Within thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the license, a licensee
may apply to the City for renewal thereof, on such applications as shall be
provided by the City Clerk. Renewal applications shall contain the name,
address and license number of the licensee's operation, and further,
licensee shall indicate any changes from the information furnished to the
City at the time of the original application. An application for renewal shall
be accompanied by a renewal application fee of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00), no part of which shall be returnable. The City shall renew said
license upon a finding after a report from the Police Department that said
operation shall have been conducted in accordance with all applicable laws
and ordinances. If the City does not renew said license, the procedure set
forth in Section 615.050 of this Chapter shall be followed.
Section 615.050. Suspension or Revocation of License. [R.O. 2007
§615.050; CC 1978 §615.050; Ord. No. 862 §6, 10-1-1981]
(from unit to unit) selling liquor by the drink, or not otherwise
comply with all applicable City ordinances;
3. Any parties interested in the proposed business have been
convicted of any violation of Statute or ordinance involving moral
turpitude, or have previously had a business license suspended or
revoked. No license shall be issued except to a person of good
character, approved by the City Council;
4. Failure to pay the required application fee.
B. If the City does not issue a license, the reasons therefor shall be set
forth in writing and accompany the notice of non-issuance.
A. The City Administrator may suspend for a period up to ninety (90) days,
or revoke, a license heretofore issued, if he/she finds one or more of the
following:
1. Material misstatements or misleading statements of fact in the
application, not discovered until after the issuance of such license;
2. Or failing to comply with conditions on license or zoning;
3. Or failing to cooperate with the instructions from the O'Fallon
Police or City Council;
4. Or permitting such conduct as would constitute a violation of any
Section of this Chapter, any Statutes or ordinances pertaining to
consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages by a minor, or
any Statutes or ordinances pertaining to possession of controlled
substances;
Section
615.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
615.050
100:1270
Section 615.060. Children To Be Accompanied By Guardian —
Identification Card. [R.O. 2007 §615.060; CC 1978 §615.060; Ord.
No. 862 §7, 10-1-1981]
No person under the age of fourteen (14) years shall be permitted on the
premises of an amusement center or penny arcade unless accompanied by
his/her parent or legal guardian. No person between the ages of fourteen
(14) and seventeen (17) years shall be permitted on the premises without
having on his/her person an identification card issued by the operator,
containing his/her name, age, home address and telephone number. No
such identification card shall be issued by the operator unless he/she has
received the written permission of the parent or legal guardian. The
operator shall maintain a permanent record of the names of the parents or
legal guardians who have granted such permission and the names of the
persons for whom they have granted such permission. Such record shall be
available for inspection at all times by the O'Fallon Police Officers and City
Officials.
Section 615.070. Alcohol, Firearms and Gambling Prohibited. [R.O.
2007 §615.070; CC 1978 §615.070; Ord. No. 862 §8, 10-1-1981]
No alcoholic beverages or non-intoxicating beer shall be permitted on the
premises of any mechanical amusement center; no firearms shall be
permitted on the premises of any amusement center; no gambling or
wagering of any kind shall be permitted on the premises of any mechanical
amusement center. The licensee shall assist the Police Department in law
enforcement on the premises. The term "premises" as used in this Chapter
shall include the parking areas adjacent to the amusement center building.
Section 615.080. Supervisor To Be Present — Hours of Operation.
[R.O. 2007 §615.080; CC 1978 §615.080; Ord. No. 862 §9,
10-1-1981]
At least one (1) supervisor of at least twenty-one (21) years of age, employed
by the operator shall be on duty at all times and be present on the premises
of any amusement center for every twenty-five (25) persons present in the
mechanical amusement center; and mechanical amusement centers may
not operate between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 3:00 P.M of the following
day.
5. Failing to control any disorderly activity, peace disturbances or
gambling. In the event the City revokes such license, licensee shall
be entitled to a hearing before the City Council upon notice duly
given ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing. The decision
of the City Council and the reasons therefor, shall be sent by
certified mail or hand delivered to licensee.
Section
615.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
615.090
100:1271
Section 615.090. Devices in Plain View — Inspections — Bathroom
Use. [R.O. 2007 §615.090; CC 1978 §615.090; Ord. No. 862 §12,
10-1-1981]
The mechanical amusement devices shall at all times be kept and placed
in plain view, and the O'Fallon Police shall be permitted to inspect the
premises or records of the mechanical amusement center at any reasonable
time. Only one (1) person at a time will be permitted to be in each bathroom
facility on the mechanical amusement center premises.
Section 615.100. Penalty For Violation. [R.O. 2007 §615.100; CC
1978 §615.100; Ord. No. 862 §10, 10-1-1981]
Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of any provision of this
Chapter may be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars
($100.00), or by serving a sentence of not more than three (3) months in
a County Jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of such
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 615.110. Not Pertaining To Private Residences or Business
Establishments. [R.O. 2007 §615.110; CC 1978 §615.110; Ord. No.
862 §11, 10-1-1981]
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be applicable to any person having
set up in his/her private residence one (1) or more mechanical amusement
devices when employed for his/her own private use or for the use of his/
her family, nor to business establishments or other public places which may
have five (5) mechanical amusement devices for use or operation by the
public, but whose gross revenue from the operation of such mechanical
amusement devices does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of its total
gross revenue.
Chapter 620
OUTPATIENT SURGICAL TREATMENT CENTER -
REGULATIONS
Section 620.010. Definition. [R.O. 2007 §620.010; Ord. No. 1539 §1,
11-18-1987]
OUTPATIENT SURGICAL TREATMENT CENTER — As used in this Chapter
means any institution, place or building devoted primarily to the
maintenance or operation of a facility for the performance of surgical
procedures. Such facilities shall not provide services or other
accommodations for the overnight stay of patients. Individual patients shall
be discharged in an ambulatory condition without danger to the continued
well being of the patients or shall be transferred to a hospital. Excluded
from this definition are any facilities licensed as a part of a hospital.
Section
615.090
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
620.020
100:1272
Section 620.020. License Required. [R.O. 2007 §620.020; Ord. No.
1539 §2, 11-18-1987]
In addition to all other licenses and permits required to lawfully operate
a business in the City no person, either as owner, agent or manager, shall
operate, conduct, or maintain an Outpatient Surgical Treatment Center
in the City of O'Fallon without having procured an Outpatient Surgical
Treatment Center License therefor.
Section 620.030. Application Procedure. [R.O. 2007 §620.030; Ord.
No. 1539 §3, 11-18-1987]
A. In order to obtain an Outpatient Surgical Treatment Center License, the
applicant shall file an application with the Clerk for the City of O'Fallon
which contains the following:
1. The full and correct name of the applicant, his/her business
address, his/her current residence. If the applicant is a firm,
partnership or association, the full business address of such
organization shall be given. If the applicant is a corporation, the full
and correct name of such corporation and the name of the state
under the laws of which it is incorporated shall be stated in the
application. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and
resident addresses of all current officers shall be given.
2. The names and business and residence addresses of any physician
who shall render medical service or treatment at the premises of
the applicant along with a written statement from each member of
the medical staff, the resident physician or surgeon,
superintendent and matron, certifying that he or she will serve on
the staff of the institution as stated by the applicant for such
permit. If during the permit period any other physicians shall
desire to render medical services at the premises of the applicant,
the information required in the original application shall be
properly submitted to the Clerk of the City of O'Fallon in the form of
an addendum to the application and shall be submitted prior to any
medical services being rendered by said physician.
3. The application shall state the training and past experience of the
applicant, pertinent to the applicant. If the applicant is a
corporation, a like description of the training and past experience
of its officers shall be stated. Also, the same information should be
supplied regarding those physicians who will be performing
surgery in the facility in respect to their training and relevant past
experience.
4. A description of medical facilities and major equipment which shall
be available and used at the premises of the center.
5. Applicant shall submit a copy of a working agreement with a duly
licensed general hospital located in or near the City of O'Fallon,
Section
620.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
620.030
100:1273
Section 620.040. Application Approval. [R.O. 2007 §620.040; Ord.
No. 1539 §4, 11-18-1987]
The application shall be approved by the City Council and license issued
by the City Clerk in accordance with this Chapter, and the license shall be
conspicuously displayed in the place of business of the licensee.
Section 620.050. License Renewal. [R.O. 2007 §620.050; Ord. No.
1539 §5, 11-18-1987]
The license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be renewed by the licensee
filing an updated application, to be received by the City Clerk of the City of
O'Fallon prior to June 30 of each year, and approved or denied by the City
Council of the City of O'Fallon within thirty (30) days thereafter. No license
granted hereunder shall be transferable.
Section 620.060. Compliance With All Laws. [R.O. 2007 §620.060;
Ord. No. 1539 §6, 11-18-1987]
The Outpatient Surgical Treatment Center shall comply with all laws and
local ordinances relating to health, sanitation, and safety and this Chapter
shall not relieve it of such duty to comply.
Missouri to provide for transfer of patients for emergency
treatment whenever necessary. Alternatively, applicant shall
demonstrate that every physician performing surgical procedures
at applicant's facility is a member of the staff of a hospital located
in or near the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, thus providing assurance
to the public that patients treated in the center shall receive
continuity of care should the services of a hospital be required.
6. Applicant shall propose to the City of O'Fallon how it intends to
dispose of all human tissue (including fetal remains). All human
tissue shall be disposed of by incineration, burial, or other sanitary
method of disposal. If the method chosen is other than incineration
or burial, the City Council of the City of O'Fallon shall, within thirty
(30) days, hold a public hearing to determine whether the method
of disposal is detrimental to public health, safety, welfare, and shall
approve or disapprove of the proposed method of disposal within
fourteen (14) days after said hearing. Approval of said method of
disposal shall not be arbitrarily withheld. In the even that applicant
desires to change its method of disposal, it shall comply with the
procedure set forth in this Subsection.
7. The applicant shall make an oath before a notary public, affirming
the truth of statements made in the application or if the applicant is
a corporation, the oath of affirmation shall be made by the
president and the secretary of the corporation.
Section
620.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
620.070
100:1274
Section 620.070. Person Only To Perform Surgery in Licensed
Center. [R.O. 2007 §620.070; Ord. No. 1539 §7, 11-18-1987]
No person shall assist in, procure, or perform surgery on the premises of an
Outpatient Surgical Treatment Center which is not in possession of a duly
issued license.
Section 620.080. Compliance With Chapter Required — When. [R.O.
2007 §620.080; Ord. No. 1539 §8, 11-18-1987]
Any Outpatient Surgical Treatment Center which is performing surgical
procedures or which has been fully licensed and authorized to operate
a business and perform surgical procedures as of the date of enactment
of this Chapter shall have three (3) months from the date of enactment
within which to comply with the provisions hereof. The City Council, in its
discretion, may extend this period for individual cases.
Section 620.090. Violation — License Revocation. [R.O. 2007
§620.090; Ord. No. 1539 §9, 11-18-1987]
The City of O'Fallon shall revoke any permit issued under this Chapter
for any willful violation by a licensee of any of the provisions, conditions,
restrictions and requirements contained herein, provided such license shall
be revoked only after the licensee shall have been notified in writing at his/
her place of business of the violations complained of and shall be afforded
an opportunity to be heard in answer to any alleged violation. The notice
shall fix a time and place at which the City of O'Fallon shall hear and
determine the alleged violations. The service of such notice shall not be less
than ten (10) days prior to the time fixed therein for a hearing.
Section 620.100. City May Seek Injunction For Violation. [R.O. 2007
§620.100; Ord. No. 1539 §10, 11-18-1987]
No Outpatient Surgical Treatment Center shall conduct business or operate
in any manner without the license provided for herein or in any way in
violation of this Chapter. The City of O'Fallon is hereby authorized to seek
injunctive or other appropriate relief to prevent or redress a violation of this
Chapter.
Chapter 625
PRIVATE WATCHMEN AND SECURITY OFFICERS
Section 625.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §630.010; Ord. No. 3396
§1, 6-19-1996]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to
have the meanings indicated below:
Section
620.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
625.010
100:1275
DESIGNATED AREA — The established property within the boundaries
owned, leased or rented by the employer of such security officer or
watchman.
LICENSEE — Any security officer or watchman who holds a license issued
by the County of St. Charles for the City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
SECURITY OFFICER — A person employed with certain powers to protect
life and property on/in a designated area and who must be in uniform,
unless otherwise approved by the Sheriff of St. Charles County, and may or
may not carry an exposed firearm or protective device.
WATCHMAN — A person employed without any firearm, weapon or
protective device to perform the tasks of observation, protection and
reporting on or in a designated area.
Section 625.020. Licensing Power. [R.O. 2007 §630.020; Ord. No.
3396 §1, 6-19-1996]
St. Charles County shall have the power to license all watchmen and
security officers serving or acting in designated areas within the corporate
limits of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri and to regulate all watchmen and
security officers serving or acting in designated areas within the corporate
limits of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri. No person shall act as a watchman,
or a security officer without first having obtained such license as required
by this Chapter.
Section 625.030. License Required. [R.O. 2007 §630.030; Ord. No.
3396 §1, 6-19-1996]
Section 625.040. License Application. [R.O. 2007 §630.040; Ord. No.
3396 §1, 6-19-1996]
Any person desiring to act as a watchman or security officer in the City of
O'Fallon shall make written application to the St. Charles County Sheriff or
his/her designee for licensing as a watchman or security officer upon a form
or forms prescribed by the Sheriff.
A. No person shall engage in the activities of a watchman or security
officer without having first obtained a license to do so as provided by
this Chapter, provided however:
1. That a person may obtain a thirty (30) day temporary permit to
perform such services pending issuance of the license provided by
this Chapter; or
2. That a person who has been trained by and is licensed or registered
by another public Law Enforcement Agency, and has applied for a
license hereunder may engage in the activity of a watchman or
security officer for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days following
filing of the application pending issuance of the license pursuant to
this Chapter.
Section
625.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
625.050
100:1276
Section 625.050. License Application Investigation By The Sheriff
of St. Charles County. [R.O. 2007 §630.050; Ord. No. 3396 §1,
6-19-1996]
All applications for a license as a watchman or security officer in the
City of O'Fallon shall be referred to the St. Charles County Sheriff who
shall investigate the moral character and fitness of the applicant(s), their
experience in such business, the character of the services they expect to
perform and the manner in which such business is to be carried on, and
shall obtain any other information concerning the applicant as he/she may
deem necessary to determine the applicant's fitness and qualifications for
the conduct of such activity.
Section 625.060. Training. [R.O. 2007 §630.060; Ord. No. 3396 §1,
6-19-1996]
All applicants who apply for a watchman or security officer license must
successfully complete a prescribed course of training approved by the St.
Charles County Sheriff prior to the issuance of said license. All security
officers who are licensed to carry firearms must successfully complete a
firearms qualification course prior to license renewal each year.
Section 625.070. License Fee. [R.O. 2007 §630.070; Ord. No. 3396
§1, 6-19-1996]
If the St. Charles County Sheriff shall approve the application prescribed,
the license shall be issued upon payment of any license fee as established by
the Sheriff. The City of O'Fallon shall approve and accept the license issued
by the St. Charles County Sheriff as a proper license for said individual to
act as a watchman or security officer within the City limits of the City of
O'Fallon as provided by this Chapter.
Section 625.080. Identification Card/Uniform. [R.O. 2007 §630.080;
Ord. No. 3396 §1, 6-19-1996]
Each such person licensed as a watchman or security officer shall receive
an identification card from the County which shall prominently indicate
the position that the person is licensed for and provide proof of identity,
authority and possession of a valid license. The licensee will carry said card
at all times while on duty. The loss of this card will be reported immediately
to the St. Charles County Sheriff's Department and a duplicate card will
be issued for a fee. The uniform worn by licensees on duty shall be unlike
the official uniform of the St. Charles County Sheriff's Department, the
City of O'Fallon Police Department, or other Law Enforcement Agencies
within St. Charles County. The licensee's uniform shall be complete with a
cap and wearing a breast-type badge clearly visible at all times while the
licensee is on duty, unless specific written permission for some other type of
attire or dress is granted by the City of O'Fallon Police Department and the
Sheriff. Each person must exhibit a name bar one-eighth (1/8) inch above
the right pocket of the uniform shirt depicting the name as it appears on the
Section
625.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
625.080
100:1277
identification card. Each person licensed under the provision hereof shall at
all times maintain on file with the Sheriff a photograph accurately depicting
the uniform, emblems and badges worn. If such person is employed by a
person, firm or corporation which employs more than one (1) watchman
or security officer who wear identical uniforms, emblems and badges, it
shall be sufficient under this Section for such person, firm or corporation to
maintain on file one (1) photograph accurately depicting such separate type
of uniform, emblem or badge worn by its employees during the performance
of their duties.
Section 625.090. Requirements For Licensed Watchmen. [R.O. 2007
§630.090; Ord. No. 3396 §1, 6-19-1996]
Section 625.100. Requirements For Licensed Security Officers.
[R.O. 2007 §630.100; Ord. No. 3396 §1, 6-19-1996]
Section 625.110. Firearms. [R.O. 2007 §630.110; Ord. No. 3396 §1,
6-19-1996]
A. Licensee must perform their function in a designated area.
B. Licensee must carry the licensee identification card whenever on duty
and display same upon request.
C. Licensee must wear and exhibit any issued badge or emblem on the
outermost uniform garment to include a visible name plate one-eighth
(1/8) inch above the right shirt pocket.
D. Licensee is not authorized to possess or imply possession of any
firearm, weapon or other implement of attack.
E. Licensee may not be a convicted felon.
A. Licensee must be in uniform at all times when on duty if carrying an
exposed weapon.
B. Licensee must perform their functions in a designated area.
C. Licensee must wear and exhibit on the outermost garment the issued
badge or emblem when in uniform to include a visible name plate oneeighth
(1/8) inch above the right shirt pocket.
D. Licensee must carry the license identification card whenever on duty
and display same when requested to do so.
E. Licensee is authorized to carry a protective device and an exposed
firearm when he/she is qualified to do so and his/her license so states.
F. Licensee may not be a convicted felon.
A. A licensed security officer certified after Police firearms training to be
armed or permitted to carry a weapon while on duty and in uniform at
the location(s) specified in the license may have a firearm.
Section
625.080
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
625.110
100:1278
Section 625.120. Revocation, Expiration or Termination of License.
[R.O. 2007 §630.120; Ord. No. 3396 §1, 6-19-1996]
Every watchman or security officer shall hold his/her license for an area
within the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, at the pleasure of the St. Charles
County Sheriff and the City of O'Fallon and such license shall be subject to
revocation by the Sheriff or the City of O'Fallon Police Department for good
cause. Such license shall terminate automatically upon the termination
of employment of such watchman or security officer by the business
corporation, person or persons upon whose written request the license is
issued. Such employing corporation, person or persons shall promptly notify
the Sheriff and City of O'Fallon Police Department that the watchman's or
security officer's employment has terminated if, and when in fact, it does
terminate. Upon the revocation, expiration or termination of such license,
it shall be the duty of each such watchman or security officer to surrender
to the Sheriff or to the City of O'Fallon Police Department the license and
identification card. From and after the revocation, expiration or termination
of such license the person shall no longer have any authority to exercise the
power of a watchman or security officer within the City limits of the City of
O'Fallon. All licenses shall be issued for the period of one (1) year.
Section 625.130. Police Officer Provisions. [R.O. 2007 §630.130;
Ord. No. 3396 §1, 6-19-1996]
B. Firearms carried by licensed security personnel may only be revolvers
capable of firing and loaded with .38 caliber (Special) ammunition. The
carrying of any other caliber, including automatic, derringers, or any
type of shotgun or rifle is prohibited. Only one (1) approved firearm may
be carried on duty. Certified Police Officers may carry duty weapons.
C. A security officer upon firing his/her weapon for any reason within the
corporate limits of the City of O'Fallon or using other force to make an
arrest shall immediately make or cause to be made a report to the St.
Charles County Sheriff's Department and to the City of O'Fallon Police
Department.
D. All Missouri State requirements for carrying a firearm must be
followed.
A. Commissioned Police Officers of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri may be
licensed to perform the duties and carry out the responsibilities of
watchmen or security officers provided they are employed during the
term of their license as commissioned Police Officers in the State of
Missouri. Each officer must have secondary employment approval from
the Chief of Police of the City of O'Fallon.
B. During the one (1) year term of the license, all licenses granted under
this provision cease to be valid simultaneously with termination of the
commissioned status.
Section
625.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
625.130
100:1279
Section 625.140. Additional Regulations. [R.O. 2007 §630.140; Ord.
No. 3396 §1, 6-19-1996]
The St. Charles County Sheriff and the City of O'Fallon Police Department
may require additional regulations, forms and information from all
applicants. Said regulations, forms, and information required by each said
governmental unit shall be deemed consistent with the provisions and intent
of this Chapter so long as such regulations, forms and information are not
inconsistent with this Chapter or the laws and constitutions of this State or
the United States.
Section 625.150. St. Charles County Sheriff's Department To
Maintain List. [R.O. 2007 §630.150; Ord. No. 3396 §1, 6-19-1996]
A current and up-to-date list of all licenses issued for the City of O'Fallon
will be maintained at the St. Charles County Sheriff's Department and a
copy furnished the Chief of Police of the City of O'Fallon.
Section 625.160. Penalties. [R.O. 2007 §630.160; Ord. No. 3396 §1,
6-19-1996]
A violation of any provision of this Chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by
a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment
in the St. Charles County Jail for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days, or by
both fine and imprisonment. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 630
UTILITIES LICENSE TAX
C. No further training is required during employment as long as a Police
Officer is qualified by State certification.
D. Responsibilities and obligations when performing in the licensed status
shall be those applicable to the licensed function being performed,
except that nothing in this provision shall diminish or enlarge upon the
duties and responsibilities of the officers as provided for by Missouri
State Statutes, the Sheriff of St. Charles County and the City of O'Fallon
Police Department.
Section
625.130
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
625.160
100:1280
ARTICLE I
Certain Utility Taxes132
Section 630.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §635.010; CC 1978
§625.010; Ord. No. 104A §1a, 8-6-1952; Ord. No. 4979 §1,
3-30-2006]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
GROSS RECEIPTS — As it relates to utility taxes collected by the City
of O'Fallon, shall mean the aggregate amount of sales and charges for
commodities or services relative to the business of supplying electricity,
gas, water, telephone or other utilities for compensation for any purpose
in the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, less discounts, credits, refunds, charges
for license, occupation or franchise taxes, sales taxes and uncollectible
accounts actually charged off during the period.
PERSON — When used in this Chapter, shall include any individual, firm,
co-partnership, joint partnership, joint venture, association, corporation,
estate, business trust, trustee, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or
combination acting as a unit, in the plural as well as the singular number.
Section 630.020. Tax Imposed — Amount. [R.O. 2007 §635.020; Ord.
No. 1201 §1, 5-3-1985; Ord. No. 1255 §2, 11-7-1985; Ord. No. 1342
§2, 6-5-1986; Ord. No. 2093 §§1—3, 11-17-1992; Ord. No. 4941 §1,
12-14-2005; Ord. No. 5073 §4, 9-14-2006; Ord. No. 5733 §1,
9-22-2011]
A. Any person, partnership, venture or corporation now or hereafter
engaged in the business of supplying electricity (except for AmerenUE),
gas, water, telephone or other utilities for compensation for any
purpose in the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, shall pay to the City Collector
a license tax sum equal to five percent (5%) of the gross receipts from
such business on the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) purchased
monthly by a user, and a tax of point five percent (.5%) on electrical
(except for AmerenUE), gas, telephone, water or other utilities services
in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) purchased monthly by
such user. AmerenUE shall pay to the City Collector a license tax sum
equal to four point eighty-four percent (4.84%) of the gross receipts
from such business on the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
purchased monthly by such user and a tax of point forty-nine percent
(.49%) in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) purchased
monthly by such users.
132. Editor's Note—Ord. nos. 5003 and 5004 were passed in compliance with HB209 of the
2006 Missouri Legislative session. Provisions contained in HB209 were subsequently
deemed unconstitutional by the Missouri Supreme Court on August 8, 2006 in City of
Springfield, Appellant V Sprint Spectrum, L.P., Respondent Case No. SC87238. These
ordinances have not been included herein. Subsequently, ord. no. 5073 §§1—3, adopted
September 14, 2006, returned these provisions to their original wording.
Section
630.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
630.020
100:1281
Section 630.030. License Tax To Be Paid — When. [R.O. 2007
§635.030; Ord. No. 1201 §2, 5-3-1985]
Every person now or hereafter engaged in any of the businesses described
in Section 630.010 and 630.020 above, shall pay to the City Collector of the
City of O'Fallon on the last day of each calendar month an amount as set out
in Section 630.020.
Section 630.040. License Tax — in Lieu of Other Occupation Taxes.
[R.O. 2007 §635.040; CC 1978 §625.050; Ord. No. 586 §5,
7-19-1977]
The tax herein required to be paid shall be in lieu of any other occupation
tax required of any person described in Section 630.020 hereof, but nothing
herein contained shall be so construed as to exempt any such person from
the payment of the tax to the City of O'Fallon which the City of O'Fallon
levies upon the real or personal property belonging to any such person, nor
the tax required of merchants or manufacturers for the sale of anything
other than electricity, gas, water, telephone or other utility service, nor shall
the tax herein required exempt any person from the payment of any tax
which may be lawfully required other than an occupation tax on any of the
businesses described in Section 630.020.
Section 630.050. Penalty For Violation. [R.O. 2007 §635.050; CC
1978 §625.060; Ord. No. 586 §6, 7-19-1977]
Any person engaged in any of the business described in Section 630.010
and 630.020 who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined
five percent (5%) of the average monthly utility license tax collected during
a twelve (12) month period.
Section 630.055. License Fee Refunded To Exempt Consumers.
[R.O. 2007 §635.055; Ord. No. 5070 §1, 9-14-2006]
B. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 393.275.2, RSMo., 2000, the City
Council hereby determines that it is in the best interests of the people
of the City of O'Fallon that the City maintain the tax rate of its business
license tax on the gross receipts of utility corporations as provided by
law regardless of the recent tariff actions of the Missouri Public Service
Commission with respect to AmerenUE rates for service.
A. Refund Authorized. The amount of any license tax paid to the City by a
person or persons engaged in the business of selling, supplying or
distributing electricity, gas or telephone service on account of sales by
such person or persons to an exempt consumer, as herein defined, for
services rendered to such consumer's residence, which has been
passed through to or otherwise collected from such consumer by the
person or persons paying such tax to the City, shall be refunded by the
City directly to such exempt consumer.
Section
630.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
630.055
100:1282
B. Definition. As used in this Section, the following term shall have the
following meaning:
EXEMPT CONSUMER — Any consumer who:
Owns or leases residential property located within the City, who
occupies the same as his/her customary place of residence and
who, on the first (1st) day of any calendar month, is sixty-five
(65) years of age or older or determined to be totally disabled by
the Social Security Administration on said date; when any such
residential property is owned or leased by two (2) or more persons
jointly, requirements for exemption shall be deemed satisfied if any
one (1) such owner or lessee is sixty-five (65) years of age or older
on the first (1st) day of such calendar month or is determined as
totally disabled under/by the Social Security Administration; or
1.
Has an annual gross income, exclusive of Social Security, less than
or equal to the L80 Low Income Median Family Income limits as
established annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD). The single person limit is established as the
one (1) person household limit and the married couple limit is
established as the two (2) person household limit as defined in the
published HUD schedule for low income families in the St. Charles
County area.
2.
C. Procedure. From April 15 to May 31 of each year any person claiming to
be entitled to a refund pursuant to this Section for taxes paid during the
prior calendar year shall submit a request for such refund to the
Director of Finance or his/her designee, together with such proof of
claim as may be required by the Director of Finance. Such proof of
claim may, at the discretion of the Director of Finance, include proof of
age, proof of income level, copies of applicable utility bills and/or proof
of payment of such bills. Where qualifying utility payments are included
as part of the rent, the owner may provide appropriate documentation
of the amount allocated for utilities for purposes of this Section. [Ord.
No. 6536, 1-10-2019]
D. Computation. The amount of refund owing to each exempt consumer
shall be the amount of the license tax imposed by this Code as a result
of such consumer's purchase of the utility services specified in this
Section at his/her residence and paid by or on behalf of the exempt
consumer for bills dated during those months during the preceding
calendar year, beginning September 1, 2006, in which the consumer
was sixty-five (65) years of age or older.
E. Benefit. Nothing contained in this Section shall in any way alter or
diminish the obligation of any person licensed pursuant to this Code to
pay a license tax computed on the full amount of his/her gross sales to
exempt consumers within the City or otherwise to comply with the
provisions of this Code. The exemption herein provided shall inure to
Section
630.055
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
630.055
100:1283
the benefit of exempt consumers only and shall be administered by the
City for their benefit.
F. Funds. Refunds herein required to be made shall be paid from budgeted
general revenue monies. Payment of this refund is subject to availability
of funds budgeted in the current year for this purpose.
Section
630.055
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
630.055
100:1284
Chapter 635
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES - REGULATIONS
Section 635.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §640.010; Ord. No. 4749
§1, 11-19-2004; Ord. No. 5316 §1, 4-10-2008]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
BUSINESS OWNER OR OPERATOR — Any person who owns or operates
a commercial establishment offering live entertainment. If owned and/or
operated by a partnership, each partner shall be deemed an owner and/
or operator of the business. If owned and/or operated by a corporation,
including a limited liability organization, each officer, director or principal
stockholder shall be deemed an owner and/or operator of the business. For
the purpose of this Section, a principal stockholder is a person who owns or
controls twenty percent (20%) or more of the corporation or organization.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT — Entertainment provided to an audience via
amplification, excluding karaoke. Entertainment provided by televisions,
juke boxes or recorded music not played on equipment operated by a disk
jockey are not required to comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS LICENSE — A license issued after
approval by the City Council that permits organizations or businesses to
offer live entertainment.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT — A permit issued after
approval by the City Council that permits organizations or businesses to
offer live entertainment at a special event, not to exceed five (5) consecutive
days.
MANAGER — Any person or persons who manage, direct, supervise or
administer the affairs or conduct of an organization or establishment
offering live entertainment, including assistant managers and supervisors
who work with or under the direction of a manager.
NUDITY — Any female appearing in a costume, garment or other device
or apparel which reveals the nipple or areola of the breast, or any portion
of such breast below the upper edge of the areola, or any part of her
pubic or anal areas, or the lower half of her buttocks, whether such flesh
be uncovered or covered by a mesh, transparent or similar material or
covering; or any male appearing in a costume, garment or other device or
apparel which reveals the flesh of any part of his pubic or anal areas, the
lower half of his buttocks, whether such flesh be uncovered or covered by
mesh, transparent or similar material or covering.
PRIVATE CLUB OR LODGE — A building or premises used for social,
recreational, dining or philanthropic purposes the normal use of which is
limited to specific members, patrons or otherwise listed and enumerated
persons who organize for a common purpose to pursue common goals,
Section
630.055
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
635.010
100:1285
interests and activities characterized by certain membership qualifications,
payment of fees and dues, regular meetings and a constitution and bylaws.
PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY — The detonation, ignition or deflagration of
display fireworks or flame effects to produce a visual or audible exhibition.
Section 635.020. Licenses and Permits — When Required. [R.O.
2007 §640.020; Ord. No. 4749 §2, 11-19-2004; Ord. No. 5316 §1,
4-10-2008]
Section 635.030. Specific Restrictions and Requirements. [R.O.
2007 §640.030; Ord. No. 4749 §3, 11-19-2004; Ord. No. 5316 §1,
4-10-2008]
A. Live Entertainment Business License Required. It shall be unlawful for
any organization or business to operate or permit to be operated on any
premises in the City any live entertainment unless they have a valid live
entertainment business license or live entertainment special event
permit.
B. Exceptions. Live entertainment sponsored and/or authorized by the
City, schools, churches, not-for-profit organizations, banquet halls,
private clubs and lodges (provided such banquet halls, private clubs
and lodges are in existence on or before September 1, 2004) are
excluded from the provisions of this Chapter. Any banquet hall, private
club or lodge constructed and/or opened after September 1, 2004, in
the City that proposes to offer live entertainment shall be required to
comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
A. Hours Of Operation. Live entertainment shall not be permitted between
the hours of 1:30 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on Tuesday through Saturday,
between the hours of 1:30 A.M. and 11:00 A.M. Sunday and between
the hours of 12:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Monday.
B. Off-Street Parking. A live entertainment business license shall only be
issued if:
1. The commercial establishment applying for a live entertainment
business license can provide one (1) on-site, off-street automobile
parking space per three (3) individuals based on the maximum
capacity of the establishment as determined by the Fire Marshall
during the hours the live entertainment is to occur.
2. If the parking lot is not of sufficient size to meet this requirement,
the applicant may share the off-street parking spaces of adjacent
commercial properties if a shared parking plan prepared and
submitted by the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the City Council that the required number of available parking
spaces will be available during the hours the live entertainment will
be provided. However, in the event that the commercial
establishment is part of a shopping center or other multi-tenant
building, the license shall only be granted if the above parking
Section
635.010
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
635.030
100:1286
requirements can be satisfied in addition to the required off-street
automobile parking requirements for the other tenant(s) and/or
speculative commercial space yet to be occupied.
3. The shared parking plan must clearly demonstrate the feasibility of
utilizing shared parking and address, at minimum, the size and
type of the adjoining uses, their required parking under Article XII
of Chapter 400, the anticipated rate of parking turnover and the
anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses that will be
sharing off-street parking spaces. Shared off-street parking spaces
must be located within six hundred (600) feet of the primary
entrance of all buildings they are intended to serve, the location of
which is not on the opposite side of a public four (4) lane or more
roadway, including any turn-only lanes.
4. Parking—special event live entertainment. Any commercial
establishment seeking a live entertainment special event permit
must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Council that
adequate parking will be available during the date(s) and time that
the live entertainment will be provided.
C. Staffing And Security Personnel. At least one (1) employee of at least
twenty-one (21) years of age shall be on duty at all times and be present
on the premises of the commercial establishment offering live
entertainment for every thirty (30) people in the audience.
D. Noise. No noise emitting from the premises at which live entertainment
is offered shall be at such a level as to unreasonably disturb the
peaceful enjoyment of nearby properties.
E. Nudity Prohibited. No nudity shall be permitted at any commercial
establishment offering live entertainment unless it is a sexuallyoriented
business operating under a conditional use permit granted by
the City.
F. Prohibited Individuals. With the exception of employees, no person
under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be permitted on the premises of
any commercial establishment that serves alcoholic beverages during
the time live entertainment is being offered unless accompanied by his
or her parent or legal guardian.
G. Pyrotechnic Displays Prohibited. No pyrotechnic displays or devices of
any nature shall be permitted in conjunction with any commercial
establishment offering live entertainment.
H. Disorderly Conduct. No fighting or other disorderly conduct shall be
permitted at any commercial establishment offering live entertainment.
Furthermore, no loitering or gathering around any commercial
establishment offering live entertainment shall be permitted once the
business has closed for the night.
Section
635.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
635.030
100:1287
Section 635.040. Live Entertainment Business Licenses —
Application Requirements and Review Procedures. [R.O. 2007
§640.040; Ord. No. 4749 §4, 11-19-2004; Ord. No. 5316 §1,
4-10-2008]
I. Separation From Nearby Residential Structures. A live entertainment
business license shall only be issued if:
1. There is at least two hundred (200) feet between the closest point
of the building (or unit in a multi-tenant building) for which the
license is sought and the closest point of any structure designed for
residential purposes; or
2. An acoustical study prepared by a qualified acoustical engineer
establishes to the satisfaction of the City Council that the sound
level emitting from the licensed establishment will not exceed the
standards set forth in Section 215.237 of the City Code at the
closest point on any adjoining lot upon which a structure designed
for residential purposes is located. The acoustical study shall
document all sound-dampening features incorporated in the
premises to be licensed; all such features shall remain so long as
any live entertainment business license is in force.
A. Fee. Each application for a live entertainment business license shall be
accompanied by a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), no part of
which shall be refundable. Applications may take up to thirty (30) days
to process.
B. Required Information. Each application for a live entertainment
business license shall include the following:
1. A completed live entertainment business license application that
includes the name and address of the business/organization;
description of premises; description of type of live entertainment to
be performed; name, address, date of birth, driver's license
number, telephone number and previous addresses of applicant.
2. A copy of the business license, liquor license, Fire Marshall
occupancy limit certificate and any other applicable permits or
licenses issued to the establishment proposing to offer live
entertainment.
3. A site plan and floor plan showing the location of the business and
proximity to other businesses and/or residences, size of the
business, location where live entertainment will be performed,
building ingress and egress points and parking lot(s).
4. A shared parking plan (including shared parking agreements) if the
proposed commercial establishment to offer live entertainment
does not have for its exclusive use on site the required one (1) offstreet
automobile parking space per three (3) individuals based on
Section
635.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
635.040
100:1288
the maximum capacity of the establishment as determined by the
Fire Marshall.
5. In evaluating the application for the live entertainment business
license, the City Council may require additional information
deemed necessary to properly review the application, including an
acoustical study prepared by a qualified acoustical engineer that
states the sound levels emitting from the commercial establishment
where live entertainment will be performed at intervals as follows:
outside of the business building, fifty (50) feet and one hundred
(100) feet from the business building and at the nearest residence
or commercial building excluding those in the same business
complex, if applicable. The acoustical study shall document all
sound-dampening features incorporated into the commercial
establishment that proposes to offer live entertainment.
C. Review Of The Live Entertainment Business License Application. Each
application for a live entertainment business license shall be reviewed
in accordance with the following procedures:
1. The City Clerk shall review the application for the live
entertainment business license to make certain all submission
requirements have been met.
2. The application for a live entertainment business license shall be
referred to the Chief of Police for investigation as to the character
and fitness of the proposed business owner(s), manager(s) or any
person(s) listed as having an interest in the proposed live
entertainment operation. Any individual identified on the
application found to have been convicted of any violation of City,
State or Federal Statute or ordinance involving moral turpitude or
who has had any previous business license suspended or revoked
may result in a recommendation of denial of the license request.
3. A majority vote by the City Council shall be required to approve,
approve with conditions or deny the application for the live
entertainment business license. In approving the live
entertainment business license, the City Council may add
conditions above and beyond the specific restrictions and
requirements of Chapter 635 deemed necessary to protect the
peace, health, safety, comfort, morals and general welfare of the
City and its inhabitants.
4. Applications for a live entertainment business license that are
denied by the City Council may not be resubmitted for a period of
twelve (12) months from the date of said denial, except on the
grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found to be
valid by the City Clerk or Chief of Police. In addition, the
application shall be accompanied by the fee of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) as set forth herein.
Section
635.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
635.050
100:1289
Section 635.050. Live Entertainment Special Event Permits —
Application Requirements and Review Procedures. [R.O. 2007
§640.050; Ord. No. 4749 §5, 11-19-2004; Ord. No. 5316 §1,
4-10-2008]
A. Fee. Each application for a live entertainment special event permit shall
be accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), no part of which shall
be refundable. Applications must be submitted at least thirty (30) days
in advance of the date of the proposed event. A maximum of two (2) live
entertainment special permits may be issued to any organization,
business, person or for the same location within a one (1) year period
between July first (1st) and June thirtieth (30th) of the succeeding year,
each of which shall not exceed five (5) consecutive days in duration.
B. Required Information. Each application for a live entertainment special
event permit shall include the following:
1. A completed live entertainment special event permit application
that includes: the name and address of the business/organization;
description of premises; description of type of live entertainment to
be performed; name, address, date of birth, driver's license
number, telephone number and previous addresses of applicant.
2. A copy of their current business license, liquor license, tent permit,
special event liquor license, Fire Marshall occupancy limit
certificate and any other applicable permits or licenses issued to
the proposed commercial establishment to offer live entertainment.
3. A site plan and floor plan showing the location of the business and
proximity to other businesses and/or residences, size of the
business, location where live entertainment will be performed,
building ingress and egress points and parking lot(s).
C. Review Of The Live Entertainment Special Event Permit. Each
application for a live entertainment business license shall be reviewed
in accordance with the following procedures:
1. The City Clerk shall review the application for the live
entertainment special event permit to make certain all submission
requirements have been met.
2. The application for a live entertainment special event permit shall
be referred to the Chief of Police for investigation as to the
character and fitness of the proposed business owner(s),
manager(s) or any person(s) listed as having an interest in the
proposed live entertainment operation. Any individual identified on
the application found to have been convicted of any violation of
City, State or Federal Statute or ordinance involving moral
turpitude or who has had any previous business license suspended
or revoked may result in a recommendation of denial of the license
request.
Section
635.050
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
635.050
100:1290
Section 635.060. Expiration and Validity of Live Entertainment
License and Special Event Permit. [R.O. 2007 §640.060; Ord. No.
4749 §6, 11-19-2004; Ord. No. 5316 §1, 4-10-2008]
The live entertainment business license will be issued for a one (1) year
period beginning on July first (1st) of the year and expiring on June thirtieth
(30th) of the succeeding year. The live entertainment special event permit
shall only be valid for the date(s) and hours of operation for which it was
granted. A live entertainment business license or special event permit shall
only be valid for the business owner and operator to whom it was originally
issued. Any sale or transfer of the commercial establishment will void any
live entertainment business license or special event permit. The new owner/
operator will be required to apply for a live entertainment business license
if they wish to continue offering live entertainment.
Section 635.070. Authorization To Close and Investigate. [R.O. 2007
§640.070; Ord. No. 4749 §7, 11-19-2004; Ord. No. 5316 §1,
4-10-2008]
3. A majority vote by the City Council shall be required to approve,
approve with conditions or deny the application for the live
entertainment special event permit. In approving the live
entertainment special event permit, the City Council may add
conditions above and beyond the specific restrictions and
requirements of Chapter 635 deemed necessary to protect the
peace, health, safety, comfort, morals and general welfare of the
City and its inhabitants.
4. Applications for a live entertainment special event permit that are
denied by the City Council may not be resubmitted for a period of
twelve (12) months from the date of said denial, except on the
grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found to be
valid by the City Clerk or Chief of Police. In addition, the
application shall be accompanied by the fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
as set forth herein.
A. The Chief of Police is authorized to close any commercial establishment
or event found to be providing live entertainment without the necessary
license or permit for a period up to twenty-four (24) hours in order to
preserve the status quo during investigation by the Chief of Police and
City Administrator.
B. The Chief of Police is authorized to close any commercial establishment
or event with the necessary license or permit suspected to be in
violation of the requirements of this Chapter and/or any additional
conditions that were placed upon the issuance of the license or permit
by the City Council for a period up to twenty-four (24) hours in order to
preserve the status quo during investigation by the Chief of Police and
City Administrator.
Section
635.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
635.080
100:1291
Section 635.080. Revocation or Suspension of A Live Entertainment
License or Permit. [R.O. 2007 §640.080; Ord. No. 4749 §8,
11-19-2004; Ord. No. 5316 §1, 4-10-2008]
Section 635.090. Appeal of A Revoked or Suspended Live
Entertainment License or Permit. [R.O. 2007 §640.090; Ord. No.
4749 §9, 11-19-2004; Ord. No. 5316 §1, 4-10-2008]
A. The City Clerk may suspend for a period of up to ninety (90) days or
revoke any live entertainment license or permit upon the finding of one
(1) or more of the following:
1. Intentional misstatements or misleading statements of fact in the
application for the license or permit not discovered until after the
issuance of the permit or license.
2. Permitting any conduct that would constitute a violation of the
requirements of this Chapter and/or any additional conditions that
were placed upon the issuance of the license or permit by the City
Council.
3. Permitting any conduct that would constitute a violation of any
State Statutes or City ordinances.
4. Permitting noise or other conditions which unreasonably disturb
the repose of occupants of nearby properties or unreasonably
disturb the peaceful enjoyment of nearby properties.
5. Upon conviction of any violation of any State Statute or City
ordinance, the live entertainment license or permit shall be
revoked or suspended by a length of time as determined by the City
Clerk.
A. If any live entertainment license or permit is revoked or suspended by
the City Clerk, the holder of the permit may request review by the City
Council. Written notice of a request for review must be filed with the
City Clerk within five (5) days of the date of notice of suspension or
revocation, and must set forth all reasons known or asserted by the
appellant as to wherein and why the Clerk's decision is erroneous.
B. The decision of the City Council and the reasons thereof shall be sent by
certified mail or hand delivered to the holder of the live entertainment
license or permit.
C. Any licensee or permit holder aggrieved by a decision of the City
Council may seek review in the Circuit Court of St. Charles County
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 536, RSMo., by filing a petition
for judicial review within fifteen (15) days of the date of the Council's
decision.
Section
635.080
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
635.100
100:1292
Section 635.100. Penalty For Violation of A Live Entertainment
License or Permit. [R.O. 2007 §640.100; Ord. No. 4749 §10,
11-19-2004; Ord. No. 5316 §1, 4-10-2008]
Any person involved in the operation of a commercial establishment offering
live entertainment, or performer conducting the live entertainment, found
to be in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject by
a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or up to ninety (90) days
in jail for each violation.
Chapter 640
ITINERANT VENDORS
Section 640.010. Definition. [R.O. 2007 §645.010; Ord. No. 4216 §2,
6-28-2001]
An itinerant vendor's license shall be issued solely to not-for-profit
organizations that engage in a temporary or transient business of selling
goods, wares, merchandise or service.
Section 640.020. Requirements of Itinerant Vendors. [R.O. 2007
§645.020; Ord. No. 4216 §3, 6-28-2001]
Section 640.030. License Application. [R.O. 2007 §645.030; Ord. No.
4216 §4, 6-28-2001]
A. Itinerant vendors may be only located as an accessory use to an existing
primary use permitted within the applicable zoning district and are
subject to the following standards:
1. May not be located within any required yards or bufferyards;
2. May not be located within the sight triangles for any intersections,
public or private.
3. May not reduce the available parking spaces below what is
required for the site through the Zoning Code.
4. Shall be located upon a hard surfaced area.
5. Are subject to any applicable Building or Fire Department Codes or
regulations.
6. All signage must be compliant with the Sign Code and, if necessary,
the tent permitting process of the City of O'Fallon.
7. May be subject to additional conditions as deemed necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare by the applicable fire
district, the O'Fallon Police Department and/or City of O'Fallon.
Section
635.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
640.030
100:1293
Section 640.040. Duration of License. [R.O. 2007 §645.040; Ord.
No. 4216 §5, 6-28-2001]
The duration of an itinerant vendor's license will be set by the City at time
of application. There will be no fee for said license other than any applicable
fees for signage or tent license.
Section 640.050. Display of License. [R.O. 2007 §645.050; Ord. No.
4216 §6, 6-28-2001]
The not-for-profit organization obtaining an itinerant vendor's license shall
have the license displayed in a prominent location at the approved site. Said
license shall be available for inspection by any person acting on the City's
behalf.
Section 640.060. Penalty. [R.O. 2007 §645.060; Ord. No. 4216 §7,
6-28-2001]
Any person/organization found to be in violation of any provision of this
Chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) and
each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 645
MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISES AND WOMEN'S
BUSINESS ENTERPRISES
Section 645.010. Intent. [R.O. 2007 §650.010; CC 1978 §645.010;
Ord. No. 786 §1, 9-16-1980]
It is the intent of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, to comply with the
requirement of the Minority Business Enterprise Regulations and Women's
Business Enterprise Regulations to assure that minority business
enterprises have the maximum opportunity to participate in the
performance of contracts financed in whole or in part with Federal funds.
A. An applicant for an itinerant vendor's license shall provide the following
to the City:
1. The name of the not-for-profit organization.
2. Proof of not-for-profit status.
3. The permanent home address and telephone number of the
representative filing the request on behalf of the organization.
4. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods sold
or service offered and a copy of any sales flyers.
5. The place where the goods, wares or merchandise will be sold.
6. Such other information as the City may require.
Section
640.030
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
645.020
100:1294
Section 645.020. Liaison Officer. [R.O. 2007 §650.020; CC 1978
§645.020; Ord. No. 786 §2, 9-16-1980]
A Minority Business Enterprise Liaison Officer will be designated and
provided with adequate staff to administer the MBE and WBE programs.
The MBE and WBE Liaison Officer will be responsible for developing,
managing, and implementing the MBE and WBE programs for the City of
O'Fallon on a day to day basis. The City will develop and maintain a record
keeping system to monitor these programs.
Section 645.030. Equal Opportunity — Affirmative Action
Techniques. [R.O. 2007 §650.030; CC 1978 §645.030; Ord. No. 786
§3, 9-16-1980]
An equitable opportunity for Minority Business Enterprises to compete
for contracts and subcontracts will be provided. Appropriate affirmative
action techniques such as arranging solicitations, time for the presentation
of bids, quantities, specifications and delivery schedules will be used to
facilitate the participation of MBEs and WBEs. Information will be available
for MBEs and WBEs concerning bonding, financing, bidding and contract
requirements.
Section 645.040. Minority Banks — MBE and WBE Directory. [R.O.
2007 §650.040; CC 1978 §645.040; Ord. No. 786 §4, 9-16-1980]
The City of O'Fallon will secure and make available to all contractors
and minority business enterprises and women's business enterprises, a
list of minority banks owned and controlled by minorities or women. The
greatest feasible use of these banks will be encouraged. Also, the City
will secure and/or develop a Minority Business Enterprise and Women's
Business Enterprise Directory that will be made available to all bidders;
and will verify that contracting firms that call themselves MBEs and WBEs
are in fact eligible Minority Business Enterprises; and require its prime
contractors to make good faith efforts to replace a MBE and WBE
subcontractor that is unable to perform successfully with another MBE or
WBE subcontractor; and will establish goals for the amount of work to be
awarded to MBEs and WBEs. Separate goals will be set for firms owned and
controlled by minorities and for firms owned and controlled by women.
Section 645.050. Contract Goals — Bidders To Submit Lists of
Proposed MBEs and WBEs. [R.O. 2007 §650.050; CC 1978 §645.050;
Ord. No. 786 §5, 9-16-1980]
Contract goals for specific contracts will be based on the known availability
of qualified MBEs and WBEs. As a minimum the City of O'Fallon will require
that MBEs and WBEs be sought in the same geographic area in which the
solicitation for subcontracts and materials is made; and will require that
all bidders submit, with the bid proposal, a written list of MBEs and WBEs
proposed to be used in accomplishing the work of the contract and the
amount of work that the MBEs and WBEs will perform.
Section
645.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.060
100:1295
Section 645.060. Order of Preference in Awarding Contracts. [R.O.
2007 §650.060; CC 1978 §645.060; Ord. No. 970 §1, 12-2-1982]
Section 645.070. Review of Successful Bidder's MBE and WBE
Involvement Efforts. [R.O. 2007 §650.070; CC 1978 §645.070; Ord.
No. 786 §7, 9-16-1980]
The City of O'Fallon will require contractors to document the steps they
have taken to obtain MBE and WBE participation. Efforts described in
Section 23.45 of 49 CFR Part 23, Paragraph (4) i through (4) vii will be
included in the contract proposals. The City will review the successful
bidder's MBE and WBE involvement efforts during the performance of the
contract; and will require that subrecipients develop an acceptable MBE
Program and WBE Program or comply with the approved MBE and WBE
programs of the City. MBE and WBE participation shall be counted toward
meeting MBE and WBE goals in accordance with 49 CFR, Part 23 Section
23.47.
Section 645.080. City Policy and Percentage Goals. [R.O. 2007
§650.080; CC 1978 §645.080; Ord. No. 786 §8, 9-16-1980]
It is the policy of the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, as expressed and adopted
by its City Council in open meeting, that it will affirmatively encourage
MBE and WBE participation in contracts and programs which it administers
with the objective of increasing the participation by businesses owned
or controlled by minorities and women, and the City will assure that all
reasonable efforts are made within the confines of the law which will aid in
meeting this objective. The Mayor of the City of O'Fallon is designated as
the Officer primarily responsible for carrying out this policy. The percentage
goals established by Federal regulations will be set as five percent (5%) for
MBE five/tenths percent (.5%) for WBE.
Chapter 650
VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS
Section 650.010. Ratification of Existing Video Franchises. [Ord.
No. 5765.1 §1, 2-9-2012]
A. Contracts will be awarded in the following order of preference.
1. First preference will be to the competitor that submits the lowest
reasonable bid and either meets the established goals or has made
"good faith efforts" to meet the established goals.
2. Second preference will be to the competitor that submits a
reasonable bid, and has the highest percentage of MBE and WBE
participation of those firms that partially meet the established
goals.
Section
645.060
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
650.010
100:1296
Section 650.020. Video Service Regulations. [Ord. No. 5765.1 §1,
2-9-2012]
A. To the extent permitted by the 2007 Video Services Providers Act, the
City Council of the City of O'Fallon hereby ratifies all existing
agreements, franchises, and ordinances regulating cable television
operators and other video service providers, including the imposition of
a franchise fee of five percent (5%) imposed on the gross revenues of all
such providers, and further declares that such agreements, franchises,
and ordinances shall continue in full force and effect until expiration as
provided therein, or until pre-empted by the issuance of video service
authorizations by the Missouri Public Service Commission or otherwise
by law, but only to the extent of said pre-emption.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide video services, as defined
in Section 650.020 hereof, within the City without either an agreement,
franchise, or ordinance approved by the City or a video service
authorization issued by the Missouri Public Service Commission.
A. Definitions. The following terms shall have the following meanings
unless otherwise defined by context:
FRANCHISE AREA — The total geographic area of the City authorized
to be served by an incumbent cable television operator or incumbent
local exchange carrier, or affiliate thereof.
GROSS REVENUES — The total amounts billed to subscribers or
received from advertisers for the provision of video services within the
City, including:
1. Recurring charges for video service;
Event-based charges for video service, including, but not limited to,
pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges;
2.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other video service equipment;
Service charges related to the provision of video service, including,
but not limited to, activation, installation, repair, and maintenance
charges;
4.
Administrative charges related to the provision of video service,
including, but not limited to, service order and service termination
charges; and
5.
A pro rata portion of all revenue derived, less refunds, rebates,
or discounts, by a video service provider for advertising over the
video service network to subscribers, where the numerator is the
number of subscribers within the City and the denominator is the
total number of subscribers reached by such advertising; but gross
revenues do not include:
6.
Section
650.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
650.020
100:1297
HOUSEHOLD — An apartment, a house, a mobile home, or any other
structure or part of a structure intended for residential occupancy as
separate living quarters.
INCUMBENT CABLE OPERATOR — The video service provider(s)
serving video subscribers within the City of O'Fallon, Missouri, prior to
the effective date of this Chapter.
LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with an average annual
household income of less than thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000.00)
as determined by the most recent decennial census.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, organization,
corporation, trust, or government entity.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who receives video services in the
franchise area.
VIDEO SERVICE — The provision of video programming provided
through wireline facilities, without regard to delivery technology,
including Internet protocol technology, whether provided as part of
a tier, on demand, or a per-channel basis, including cable service as
defined by 47 U.S.C. Section 522(6), but excluding video programming
provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C.
Section 332(d), or any video programming provided solely as part of
and via a service that enables users to access content, information,
electronic mail, or other services offered over the public Internet.
VIDEO SERVICE AUTHORIZATION — The right of a video service
provider or an incumbent cable operator that secures permission from
Discounts, refunds, and other price adjustments that reduce
the amount of compensation received by a video service
provider;
a.
b. Uncollectibles;
c. Late payment fees;
Amounts billed to subscribers to recover taxes, fees, or
surcharges imposed on subscribers or video service providers
in connection with the provision of video services, including
the video service provider fee authorized herein;
d.
e. Fees or other contributions for PEG or I-Net support; or
Charges for services other than video service that are
aggregated or bundled with amounts billed to subscribers,
provided the video service provider can reasonably identify
such charges on books and records kept in the regular course
of business or by other reasonable means. Except with respect
to the exclusion of the video service provider fee, gross
revenues shall be computed in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles.
f.
Section
650.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
650.020
100:1298
the Missouri Public Service Commission pursuant to Sections 67.2675
to 67.2714, RSMo., to offer video service to subscribers.
VIDEO SERVICE NETWORK — Wireline facilities, or any component
thereof, that deliver video service, without regard to delivery
technology, including Internet protocol technology or any successor
technology. The term "video service network" shall include cable
television systems.
VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER OR PROVIDER — Any person authorized
to distribute video service through a video service network pursuant to
a video service authorization.
VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE — The fee imposed under Section
650.020(C)(1) hereof.
B. General Regulations.
1. A video service provider shall provide written notice to the City at
least ten (10) days before commencing video service within the
City. Such notice shall also include:
a. The name, address and legal status of the provider;
b. The name, title, address, telephone number, e-mail address,
and fax number of individual(s) authorized to serve as the point
of contact between the City and the provider so as to make
contact possible at any time (i.e., twenty-four (24) hours per
day, seven (7) days per week); and
c. A copy of the provider's video service authorization issued by
the Missouri Public Service Commission.
2. A video service provider shall also notify the City, in writing, within
thirty (30) days of:
a. Any changes in the information set forth in or accompanying its
notice of commencement of video service; or
b. Any transfer of ownership or control of the provider's business
assets.
3. A video service provider shall not deny access to service to any
group of potential residential subscribers because of the race or
income of the residents in the area in which the group resides. A
video service provider shall be governed in this respect by Section
67.2707, RSMo. The City may file a complaint in a court of
competent jurisdiction alleging a germane violation of this
Subsection, which complaint shall be acted upon in accordance
with Section 67.2711, RSMo.
4. A video service provider shall comply with all Federal
Communications Commission requirements involving the
Section
650.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
650.020
100:1299
distribution and notification of emergency messages over the
emergency alert system applicable to cable operators.
5. A video service provider shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City, its officials, boards,
board members, commissions, commissioners, agents, and
employees against any and all claims, suits, causes of action,
proceedings, and judgments ("claims") for damages or equitable
relief arising out of (i) the construction, maintenance, repair or
operation of its video services network, (ii) copyright
infringements, and (iii) failure to secure consents from the owners,
authorized distributors, or licenses or programs to be delivered by
the video service network. Such indemnification shall include, but
is not limited to, the City's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in
defending against any such claim prior to the video service
provider assuming such defense. The City shall notify the provider
of a claim within seven (7) business days of its actual knowledge of
the existence of such claim. Once the provider assumes the defense
of the claim, the City may at its option continue to participate in the
defense at its own expense. This indemnification obligation shall
not apply to any claim related to the provision of public,
educational, or governmental channels or programming or to
emergency interrupt service announcements.
C. Video Service Provider Fee.
1. Each video service provider shall pay to the City, for the use of the
City's right-of-way and other facilities, a video service provider fee
in the amount of five percent (5%) of the provider's gross revenues
on or before the last day of the month following the end of each
calendar quarter. The City may adjust the video service provider
fee as permitted in Section 67.2689, RSMo.
2. A video service provider may identify and pass through on a
proportionate basis the video service provider fee as a separate line
item on subscribers' bills.
3. The City, not more than once per calendar year and at its own cost,
may audit the gross revenues of any video service provider as
provided in Section 67.2691, RSMo. A video service provider shall
make available for inspection all records pertaining to gross
revenues at the location where such records are kept in the normal
course of business.
D. Customer Service Regulations.
1. For purposes of this Subsection, the following terms shall mean:
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — Those hours during which most
similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers.
In all cases the term normal business hours must include some
Section
650.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
650.020
100:1300
evening hours at least one (1) night per week or some weekend
hours;
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those service conditions
which are within the control of the video service provider. Those
conditions which are not within the control of the video service
provider include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and
severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are
ordinarily within the control of the video service provider include,
but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events,
rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and
maintenance or upgrade of the video system.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of picture or sound on one
(1) or more video channels.
2. All video service providers shall adopt and abide by the following
minimum customer service requirements.
a. Video service providers shall maintain a local, toll-free or
collect call telephone access line which may be available to
subscribers twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a
week.
b. Video service providers shall have trained company
representatives available to respond to customer telephone
inquiries during normal business hours. After normal business
hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an
automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received after normal business hours shall be
responded to, by a trained company representative, on the next
business day.
c. Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by
a customer representative, including wait time, shall not
exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the
call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed
thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be met no less than
ninety percent (90%) of the time under normal operating
conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
d. Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a
busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
e. Customer service centers and bill payment locations shall be
open at least during normal business hours and shall be
conveniently located.
f. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following
standards shall be met no less than ninety-five percent (95%)
of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
Section
650.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
650.020
100:1301
(1) Standard installations shall be performed within seven (7)
business days after an order has been placed. "Standard"
installations are those that are located up to one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet from the existing distribution
system.
(2) Excluding conditions beyond the control of the video
service provider, the video service provider shall begin
working on "service interruptions" promptly and in no
event later than twenty-four (24) hours after the
interruption becomes known. The video service provider
must begin actions to correct other service problems the
next business day after notification of the service problem.
(3) The "appointment window" alternatives for installations,
service calls, and other installation activities will be either
a specific time or, at maximum, a four (4) hour time block
during normal business hours. The operator may schedule
service calls and other installation activities outside of
normal business hours for the express convenience of the
customer.
(4) A video service provider shall not cancel an appointment
with a customer after the close of business on the business
day prior to the scheduled appointment.
(5) If a video service provider's representative is running late
for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to
keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer must be
contacted. The appointment shall be rescheduled, as
necessary, at a time convenient for the customer.
g. Refund checks shall be issued promptly, but no later than
either:
(1) The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of
the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier; or
(2) The return of the equipment supplied by the video service
provider if the service is terminated.
h. Credits for service shall be issued no later than the customer's
next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is
warranted.
i. Video service providers shall not disclose the name or address
of a subscriber for commercial gain to be used in mailing lists
or for other commercial purposes not reasonably related to the
conduct of the businesses of the video service provider or its
affiliates, as required under 47 U.S.C. Section 551, including
all notice requirements. Video service providers shall provide
an address and telephone number for a local subscriber to use
Section
650.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
650.020
100:1302
without toll charge to prevent disclosure of the subscriber's
name or address.
3. As required by Section 67.2692, RSMo., Subsection (D)(2) of
Section 650.020 shall be enforced only as follows:
a. Each video service provider shall implement an informal
process for handling inquiries from the City and customers
concerning billing issues, service issues, and other complaints.
If an issue is not resolved through this informal process, the
City may request a confidential non-binding mediation with the
video service provider, with the costs of such mediation to be
shared equally between the City and the video service
provider.
b. In the case of repeated, willful, and material violations of the
provisions of this Section by a video service provider, the City
may file a complaint on behalf of a resident harmed by such
violations with Missouri's Administrative Hearing Commission
seeking an order revoking the video service provider's Public
Service Commission authorization. The City or a video service
provider may appeal any determination made by the
Administrative Hearing Commission under this Section to a
court of competent jurisdiction, which shall have the power to
review the decision de novo. The City shall not file a complaint
seeking revocation unless the video service provider has been
given sixty (60) days' notice to cure alleged breaches but has
failed to do so.
E. Public, Educational, And Government Access Programming.
1. Each video service provider shall designate the same number of
channels for non-commercial public, educational, or governmental
("PEG") used as designated by the incumbent cable operator as of
the effective date of this Chapter.
2. Any PEG channel that is not substantially utilized by the City may
be reclaimed and programmed by the video service provider at the
provider's discretion. If the City finds and certifies that a channel
that has been reclaimed by a video service provider will be
substantially utilized, the video service provider shall restore the
reclaimed channel within one hundred twenty (120) days. A PEG
channel shall be considered "substantially utilized" when forty (40)
hours per week are locally programmed on that channel for at least
three (3) consecutive months. In determining whether a PEG
channel is substantially utilized, a program may be counted not
more than four (4) times during a calendar week.
3. The operation of any PEG access channel and the production of any
programming that appears on each such channel shall be the sole
responsibility of the City or its duly appointed agent receiving the
benefit of such channel, and the video service provider shall bear
Section
650.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
650.020
100:1303
Chapter 700
PUBLIC UTILITIES
only the responsibility for the transmission of the programming on
each such channel to subscribers. The City must deliver and submit
to the video service provider all transmissions of PEG content and
programming in a manner or form that is capable of being accepted
and transmitted by such video service provider over its network
without further alteration or change in the content or transmission
signal. Such content and programming must be compatible with
the technology or protocol utilized by the video service provider
to deliver its video services. The video service provider shall
cooperate with the City to allow the City to achieve such
compatibility.
4. The City shall make the programming of any PEG access channel
available to all video service providers in a non-discriminatory
manner. Each video service provider shall be responsible for
providing the connectivity to the City's or its duly appointed agent's
PEG access channel distribution points existing as of the effective
date of this Chapter. Where technically necessary and feasible,
video service providers shall use reasonable efforts and shall
negotiate in good faith to interconnect their video service networks
on mutually acceptable rates, terms, and conditions for the purpose
of transmitting PEG programming. A video service provider shall
have no obligation to provide such interconnection to a new video
service provider at more than one (1) point per headend, regardless
of the number of political subdivisions served by such headend. The
video service provider requesting interconnection shall be
responsible for any costs associated with such interconnection,
including signal transmission from the origination point to the
point of interconnection. Interconnection may be accomplished by
direct cable microwave link, satellite, or other reasonable method
of connection acceptable to the person providing the interconnect.
5. A video service provider may identify and pass through as a
separate line item on subscribers' bills the value of monetary and
other PEG access support on a proportionate basis.
F. Compliance With Other Regulations. All video service providers shall
comply with all other applicable laws and regulations.
Section
650.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
650.020
100:1304
ARTICLE I
Purpose
Section 700.010. Purpose. [R.O. 2007 §700.010]
The purpose of this Chapter is to set out the manner in which water and
sewer service will be provided to customers of the City of O'Fallon water
and sewer systems. This Chapter provides for the rules and regulations
that will provide for orderly service and system uses, sets standards for
construction of line extensions, sets rates and charges, provides for
conservation and protection of drinking water, sets conditions on industrial
sewer discharges, sets penalties for violations and other matters relating
thereto.
Section
700.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.010
100:1305

ARTICLE II
Definitions
Section 700.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2007 §700.020; Ord. No. 1278
§2, 1-22-1986; Ord. No. 1592 §1, 5-17-1988; Ord. No. 1810 Art. I
§1(A), 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 2037 §1, 7-3-1992]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
ACT OR THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et. seq.
AIR-GAP SEPARATION — The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet
supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the
overflow level rim of the receptacle, and shall be at least double the
diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the flood level rim of
the vessel, but in no case less than three (3) inches.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY — Any water source or system, other than
the public water supply, that may be available in the building or on the
premises.
BACKFLOW — The reversal of the intended direction of flow of water, other
liquids, gases, or substances into the public water system from any source
or sources.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — Any device, method, or type of
construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system.
B.O.D. — Biochemical oxygen demand, determination by laboratory testing
as set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater with the results expressed in units of milligrams per
liter.
CITY — The City of O'Fallon, Missouri including, but not limited to, its
employees, agents, engineers, Operation and Maintenance Services
personnel, and other designates as the City may have from time to time as
deemed necessary.
CONTAINMENT — Protection of the public water supply by installing a
cross-connection control device or air-gap separation on the main service
line to a facility.
CONTAMINATION — An impairment of the quality of the water by sewage,
process fluids, or other wastes to a degree which could create an actual
hazard to the public health through poisoning or through spread of disease
by exposure.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any physical link between a potable water supply
and any other substance, fluid, or source, which makes possible
contamination of the potable water supply due to the reversal of flow of the
water in the piping or distribution system.
Section
700.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.020
100:1307
CUSTOMER — Any person who receives water from a public water system,
except those persons receiving water for resale.
DRAINAGE AREA — That part of the tributary area for which a detention
facility is designed to control peak discharge rates.
EASEMENT — Authorization by a property owner for the use by another for
a specified purpose, of any designated part of the property.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source
if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of
the Act.
HAZARD, DEGREE OF — An evaluation of the potential risk to public health
and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.
INDUSTRIAL PROCESS SYSTEM — Any system containing a fluid or
solution, which may be chemically, biologically, or otherwise contaminated
or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health,
system, pollutional, or plumbing hazard if introduced into a potable water
supply.
INDUSTRIAL USER OR USER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership,
governmental entity, etc., using or allowing the use of water and/or sewer
services including, but not limited to treatment of waste, provided by the
City of O'Fallon, Missouri.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGE PERMIT — The control mechanism
issued by the City to Significant Industrial Users, Industrial Users or Users
which include conditions necessary to prevent Pass Through or
Interference, or protect the quality of the receiving waterways of the
POTW's effluent or protect worker health and safety, or facilitate POTW
HAZARD, HEALTH — Any condition, device, or practice in the water
supply system and its operation which could create or may create a
danger to the health and well-being of the water customer.
1.
HAZARD, PLUMBING — A plumbing type cross-connection in a
customer's potable water system that has not been properly protected
by a vacuum breaker, air-gap separation or backflow prevention device.
2.
HAZARD, POLLUTIONAL — An actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the
customer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance
or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system
or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.
3.
HAZARD, SYSTEM — An actual or potential threat of severe damage
to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the
customer's potable water system, or of a pollution or contamination
which would effect the quality of the potable water in the system.
4.
Section
700.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.020
100:1308
sludge management and disposal, or protect ambient air quality, or protect
against damage to the POTW.
INTERFERENCE — Any wastewater discharge from any user which, alone
or in conjunction with a discharge(s) from other sources, which the City
deems will inhibit or disrupt the POTW, its treatment process, use or
disposal, including sewage sludge disposal or use, which contributes to
increase in magnitude or duration of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's National Pollutants Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit.
ISOLATION — Protection of a facility service line by installing a crossconnection
control device or air-gap separation on an individual fixture,
appurtenance, or system.
LATERAL — The entire length of sewer pipe(s) and fittings connecting the
customers premises to the City main sewer line.
LOCAL LIMITS — The most recent schedule developed by the City which
identifies the maximum discharge limitations of various types of pollutants
by users connected to or using the POTW. Such schedule shall be updated
from time to time as deemed necessary by the City for the purpose of being
a control mechanism and used in issuance of Industrial Waste Discharge
Permits.
NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, PRETREATMENT STANDARD
OR STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the USEPA which
applies to Industrial Users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits
established pursuant to 40CFR 403.5.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or
may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of the proposed pretreatment standards under
Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that Section,
provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site where no other source is located; or
a.
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
b.
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extreme to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source, should be
considered.
c.
1.
Section
700.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.020
100:1309
PASS THROUGH — A wastewater discharge which exits the POTW into
waters of the State in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge(s) from other sources, the City deems to have
the potential for, or causes, the POTW to violate any requirements of the
City's POTW NPDES Permit including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of violation(s).
POLLUTION — The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute
a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water to a degree which does
not create an actual hazard to the public health which does adversely and
unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.
POTW — Publicly Owned Treatment Works and shall include all facilities
or devices that collect, transport and/or treat domestic, commercial or
industrial wastes and are owned and/or operated by the City, or by sewage
systems that convey wastewaters into and through the City system and
which have entered into agreement for transportation and treatment of
wastewater by the City.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration may
be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes
or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d): Appropriate
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of Section (1) (b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
2.
Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment, or
(1)
Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which are necessary for the placement, assembly or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(2)
a.
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies
do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
b.
3.
Section
700.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.020
100:1310
pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as equalization
tanks or facilities, for protection against surges or slug loadings that might
interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW. However, where
wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility
with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from another regulation
process, the effluent from the equalization facility must meet an adjusted
pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with 40CFR 403.6(e).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to Pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment
Standard, imposed on an Industrial User.
PRIVATE SEWER COLLECTION SYSTEM — A system serving, collecting
and/or treating sewer waste flow from more than one (1) parcel of property,
apartment complex, commercial or industrial complex or single-family
residence.
PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system that provides for a water
source or supply, serving one (1) or more parcel of property, apartment
complex, commercial or industrial complex or a single-family residence.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A system for the provision to the public of water
for human consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances, if
such system has at least fifteen (15) service connections or regularly serves
an average of at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily at least sixty (60)
days per calendar year. Such system includes any collection, treatment,
storage or distribution facilities used in connection with such system.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The connection of the customer service line
onto the downstream end of the water meter.
SEWER (SHALL MEAN SANITARY SEWER) — All sewage or wastes from a
customer's property or user excluding stormwater, rainwater, downspouts,
foundation drains runoffs, etc. Stormwater, rainwater, downspouts,
foundation drain runoffs, etc., are prohibited to discharge into the Sanitary
Sewer System.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any user which is subject to
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any non-categorical user that
discharges twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more processed
wastewater, or that contributes a processed wastestream which makes up to
five percent (5%) or more of the dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the POTW, or any user that has a reasonable potential, in opinion of
the City, for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement.
SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE — Any one of the following:
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined herein as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of wastewater
measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed the daily
maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter in any
amount;
1.
Section
700.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.020
100:1311
SLUG LOAD — Any discharge at a flow rate of concentration which could
cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section 700.440
of this Chapter or any discharge including, but not limited to, an accidental
spill or a non-customary batch discharge.
STANDARD CONDITIONS — The current rules and procedures to be used
and followed in conjunction with an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit,
and includes Monitoring, Reporting and Management Requirements for
permitted users. See Exhibit C to this Chapter, on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
T.S.S. — Total suspended solids determined by laboratory testing as set
forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater with the results expressed in units of milligrams per liter.
USER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, etc., using or allowing
the use of water and/or sewer services provided by the City of O'Fallon,
Missouri.
WATER SUPPLIER — The owner, operator, or individual in responsible
charge of a public water system.
Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements
taken for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals
or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit
multiplied by the applicable criteria [1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and
grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH];
2.
Any other discharge violation that the City believes has caused, alone
on in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through
(including endangering the health of the residents of the City or the
general public);
3.
Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City's exercise
of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
4.
Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
5.
Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day
compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance schedules;
6.
7. Failure to accurately report non-compliance;
Any other violation(s) which the City determines will adversely affect
the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
8.
Section
700.020
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.020
100:1312
ARTICLE III
General Rules
Section 700.030. Rules and Regulations Shall Govern. [R.O. 2007
§700.030; Ord. No. 1810 Art. I §1(B), 4-17-1990]
The following rules and regulations shall govern and be enforced by the City
of O'Fallon and its agents. These rules and regulations apply to all persons,
firms, corporations, partnerships, etc., using or intending to use water and/
or sewer services provided by the City of O'Fallon.
Section 700.040. Application For Services. [R.O. 2007 §700.040;
Ord. No. 1810 Art. I §1(C), 4-17-1990]
All persons, firms, corporations, partnerships, etc., desiring to obtain water
and/or sewer services from the City of O'Fallon, shall first make application
to obtain such services. All applicants shall follow and meet requirements
set forth in this Chapter. Failure to do so may result in disconnection of
service and other penalties as defined herein.
Section 700.050. Connections — Cost — To Be Metered. [R.O. 2007
§700.050; Ord. No. 6145 §1, 9-24-2015]
Connections to the City's water system shall be requested, connections fees
paid in full, meter installed, and the connection inspected and approved
prior to initiation of service. The connection fee shall be only for the right
to connect, with all costs and installation the responsibility of the property
owner requesting service. Meters for service shall be purchased directly
from the City. All metered service installations shall be located in approved
meter wells at or near the property lines within City easements or right-ofway.
Metered services, connections, and installation procedures shall be of
the type approved by the City.
Section 700.060. City Has Right To Inspect Meters, Etc. [R.O. 2007
§700.060; Ord. No. 1810 Art. I §1(G), 4-17-1990]
The City shall have the right to inspect meters and all other fixtures and
appliances for the use of water whenever deemed necessary by the City for
the purpose of regulating such use, keeping an accurate account thereof
and preventing waste, leakage or other violations of these rules and
regulations, and for such purpose it shall be the duty of the water customer
to allow the City access to their premises at reasonable times and intervals;
and should any user refuse to allow such access, upon order of the City, the
water supply may be cut off and withheld from any such water customer or
user so refusing.
Section 700.070. City Has Right To Shut Off Water — When. [R.O.
2007 §700.070; Ord. No. 1810 Art. I §1(D—E), 4-17-1990]
A. The City reserves the right, at any time, to shut off water in their
distribution mains for the purpose of making repairs or extensions or
Section
700.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.070
100:1313
Section 700.080. Water Main Break or Leak — Responsibility For
Repair. [R.O. 2007 §700.080; Ord. No. 1810 Art. I §1(H), 4-17-1990]
The City requires that any break or leak in a water service pipe, from
the curb box to the meter be promptly repaired at the expense of the
water user where remote meters are involved. Any break or leak in water
service pipes from the water main to the curb box or exterior meter box
is the responsibility of the City. Any break or leak beyond that point is the
responsibility of the customer. No customer, owner, tenant or other person
in charge of any premises provided with water connection shall negligently
or willfully permit or commit any waste of water by leakage, useless or
careless discharge of flow, freezing of pipes or other fixtures, etc. When
the supply of water is shut off due to the fault of the water user under
the provisions of any of the rules, regulations, or ordinances of this City, a
fee shall be charged for shutting off and turning on the water service as
authorized and approved herein.
Section 700.090. Water, Sewer Line Installation Prohibited Without
City Approval. [R.O. 2007 §700.090; Ord. No. 1810 Art. I §1(J),
4-17-1990]
No water or sewer pipe of any kind, including water service lines and
sewer pipe laterals, shall be installed within any right-of-way or easement
of the City or be connected to the water or sewer system, unless connection
fees are paid, and approval is given by the City. All usages shall be billed
accordingly as set forth herein.
Section 700.100. Water Service Not To Be Transferred. [R.O. 2007
§700.100; Ord. No. 1810 Art. I §1(K), 4-17-1990]
A water service connection is for the sole use of the water customer or user
and does not permit the transfer of water from one (1) property to any other
customer or user in any way. If a specific emergency situation exists that
for any other purpose they deem necessary in the best interests of
the system and it's customers. All customers are hereby cautioned and
risk of damage is hereby assumed by the water customer and/or user.
Customers and users are advised to take measures to prevent water
tanks from draining, boilers from collapsing and to follow standard
backflow prevention measures. It is expressly understood and agreed
by and between the customer/water user and the City, that no claim
shall be made against the City by reason of breaks, leaks, bursting,
repairs or maintenance of any water pipes or water facilities owned by
the City or for any failure to supply water for any reason.
B. The City reserves the right to shut off the supply of water from any
water customer or user at any time so long as the service pipe through
which such user may be supplied, or any meter, or other part of such
pipe may be out of order or in disrepair for the proper supply of water
through same.
Section
700.070
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.100
100:1314
would make such an arrangement advisable, it shall be done only on specific
written permission of the City.
Section 700.110. Separate Connections For Each User. [R.O. 2007
§700.110; Ord. No. 1810 Art. I §1(L), 4-17-1990]
The City requires each user of water and/or sewer services provided by the
City to install and maintain a separate connection with the City water and
sewer mains; customer connections intended to serve one (1) property shall
not serve any other property in any way.
Section 700.120. Connection Construction Costs — Line Extensions.
[R.O. 2007 §700.120; Ord. No. 1810 Art. I §1(M), 4-17-1990]
Line extensions and connections to the City Water and Sewer System, when
made, shall be at the sole cost of the user or customer. All connections shall
be subject to the City's approved inspection.
Section 700.130. Requirements For Use of Public Sewers. [R.O.
2007 §700.130; Ord. No. 1810 Art. III §3, 4-17-1990]
Each sewer customer and/or user shall abide by and agree to follow any
and all regulations and requirements set forth pertaining to use of public
sewers, collection and treatment of wastes, as set forth herein, the City
Public Use Sewer Ordinance, the Missouri Department of Natural
Resources and the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Section 700.140. Regulations For Wastewater System Use. [R.O.
2007 §700.140; Ord. No. 1810 Art. IX §1, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 3003
§2, 1-19-1993]
A. All connections to the City Sewer System shall be subject to the City
Public User Sewer ordinance which regulates the amount and type of
wastes that may be discharged as well as specifying requirements that
are applicable to the City's Pretreatment Program and as regulated by
the United States Environment Protection Agency and the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources.
B. All political subdivisions who are served by the City of O'Fallon shall
adopt a similar user charge ordinance.
C. The user charge rates will be established so that adequate revenue is
generated to properly operate and maintain the City's sewerage
facilities. The minimum user charge rates will be established by
calculating the costs associated with plant and pumping station
operations and maintenance, sewer line maintenance, inflow and
infiltration treatment, sewerage replacement schedule, administration,
debt service and generate sufficient reserve to maintain minimum bond
coverage. The estimated flows from the users will be divided into the
costs applicable to those users, to arrive at a cost per one thousand
(1,000) gallons of wastewater treated. The City reserves the right to set
Section
700.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.140
100:1315
Section 700.150. City's Right To Interrupt Service — When. [R.O.
2007 §700.150; Ord. No. 1810 Art. I §1(P), 4-17-1990]
The City reserves the right to interrupt sewer service in its collecting
sewers at any time, without notice, to make repairs, extensions or
alterations to the collecting sewers or pump station equipment, and on
occasion of such limited service may require customer not to discharge into
the collecting sewers for a reasonable period of time. When it is reasonably
possible, the City will notify affected customers in advance when sewer
service will be limited.
Section 700.160. City Not To Be Responsible For Damages — When.
[R.O. 2007 §700.160; Ord. No. 1810 Art. I §1(O), 4-17-1990]
As a condition of furnishing service, the City shall not be responsible
for damages for any failure to remove wastewater from the customer's
premises or for backup of wastewater into customer's premises or for
interruption of service for any reason. The City shall not be liable for
damages resulting to customer or third persons, unless due to negligence
on the part of the City and in absence of any contributory negligence on
the part of the customer or such third party. The City shall not be liable for
damages caused by an interruption of sewer service or for damages caused
by defective piping and appliances on the customer's premises, or for any
defect in customer's sewer lateral service line.
Section 700.170. Sewer Pipe (Lateral) — Responsibilities of User.
[R.O. 2007 §700.170; Ord. No. 1810 Art. I §1(N), 4-17-1990]
It is required that any break or leak in a sewer service pipe (lateral) be
promptly repaired at the expense of the user. It shall be the City's option to
repair breaks or leaks in a sewer service lateral underneath roadways and
in utility easements from the sewer main to the customers property line and
the City reserves the right to bill and collect the cost of repairs from the
user or property owner. It shall be the customers responsibility to keep the
sewer lateral service line clean from stoppage and to clear the sewer lateral
service line from the point of connection to the sewer main.
Section 700.175. Sewer Lateral Repair Program — Annual Fee.
[Ord. No. 5491 §1, 8-13-2009; Ord. No. 5499 §1, 8-27-2009; Ord. No.
5616 §§1—2, 8-26-2010; Ord. No. 5727A §§1—2, 9-8-2011; Ord. No.
5815 §§1—2, 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 5933 §§1—2, 9-12-2013; Ord. No.
a minimum charge for each billing period. Administrative and line
maintenance costs will apply only to those areas which use these
services.
D. The user charge rate shall be reviewed annually.
E. A depreciation, repair and replacement account shall be established in
the amount of ninety-four thousand twenty-eight dollars ($94,028.00) a
year including interest accrued on the account for twenty (20) years.
Section
700.140
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.175
100:1316
6032 §§1 — 2, 9-11-2014; Ord. No. 6143 §§1—2, 9-24-2015; Ord. No.
6255 §§ 1 – 2, 9-22-2016; Ord. No. 6384, 9-14-2017; Ord. No. 6505,
9-27-2018; Ord. No. 6607, 9-27-2019]
Section 700.180. Systems To Be Operated Separately. [R.O. 2007
§700.180; Ord. No. 1843 §1, 10-4-1990]
The existing combined waterworks and sewerage system of the City of
O'Fallon, Missouri, shall be and the same is hereby separated into a
waterworks system and a sewerage system, and said waterworks system
and all future improvements and extensions thereto and said sewerage
system and all future improvements and extensions thereto shall hereafter
be operated and maintained as separate and distinct systems from one
another.
A. There is hereby levied and assessed against all residential property
having six (6) or less dwelling units an annual fee of thirty dollars
($30.00) for the repair of lateral sewer service lines on or connecting
such property with the public sewer system line.
B. The fee imposed hereby shall be imposed upon condominiums that have
six (6) or less condominium units per building, and each condominium
unit shall be responsible for its proportionate share of any fee charged
pursuant to this Chapter, and, in addition, any condominium unit shall,
if determined to be responsible for and served by its own individual
lateral sewer line, be treated as an individual residence regardless of
the number of units in the development.
C. The fund collected pursuant to this Section shall be deposited in a
special account to be used solely for the purpose of paying for all or a
portion of the costs reasonably associated with and necessary to
administer and carry out the defective sewer lateral service line
repairs.
D. The fee levied hereby shall be added to the general tax levy bills of
property owners within the City and may be charged a fee in the same
manner and to the same extent as provided for the collection of
delinquent real estate taxes and tax bills.
Section
700.175
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.180
100:1317

ARTICLE IV
Connection Fees
Section 700.190. Water and Sewer Connection Fees. [R.O. 2007
§700.190; Ord. No. 1810 Art. III §1, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 3089 Art. II,
12-21-1993; Ord. No. 4286 §1, 11-15-2001; Ord. No. 4619 §§1—2,
12-18-2003; Ord. No. 4904 §§1—2, 9-8-2005; Ord. No. 5493 §1,
8-27-2009; Ord. No. 5718 §1, 7-28-2011]
A. All new connections to the City system(s) shall be subject to payment of
a connection fee(s) for the right to connect to the City system(s).
B. Connection fees for developments (for which construction plan
approval is required under the Zoning Code) to be connected to the
City's sewerage system shall be due and payable at the time a building
permit is issued. Connection fees for developments to be connected to
the City's water system shall be due and payable at the time a building
permit is issued. Connection fees for individual buildings shall be due
and payable at the time a building permit is issued. A delayed payment
penalty of ten percent (10%) of the connection fee due will be assessed
if the fee is not paid within thirty (30) days. An additional delayed
payment charge of three/fourths of one percent (0.75%) of the
outstanding balance will be added each month, or portion thereof, the
payment of connection fee remains outstanding.
C. No collection system line or service line shall be connected to the
sewage system until all fees are paid. If a line is connected prior to
payment of fees, the City may disconnect the line and charge the owner,
developer, contractor, plumber or other parties, jointly or severally
liable, all costs incurred for the disconnection including, but not limited
to, reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and interest from the date of
disconnection.
D. (Reserved)
E. Due to the limited capacity of water and wastewater treatment
anticipated to be available for the foreseeable future, no additional
water or sewer connections will be made to a City water or sewer line to
serve premises located outside the corporate limits of the City of
O'Fallon, Missouri.
F. In addition to the below stated fees for the right to connect to the City
water system, the water customer or user will purchase from the City
the water meter as required by the City.
G. Connection Fees—Sewer And Water.
1. Connection fees for the right to connect to the City water system
are as follows:
Section
700.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.190
100:1319
WATER CONNECTION FEES
1 inch meter or smaller $2,500.00
1.5 inch meter $2,500.00
2 inch meter $3,000.00
3 inch meter $5,000.00
4 inch meter $10,000.00
6 inch meter and larger $15,000.00
2. Connection fees—wastewater. Connection fees for the right to
connect to the City wastewater system are equal to the amount
indicated above for water connections and are based on the water
meter size.
3. All connections shall be subject to approval and all connection fees
paid prior to connection. All connection fees above are for premises
inside the City limits of O'Fallon. The City reserves the right to set
fees for premises outside the City limits of O'Fallon on a case-bycase
basis. Connections at the main shall be subject to inspection
and approval prior to initiation of service.
H. Outside City connections by previous agreement only shall be twice the
connection fees stated above.
Section
700.190
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.190
100:1320
ARTICLE V
Deposits133
Section 700.200. Water and Sewer Security Deposits. [Ord. No.
5756 §1, 12-8-2011]
A. Security deposits for water and/or sewer service shall be as follows:
[Ord. No. 6145 §2, 9-24-2015]
Residential water and sewer service combined, water service only or
sewer service only: one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
Commercial, business and/or industrial customers, each metered
water connection or sewer connection, water and sewer service
combined, water service only or sewer service only: one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00).
Security deposits for commercial, business and/or industrial water
services over one (1) inch in size will be based at one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) per inch of meter size minimum. Additional deposits
may apply for higher use customers.
B. Security deposits shall be paid prior to initiation and start of service, or
the City may, at its option, add security deposits to the customer's
water/sewer service bill. Unpaid deposits may result in service
disconnection. Deposits shall be held without interest and are held to be
applied to the final bill and any accumulated fees or charges until the
customer has twenty-four (24) consecutive months of timely payment.
[Ord. No. 6145 §2, 9-24-2015]
For purposes of this Section, "timely payment" is no more than one (1)
late payment or assessed fee or penalty for late or delayed payment,
no returned check, no rejected payment, no discontinuation of service,
etc.
Security deposits may be transferred and applied to a new location,
at the City's discretion, when a customer relocates within the City's
service area.
C. All security deposits shall be maintained in a separate account. No
interest shall be paid on security deposits.
D. Liability Of Owner Of Multi-Unit Establishment. The owner of any multiunit
establishment containing two (2) or more units shall be considered
the "customer" and user of water furnished to all units in the
establishment and liable for the payment of deposit and service bills
133. Editor's Note—Ord. No. 5756 §1 adopted December 8, 2011 repealed art. V and art. VI and
sections 700.200—700.270 of this chapter and enacted the new provisions set out herein.
Former arts. V and VI derived from R.O. 2007 §§700.200—700.270; ord. no. 1810 arts. IV,
art VI §5, 4-17-90, ord. no. 3089 arts. III, V, VI, 12-21-93; ord. no. 3143 §I, 8-16-94; ord. no.
3634A §§2—3, 12-29-97; ord. no. 3993 §§1—2, 12-22-99; ord. no. 4285 §§1—2, 11-15-01;
ord. no. 4619 §3, 12-18-03; ord. no. 4662 §2, 6-1-04; ord. no. 4923 §§2—5, 11-16-05; ord.
no. 4924 §§2—4, 11-16-05; ord. no. 5095 §1, 11-9-06; ord. no. 5104 §1, 11-9-06; ord. no.
5273 §1, 1-14-08; ord. no. 5374 §1, 9-25-05; ord. no. 5718 §2—3, 7-28-11.
Section
700.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.200
100:1321
therefore. However, if the owner installs or causes to be installed
separate water meters for each and every unit of the multi-unit
establishment, the tenant may be treated as the "customer" for water
and/or sewer deposit purposes.
Section
700.200
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.200
100:1322
ARTICLE VI
Rates134
Section 700.210. Self-Supporting Systems. [Ord. No. 5756 §1,
12-8-2011]
The user/service charges for water and/or sewer services shall generate
adequate annual revenues to pay costs of annual operation and
maintenance of the water and sewer systems including replacement and
costs associated with debt retirement associated with financing of the water
and sewer system and/or any capital costs associated with said systems
which the City may designate to be paid by the user/service charge. The
water and sewer user/service charge shall be set by ordinance and together
with the systems shall be self-supporting. The City shall bill customers
for any and all miscellaneous charges set forth by State and Federal law,
examples of which may include, but are not limited to, primacy fees,
laboratory testing, etc.
Section 700.220. Water Service Charges. [Ord. No. 5756 §1,
12-8-2011]
A. Each customer, user and/or owner of premises connected to the water
system of the City with a meter size of one (1) inch or less shall pay for
water drawn from the water system of the City according to the
readings of the water meters in each particular connection based on the
following charges: [Ord. No. 6145 §3, 9-24-2015; Ord. No. 6605,
9-26-2019]
Water Service Charges Base Rate and Usage Fee
Category 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Premises
inside the
City limits
Monthly
base rate (1"
meter or
less)
$9.95 $10.44 $10.95 $11.50 $12.07 $12.68 $13.31
Usage fee
(per 1,000
gallons)
$3.37 $3.54 $3.71 $3.90 $4.09 $4.29 $4.51
134. Editor's Note—Ord. No. 5756 §1 adopted December 8, 2011 repealed art. V and art. VI and
sections 700.200—700.270 of this chapter and enacted the new provisions set out herein.
Former arts. V and VI derived from R.O. 2007 §§700.200—700.270; ord. no. 1810 arts. IV,
art VI §5, 4-17-90, ord. no. 3089 arts. III, V, VI, 12-21-93; ord. no. 3143 §I, 8-16-94; ord. no.
3634A §§2—3, 12-29-97; ord. no. 3993 §§1—2, 12-22-99; ord. no. 4285 §§1—2, 11-15-01;
ord. no. 4619 §3, 12-18-03; ord. no. 4662 §2, 6-1-04; ord. no. §§2—5, 11-16-05; ord. no.
4924 §§2—4, 11-16-05; ord. no. 5095 §1, 11-9-06; ord. no. 5104 §1, 11-9-06; ord. no. 5273
§1, 1-14-08; ord. no. 5374 §1, 9-25-05; ord. no. 5718 §2—3, 7-28-11.
Section
700.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.220
100:1323
Water Service Charges Base Rate and Usage Fee
Category 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Premises
outside the
City limits
Monthly
base rate (1"
meter or
less)
$18.25 $19.17 $21.90 $23.00 $24.14 $25.35 $26.62
Usage fee
(per 1,000
gallons)
$7.32 $7.69 $7.42 $7.79 $8.18 $8.59 $9.02
All monthly base rate amounts listed herein include up to one thousand
(1,000) gallons of water each month. All usage fees per one thousand
(1,000) gallons over the one-thousand-gallon-per-month minimum are
for each one thousand (1,000) gallons or portion thereof. New charges
start at the beginning of a full billing cycle on or after January 1 of
the year indicated. The charges established after year 2021 will be an
annual rate increase of six percent (6%) over the previous year and
shall continue in force until different rates are adopted.
B. Each customer, user and/or owner of premises connected to the water
system of the City with a meter size of greater than one (1) inch shall
pay for water drawn from the water system of the City each month
according to the readings of the water meters at the same usage fees
indicated for one (1) inch and smaller meters. The monthly base rate for
meters greater than one (1) inch shall be as indicated in the table below.
[Ord. No. 6145 §3, 9-24-2015]
Water Service Base Rate Schedule Monthly Base Rate by Meter
Size
Category 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
1.5 Inch
Premises
inside the
City limits
$15.00 $15.00 $21.90 $23.00 $24.15 $25.35 $26.62
Premises
outside the
City limits
$27.60 $27.60 $43.80 $45.99 $48.29 $50.70 $53.24
2 Inch
Premises
inside the
City limits
$20.00 $20.00 $35.04 $36.79 $38.63 $40.57 $42.59
Section
700.220
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.220
100:1324
Water Service Base Rate Schedule Monthly Base Rate by Meter
Size
Category 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Premises
outside the
City limits
$36.80 $36.80 $70.08 $73.58 $77.26 $81.13 $85.18
3 Inch
Premises
inside the
City limits
$35.00 $35.00 $65.70 $68.99 $72.44 $76.06 $79.86
Premises
outside the
City limits
$64.40 $64.40 $131.40 $137.97$144.87 $152.11$159.72
4 Inch
Premises
inside the
City limits
$55.00 $55.00 $109.50 $114.98$120.73 $126.76$133.10
Premises
outside the
City limits
$101.20 $101.20$219.00 $229.95$241.45 $253.52$266.20
6 Inch
Premises
inside the
City limits
$95.00 $95.00 $219.00 $229.95$241.45 $253.52$266.20
Premises
outside the
City limits
$174.80 $174.80$438.00 $459.90$482.90 $507.04$532.39
8 Inch
Premises
inside the
City limits
$135.00 $135.00$350.40 $367.92$386.32 $405.63$425.92
Premises
outside the
City limits
$248.00 $248.00$700.80 $735.84$772.63 $811.26$851.83
Section
700.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.220
100:1325
All monthly base rate amounts listed herein include up to one thousand
(1,000) gallons of water each month. All usage fees per one thousand
(1,000) gallons over the one-thousand-gallon-per-month minimum are
for each one thousand (1,000) gallons or portion thereof. The monthly
base rate portion of the bill shall be multiplied by the number of
months included on the bill. Similarly, the monthly allowance (one
thousand (1,000) gallons) included in the monthly base rate shall be
multiplied by the number of months included on the bill. The charges
established herein shall continue in force until different charges are
adopted.
C. A charge for water service shall be made based upon the meter
readings and computed at the rates and fees hereinabove set out. The
City, through its properly authorized employees, may read water meters
and/or bill for services monthly, bi-monthly, quarterly or some other
periodic basis, based on the charges set forth above, and may combine
bills for water service with bills for City solid waste and/or sewer
services provided to the same location. If such unified billing is
adopted, the City Administrator shall adopt a policy to establish the
sequence of the services being billed to which partial payments shall be
applied. Failure of the City to submit a service bill or a delinquent notice
shall not excuse the water customer from their obligation to pay for
water service when a bill is submitted.
D. Whenever, for any cause, a water meter fails to operate, or for some
reason a meter cannot be read by the City, a reasonable estimate shall
be made by the City of the amount of water supplied during such period
and the customer/user shall be liable for payment based on the
estimated amount of water.
E. Water meters will be owned and maintained by the City. Water meters
will be kept in proper operating condition by the City and meter tests
will be made in accordance to the testing methods set forth by the
American Water Works Association. Water meters damaged or
destroyed through tampering or abuse will be repaired or replaced by
the City at the customer's expense.
F. Meter tests will be performed as deemed necessary by the City at no
charge to the water user. Water meter errors which do not exceed two
percent (2%) fast or slow shall be considered as being within the
allowable limits of accuracy for billing purposes. The percentages of
error will be considered as that arrived at by taking the average of the
error at full load and that at ten percent (10%) load, unless a water
user's rate of usage is known to be practically constant in which case
the error at such constant use will be used.
G. Due to supply and capacity limitations on the City's water and sewer
systems for the foreseeable future, no additional water service
connections will be made to premises outside the City limits of O'Fallon
if the property is located in an area served or to be served by the City of
O'Fallon sewer system. Any owner or property located outside the
Section
700.220
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.220
100:1326
O'Fallon City limits desiring to connect to and acquire water from
O'Fallon's water system must apply to the City Council for an extension
of service and must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Council
in its sole and unlimited legislative discretion, by deed restriction,
contract running with the land, or other satisfactory means:
1. That the use, development and any redevelopment of the property
to be served is not, and will not be, incompatible with the scale and
character of the permitted uses for nearby property within the City;
2. That the property will not be further subdivided or converted to any
use other than that described in detail in the application for
extension of service without the consent and agreement of the City
Council, which consent shall be vested in the Council's sole and
unlimited legislative discretion;
3. That the property will not be connected to the City's sewer system
without consent of the City Council in the Council's sole and
unlimited legislative discretion; and
4. That no additional property other than the property described in
the application for extension of service will be allowed to connect
to any lines extended beyond the City limits without the consent of
the City Council, which discretion shall be vested in the Council's
sole and unlimited legislative discretion.
H. A discount equivalent to fifteen percent (15%) of the total monthly
charges (not including late fees, penalties, interest, returned check
fees, payment cancellation fees, collection costs, etc.) is available to
individual residential customers (but not multi-unit, institutional,
commercial, industrial or other customers) upon proof that he/she is
either over the age of sixty-five (65), or a veteran of the United States
Armed Forces with a service-connected disability of at least twenty-five
percent (25%). Proof of age must be in the form of a driver's license,
State identification card, passport, or other government-issued ID
issued by a government within the United States. A service disability
must be verified by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs.
[Ord. No. 5930 §2, 8-22-2013]
I. Customers receiving a bill from the City for water service shall be given
the opportunity to designate a voluntary contribution of one dollar
($1.00), three dollars ($3.00) or five dollars ($5.00) that shall become
the amount due from the customer and payable as that customer's bill,
and the voluntary contribution will be donated to a not-for-profit
organization designated by the City. The terms for such contribution
shall be set forth in an agreement executed between the City and the
designated not-for-profit organization(s) and kept on file with the City
Clerk. The designated not-for-profit organization(s) may change
without notice to the customer. [Ord. No. 6096 § 2, 5-14-2015]
Section
700.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.230
100:1327
Section 700.230. Sewer Service Charges. [Ord. No. 5756 §1,
12-8-2011]
A. Each user connected to the sewage system of the City of O'Fallon shall
pay for sewer service based on gallons of water or sewage metered
based on the following monthly charges: [Ord. No. 6145 § 4,
9-24-2015; Ord. No. 6379 § 1, 8-24-2017]
Sewer Service Charges
Base Rate And Usage Fee
Category 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Premises inside the
City limits
Monthly base rate (1"
meter or less)
$18.33 $20.44 $22.79 $25.41 $28.33
Usage fee (per 1,000
gallons)
$2.57 $2.87 $3.20 $3.56 $3.97
Premises outside the
City limits
Monthly base rate (1"
meter or less)
$36.66 $40.88 $45.58 $50.82 $56.66
Usage fee (per 1,000
gallons)
$5.13 $5.74 $6.40 $7.12 $7.94
New charges will start on January first (1st) of the year indicated. All
monthly base rate amounts listed herein include up to four thousand
(4,000) gallons each month. All usage fees per one thousand (1,000)
gallons over the four thousand (4,000) gallon per month minimum are
for each one thousand (1,000) gallons or portion thereof. The charges
established after year 2021 will be an annual increase of six percent
(6%) over the previous year and shall continue in force until different
rates are adopted.
B. Customers without O'Fallon approved water meters shall have the
option of installing an approved water meter at their sole expense or
paying a flat rate sewer charge based on the water/sewer usage of
fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons per month per each commercial,
business or residential unit.
C. If a commercial or industrial contributor has a consumptive use of
water, or in some other manner uses water which is not returned to the
wastewater collection system, does not use metered City water or has a
water source in addition to City water, the user charge for that
contributor will be based on a wastewater meter(s) or separate water
meter(s) installed and maintained at the contributor's expense and in a
manner acceptable to the City.
Section
700.230
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.230
100:1328
D. Each customer, user and/or owner of premises connected to the sewer
system of the City with a water meter size of greater than one (1) inch
shall pay for sewage treated by the wastewater system of the City
according to the readings of the water meters at the same usage fees
indicated for one (1) inch and smaller meters. The monthly base rate for
properties with water meters greater than one (1) inch shall be as
follows: [Ord. No. 6145 § 4, 9-24-2015; Ord. No. 6379 § 1,
8-24-2017]
Sewer Minimum Monthly Base Rate
Based On Water Meter Size
Category 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
1.5 Inch
Premises inside the City
limits
$36.67 $40.88 $45.58 $50.82 $56.67
Premises outside the City
limits
$73.33 $81.76 $91.17 $101.65 $113.34
2 Inch
Premises inside the City
limits
$58.66 $65.41 $72.93 $81.31 $90.67
Premises outside the City
limits
$117.32 $130.81 $145.86 $162.63 $181.33
3 Inch
Premises inside the City
limits
$109.99 $122.64 $136.74 $152.47 $170.00
Premises outside the City
limits
$219.98 $245.28 $273.48 $304.94 $340.00
4 Inch
Premises inside the City
limits
$183.32 $204.40 $227.90 $254.11 $283.33
Premises outside the City
limits
$366.63 $408.79 $455.80 $508.22 $566.67
6 Inch
Premises inside the City
limits
$366.63 $408.79 $455.80 $508.22 $566.67
Premises outside the City
limits
$733.26 $817.58 $911.61 $1,016.44 $1,133.33
8 Inch
Premises inside the City
limits
$586.61 $654.07 $729.29 $813.16 $906.67
Section
700.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.230
100:1329
Sewer Minimum Monthly Base Rate
Based On Water Meter Size
Category 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Premises outside the City
limits
$1,173.22 $1,308.14 $1,458.58 $1,626.31 $1,813.34
The charges established after year 2021 will be an annual increase
of six percent (6%) over the previous year and shall continue in force
until different rates are adopted.
E. All new structures connected to the sewer system shall have a City
approved water meter installed on the incoming water line.
F. Effective January 1, 2012, the charge for wholesale sewer service
customers located outside of the City of O'Fallon shall be equal to the
usage fee (per 1,000 gallons) paid by customers within the City of
O'Fallon. The City Council may by contract approve a different charge.
For purposes of this Section, a "wholesale sewer service customer" is
one to whom the City provides sanitary sewer service for resale to the
ultimate consumer.
G. A surcharge for sewer service shall also be based, where applicable,
upon biological oxygen demand (B.O.D.) or total suspended solids
(T.S.S.) in excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter and shall
be as per the following schedule: thirteen cents ($0.13) per pound
B.O.D. and fifty-three cents ($0.53) per pound T.S.S. in excess of three
hundred (300) milligrams per liter. The appropriate personnel of the
City of O'Fallon shall have the right to make periodic inspections,
require testing and examine test results of any person, partnership or
corporation which possibly emits sewage exceeding these standards
and to take whatever legal steps that may be necessary to prevent
excessive amounts from damaging its sewer treatment facilities.
H. Any concentration of sewage discharge by any user in excess of one
thousand (1,000) milligrams per liter of T.S.S. and/or B.O.D. shall be in
violation of the provisions of this Chapter unless approved by prior
agreement or consent of the City of O'Fallon and as allowed by State
and/or Federal law. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation that
violates the provisions of this Chapter may be subject to a fine or charge
of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. Each day shall
constitute a separate violation.
I. Any user which discharges any pollutants which cause an increase in
the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the City's sewer
system, or any user which discharges any substance which singly or by
interaction with other substances causes identifiable increases in the
cost of operation, maintenance or replacement of the sewer system
shall pay for such increased costs. The charge for each such user shall
Section
700.230
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.230
100:1330
be as determined by the responsible plant operating personnel and
approved by the City Council.
J. Due to the limited treatment capacity of the sewer plant, no additional
sewer service connections will be made to premises outside the City
limits of O'Fallon unless approved through mutual agreement of the
parties involved.
K. A discount equivalent to fifteen percent (15%) of the total monthly
charges (not including late fees, penalties, interest, returned check
fees, payment cancellation fees, collection costs, etc.) is available to
individual residential customers (but not multi-unit, institutional,
commercial, industrial or other customers) upon proof that he/she is
either over the age of sixty-five (65), or a veteran of the United States
Armed Forces with a service-connected disability of at least twenty-five
percent (25%). Proof of age must be in the form of a driver's license,
State identification card, passport, or other government-issued ID
issued by a government within the United States. A service disability
must be verified by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs.
[Ord. No. 5930 §2, 8-22-2013]
L. All single-family residential properties having one (1) water meter
serving one (1) unit shall, for all billing purposes within both the water
and sewer systems, be considered as having a one (1) inch water meter
regardless of the actual size of the water meter installed.
M. All residential customers shall be billed for sewer usage based on their
respective average winter water use, minimum of two (2) months, as
determined by water meter reading(s) gathered between each
November first (1st) and March thirty-first (31st) period. Once this
winter water usage is determined, the sewer charge will remain
unchanged until the next winter water usage is determined. When
winter water usage is not available on the account, the sewer bill will be
based on an average residential use of six thousand two hundred
(6,200) gallons a month until the winter water use data is available.
N. Non-residential customers shall be billed for sewer service based on
actual water or sewage meter readings.
O. All rates and fees contained herein shall be valid from the date of
approval and not expire until a new rate is established.
P. The City, through its properly authorized employees, may read meters
and/or bill for services monthly, bi-monthly, quarterly or on some other
periodic basis, as deemed necessary, and statements for services shall
be rendered on a periodic basis, based on the charges set forth above.
The monthly base sewer base rate portion of the bill shall be multiplied
by the number of months included on the bill. Similarly, the monthly
allowance (four thousand (4,000) gallons) included in the monthly base
sewer base rate shall be multiplied by the number of months included
on the bill. The City may combine bills for sewer service with bills for
Section
700.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.230
100:1331
Section 700.240. Prorating Charges. [Ord. No. 5756 §1, 12-8-2011]
Customers who request initiation or discontinuance of water and/or sewer
service for a portion of the billing period may receive a prorated bill for that
portion of the billing period that service is received.
Section 700.250. Tampering With Water and Sewer Equipment
Prohibited. [Ord. No. 5756 §1, 12-8-2011]
Any person found to have turned on or off a water meter, water valve, sewer
meter, sewer valve, or fire hydrant, or otherwise intentionally tampered
with same, without authorization by the City, shall upon conviction be
subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment; and such person shall also be liable for the expense of any
necessary repair.
Section 700.260. Liability For Payment Generally— Collection. [Ord.
No. 5756 §1, 12-8-2011]
City solid waste and/or water services provided to the same location.
If such unified billing is adopted, the City Administrator shall adopt a
policy to establish the sequence of the services being billed to which
partial payments shall be applied. Failure of the City to submit a service
bill or a delinquent notice shall not excuse the customer from the
obligation to pay for service when a bill is submitted.
Q. Customers receiving a bill from the City for sewer service shall be given
the opportunity to designate a voluntary contribution of one dollar
($1.00), three dollars ($3.00) or five dollars ($5.00) that shall become
the amount due from the customer and payable as that customer's bill,
and the voluntary contribution will be donated to a not-for-profit
organization designated by the City. The terms for such contribution
shall be set forth in an agreement executed between the City and the
designated not-for-profit organization(s) and kept on file with the City
Clerk. The designated not-for-profit organization(s) may change
without notice to the customer. [Ord. No. 6096 § 3, 5-14-2015]
A. Water and/or sewer service shall be deemed to be furnished to both the
occupant and owner of all establishments receiving service, and the
occupant and owner of such establishments shall each be severally and
jointly liable to the City for payments of the charges for the premises
upon which establishments are located. The City may sue the occupant,
the owner, or both, of the establishments receiving water and/or sewer
for which such service has been made available, and receive any sums
due for such services including penalties and costs incurred by the City
and a reasonable attorney's fee and the costs of such suit.
B. The City Administrator, in coordination with the departments of water
and sewer and finance, may adopt administrative procedures to bill,
receive, account for and enforce collection of all charges by any lawful
Section
700.230
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.260
100:1332
Section 700.270. (Reserved)
means, including filing suit, and may fix a reasonable time when
payments shall be due, assess and collect reasonable fees, charges for
late payment, returned checks, rejected payments, and other collection
measures, including interest thereon at the rate allowed by law. Service
may be discontinued for non-payment of any fees or charges and
restoration of service may be withheld until all obligations owed to the
City are satisfied.
C. For delinquent customers receiving sewer service only, the City may
notify the water utility serving the premises for the purpose of
disconnecting water service as provided under State law or of
disconnecting the sewer service connection and closing access to the
City sewer system.
Section
700.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.270
100:1333

ARTICLE VII
Conservation
Section 700.280. Water Conservation Plan. [R.O. 2007 §700.280;
Ord. No. 1810 Art. VIII §1, 4-17-1990]
Section 700.290. Mandatory Curtailment or Restrictions. [R.O.
2007 §700.290; Ord. No. 1810 Art. VIII §2, 4-17-1990]
A. All connections to the City Water System shall be subject to the City's
Water Conservation Plan to provide for public health and regulate use
of the water system.
B. Voluntary Curtailment Or Restrictions. During times of drought,
disasters or other conditions that may or would create a water shortage
problem, the City or its agents, in the best interest of the citizens of
O'Fallon and the water system, shall request City water customers to
voluntarily curtail water use. Such requests may be, but are not limited
to: voluntarily curtailment or restrictions of lawn watering; car
washing; filling or refilling of swimming pools; washing of driveways,
parking areas and other paved areas; commercial and industrial users
to reduce water usage by twenty-five percent (25%) and other nonessential
uses.
A. If a disaster occurs, severe conditions exist, and/or voluntary water
curtailment or restrictions are requested and demands on the water
system continue to indicate that the threat of a water shortage will
continue or occur, the City or its agents shall immediately implement
any parts of the below conservation plan as it deems necessary:
1. Mandatory restriction of lawn watering. Even numbered addresses
water on even numbered days of the month, odd numbered
addresses water on odd numbered days.
2. Mandatory ban on all lawn watering, watering of gardens, plants
and trees is prohibited except from a hand held container.
3. Mandatory ban on washing sidewalks, driveways, parking areas,
patios and other paved areas.
4. Mandatory ban on the filling or refilling of swimming pools, and/or
washing of cars, other motor vehicles, trailers or boats.
5. Mandatory ban on water uses from fire hydrants except for fighting
fires, flushing mains to alleviate specific complaints and testing or
sampling water.
6. Commercial and industrial users shall reduce water usage by
twenty-five percent (25%).
Section
700.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.300
100:1335
Section 700.300. Notification. [R.O. 2007 §700.300; Ord. No. 1810
Art. VIII §3, 4-17-1990]
The City or its agents shall give notice to water system customers of any
voluntary requests or mandatory measures in effect by means of cable
television, local radio stations and news media. In cases of extraordinary
emergencies or disasters the City Emergency Warning System shall be
utilized.
Section 700.310. Enforcement. [R.O. 2007 §700.310; Ord. No. 1810
Art. VIII §4, 4-17-1990]
A. Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this Article shall be
subject to a fine or charge not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
per occurrence. Each day shall count as a separate occurrence.
B. Discontinuance Of Service. The City or its designated agents shall have
the authority to discontinue service in the event of violation of
mandatory water use restrictions. Upon disconnection of service, all
fines and reconnection charges must be paid before service is restored.
C. Police Officers Enforce. Every Police Officer of the City shall in
connection with his/her duties imposed by law diligently enforce the
provisions of this Article.
Section
700.300
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.310
100:1336
ARTICLE VIII
Backflow Prevention
Section 700.320. Requirements For Backflow Prevention. [R.O.
2007 §700.320; Ord. No. 1810 Art. III §2, 4-17-1990]
Section 700.330. Protection of Water System. [R.O. 2007 §700.330;
Ord. No. 1810 Art. VII §1, 4-17-1990]
All connections to the City Water System shall be subject to the City
Backflow Prevention regulations and all other regulations that may be
adopted from time to time by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency, the Missouri Department of Natural Resources, or the City of
O'Fallon, Missouri.
Section 700.340. Cross-Connections Prohibited. [R.O. 2007
§700.340; Ord. No. 1592 §2, 5-17-1988]
Section 700.350. Survey and Investigations. [R.O. 2007 §700.350;
Ord. No. 1592 §3, 5-17-1988]
A. Each water customer and/or user shall install an approved backflow
prevention device on each service line to their water system serving the
premises where, in the judgment of the City or the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources, actual or potential hazards to the
public (City) potable water system exist. The type and degree of
protection required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard.
B. Each water customer required by the City or the Missouri Department
of Natural Resources shall follow the rules, regulations and
requirements set forth in this Article.
A. No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the public
potable or customer's water system may exist unless such actual or
potential cross-connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction
of the water supplier and as required by the laws and regulations of the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources.
B. No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby an auxiliary
water supply may enter a public potable or customer's water system
unless such auxiliary water supply and the method of connection and
use of such supply shall have been approved by the water supplier and
the Missouri Department of Natural Resources.
C. No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises in which the plumbing system, facilities, and fixtures have not
been constructed and installed using acceptable plumbing practices
considered by the water supplier as necessary for the protection of
health and safety.
Section
700.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.350
100:1337
Section 700.360. Type of Protection Required. [R.O. 2007 §700.360;
Ord. No. 1592 §4, 5-17-1988]
Section 700.370. Where Protection Is Required. [R.O. 2007
§700.370; Ord. No. 1592 §5, 5-17-1988]
A. The customer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
water supplier, or his/her authorized representative, for the conduction
of surveys and investigations of water use practices within the
customer's premises to determine whether there are actual or potential
cross-connections to the customer water system through which
contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the public potable water
system.
B. On request by the water supplier or his/her authorized representative,
the customer shall furnish information on water user practices within
his/her premises.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the water customer to conduct periodic
survey of water use practices on his/her premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross-connections to his/her water system
through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his/her
or the public potable water system.
A. The type of protection required shall depend on the degree of hazard
which exists, as follows:
1. An approved air-gap separation shall be installed where the public
potable water system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a system or health hazard.
2. An approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public potable water system may be contaminated with a substance
that could cause a system or health hazard.
3. An approve air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device or an approved double-check
valve assembly shall be installed where the public potable water
system may be polluted with substances that could cause a
pollutional hazard not dangerous to health.
A. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a customer's water system serving premises where, in
the judgment of the water supplier or the Missouri Department of
Natural Resources, actual or potential hazards to the public potable
water system exist. The type and degree of protection required shall be
commensurate with the degree of hazard.
B. An approved air-gap separation or reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be installed after the metered flow of any
service connection or within any premises where, in the judgement of
Section
700.350
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.370
100:1338
the water supplier or the Missouri Department of Natural Resources,
the nature and extent of activities on the premises, or the materials
used in connection with the activities, or materials stored on the
premises, would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health
should a cross-connection occur, even though such cross-connection
may not exist at the time the backflow prevention device is required to
be installed. This includes but is not limited to the following situations:
1. Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless the quality of the
auxiliary supply is acceptable to the water supplier and the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources.
2. Premises having internal cross-connections that are not
correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impractical to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist.
3. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspection for crossconnections
cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at
sufficiently short notice to assure the cross-connections do not
exist.
4. Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
5. Premises, which due to the nature of the enterprise therein, are
subject to recurring modification or expansion.
6. Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as
to permit entry into the public water supply, or where a crossconnection
could reasonably be expected to occur. This shall
include the handling of process waters and cooling waters.
7. Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are
handled such that if backsiphonage or backpressure should occur,
a serious health hazard may result.
C. The following types of facilities fall into one (1) or more of the
categories of premises where an approved air-gap separation or
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device is required by
the water supplier and the Missouri Department of Natural Resources
to protect the public water supply and must be installed at these
facilities unless all hazardous or potentially hazardous conditions have
been eliminated or corrected by other methods to the satisfaction of the
water supplier and the Missouri Department of Natural Resources.
1. Aircraft and missile plants.
2. Automotive plants.
3. Auxiliary water systems and water loading stations.
4. Beverage bottling plants.
Section
700.370
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.370
100:1339
5. Canneries, packing houses, reduction plants, and stockyards.
6. Car washing facilities.
7. Chemical manufacturing, processing, compounding, or treatment
plants.
8. Dairies, animal and veterinary clinics.
9. Film laboratories.
10. Fire protective systems.
11. Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites.
12. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, medical buildings.
13. Industries using toxic substances.
14. Irrigation and sprinkler systems, residential or commercial, any
size.
15. Laundries and dye works.
16. Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing, and fabrication plants.
17. Nursing or convalescent homes.
18. Oil and gas production, storage or transmission properties.
19. Paper and paper products plants.
20. Plant nurseries, tree farms and fertilizer facilities.
21. Plating plants.
22. Power plants.
23. Printing and publishing facilities.
24. Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
25. Research and analytical laboratories.
26. Rubber plants, natural and synthetic.
27. Sewage and storm drainage facilities—pumping stations and
treatment plants.
28. Water front facilities and industries.
29. Any customer or user using any type of booster pressure pumps for
any purpose or reason.
D. The water supplier, at his/her discretion may require a backflow
prevention device at facilities other than those above that he/she deems
may have a hazardous or potentially hazardous condition.
Section
700.370
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.380
100:1340
Section 700.380. Backflow Prevention Devices. [R.O. 2007
§700.380; Ord. No. 1592 §6, 5-17-1988]
Section 700.390. Installation. [R.O. 2007 §700.390; Ord. No. 1592
§7, 5-17-1988]
Backflow prevention devices required by this Chapter shall be installed at
a location and in a manner approved by the water supplier and shall be
installed at the expense of the water customer.
Section 700.400. Inspection and Maintenance. [R.O. 2007 §700.400;
Ord. No. 1592 §8, 5-17-1988; Ord. No. 3089 Art. I, 12-22-1993]
A. Any backflow prevention device required by this Chapter shall be of a
type, model and construction approved by the water supplier and the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources as follows:
1. Air-gap separation to be approved shall be at least twice the
diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim
of the vessel, but in no case less than three (3) inches.
2. Double-check valve assemblies or reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention devices shall be of Watts manufacture series
No. 709 or 909 or an approved equivalent.
B. Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the water supplier at
the time of installation and properly maintained shall, except for
inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the
requirements of this Chapter so long as the water supplier is assured
that they will satisfactorily protect the water system. Whenever the
existing device is moved from its present location, or requires more
than minimum maintenance, or when the water supplier finds that the
maintenance or lack of maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the
unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the
requirements of this Chapter.
A. Periodic inspection and testing schedules shall be established by the
water supplier for all backflow prevention devices. Inspections will not
exceed the following intervals.
1. Air-gap separations shall be inspected at the time of installation
and every twelve (12) months thereafter.
2. Double-check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at the time of installation and at least every twelve (12)
months thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally,
cleaned, and repaired whenever needed and at least every thirty
(30) months.
3. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at
least every twelve (12) months thereafter. They shall be
Section
700.380
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.400
100:1341
Section 700.410. Violations. [R.O. 2007 §700.410; Ord. No. 1592 §9,
5-17-1988]
dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned, and repaired whenever
needed and at least every five (5) years.
B. All costs associated with inspections, testing, cleaning, repairs,
overhaul or replacement of backflow prevention devices shall be the
responsibility of the water customer. All inspections, testing, cleaning,
repairs and overhauls of backflow prevention devices shall be
performed by a State of Missouri Certified Backflow Prevention Service
Tester. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to provide the City
with written inspection documentation upon receipt.
C. Backflow prevention devices found to be defective shall be repaired or
replaced at the expense of the water customer without delay and in any
event no later than thirty (30) days from the discovery of the defect.
D. Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
remove, or otherwise made ineffective without specific written
authorization by the water supplier. Bypass piping around a backflow
prevention assembly is allowed only if the bypass is equipped with an
identical backflow prevention assembly.
E. The water supplier shall maintain a complete record of each backflow
prevention device. Records will include comprehensive listing of
installation, tests, inspections, cleaning, repairs, and overhauls and
generally be a complete history of each backflow prevention device
from purchase to retirement. Records of customer repairs, cleaning,
overhaul, and replacement shall be made available to the water
supplier upon request.
A. The water supplier shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to
the customer thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any
backflow prevention device required by this Chapter is not installed,
tested, and maintained in a manner acceptable to the water supplier or
if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or
bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises.
B. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the customer
has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with this Chapter to the satisfaction of the water supplier.
Section
700.400
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.410
100:1342
ARTICLE IX
Fire Hydrants
Section 700.420. Fire Hydrants, Regulations For Use. [R.O. 2007
§700.420; Ord. No. 3089 Art. IV §1, 12-21-1993]
A. Fire Hydrant Use Procedure.
1. Hydrants shall be operated only by Fire Protection Districts, the
City, personnel authorized by the City or those persons and/or
companies granted a temporary permit to operate hydrants owned
by the City in accordance with these hydrants regulations. The
operation of a hydrant by any unauthorized person and/or company
shall result in impoundment of any hoses, wrenches and/or nozzles
City personnel deemed used in the hydrant operation and/or
charges levied and/or subject to prosecution by the City of O'Fallon.
2. The authorized hydrant user shall provide all equipment necessary
for hydrant use, including hoses, control valves and an approved
Department of Natural Resources Backflow Prevention device, plus
and other equipment the City deems necessary for the safe
operation of the hydrant.
3. The City reserves the right to deny any request for hydrant use for
any reason the City believes necessary to protect the property and/
or the best interests of the City.
B. Hydrant Use Permits. [Ord. No. 6145 §5, 9-24-2015]
1. Upon approval, a hydrant user may purchase a one-day, a fifteenday
or a thirty-day permit.
2. Purchasers of one-day permit(s) may purchase multiple quantities
of one-day use permits, as approved by City staff.
3. Fifteen- and thirty-day use permits are intended for use on
construction projects or developments, as approved by City staff
and shall only be used on hydrants within the area specified on the
permit.
4. Use of a hydrant without a valid permit shall result in the
impoundment of the equipment connected to the hydrant and
subject the unauthorized user to the penalties set forth in Section
700.250.
5. Use of a hydrant without an appropriate backflow prevention
device will result in the immediate revocation of the hydrant
permit, impoundment of all equipment used in the improper
operation of the hydrant, and subject the unauthorized user to the
penalties set forth in Section 700.250.
C. Hydrant Use Fees And Charges. [Ord. No. 6145 § 5, 9-24-2015]
Section
700.420
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.420
100:1343
1. The fee schedule will be as reflected in the City's annual budget
under fees and charges.
2. If a hydrant is damaged by improper use, the user shall be
responsible for all costs related to the repair of the hydrant.
3. Unauthorized or improper use of a hydrant shall subject the
equipment used to impoundment and subject the unauthorized
user to the penalties set forth in Section 700.250.
4. The City may waive or reduce hydrant use permit fees for City
maintenance, improvements, or construction projects.
D. Procedures. [Ord. No. 6145 § 5, 9-24-2015]
1. To set up a hydrant use account, a hydrant permit form shall be
filled out and approved by personnel in the City's Utility Billing
Section.
2. Persons requesting a hydrant use permit must sign an
acknowledgement verifying that all Department of Natural
Resources regulations pertaining to backflow prevention will be
followed when hydrants are used.
3. Once the account has been established, hydrant use permits may
be obtained by calling the Utility Billing Section, during regular
working hours, stating the location of the hydrant and the date(s)
requested. The permit use fee will be billed to the account holder.
4. Requests for fifteen- or thirty-day permits must specify the purpose
and the specific area for the permit (e.g., project limits, subdivision,
etc.). Once fees have been paid, and the permit issued, any hydrant
within the specified area may be used during the permit period. At
the end of the permit period, the permits become invalid. Another
permit must be purchased for continued use of hydrants in the
specified area.
5. City personnel will randomly inspect for proper use and damages to
hydrants.
Section
700.420
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.420
100:1344
ARTICLE X
Sprinkler Systems
Section 700.430. Sprinkler System Uses. [R.O. 2007 §700.430; Ord.
No. 1810 Art. V §2, 4-17-1990]
A. This Section pertains to Fire Protection Sprinkle System, Irrigation
Sprinkler System and similar systems which are subject to regular and
ordinary water use regulations as identified in this Chapter. Both Fire
Protection and Irrigation Sprinkler Systems shall be subject to all
backflow prevention requirements set forth by the City and the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources. Those systems not
complying with said requirements shall be subject to disconnection,
with no liability incurred by any other entity or person, all liability is
assumed by the customer and/or user.
B. All water mains laid on or within private property for the sole purpose
of providing fire protection through fire hydrants or sprinkler systems,
are subject to installation of a detector check valve with bypass
compound meter, sized as approved by the City. The detector check
valve and meter if required, shall be housed in an underground vault,
with size and design to be approved by the City. All costs for furnishing
and installing the detector check valve and bypass meter, complete with
approved detector check valve will be checked periodically by the City
and the meter will be read at the same time other meters are read.
Water use registered through the meter shall be added to other usage
for billing to the customer as per Article VI of this Chapter.
C. The customer and/or water user shall promptly report to the City any
fires that occur requiring water usage through the fire protection line,
and the City will reset the detector check valve at no cost to the
customer. In the event routine checks of the detector check valve show
that the valve is open and no fire has been reported, the customer shall
be subject to a fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense
and further water service shall be provided only through totally
metered lines, with all costs of metering to be borne by the water user.
D. All Fire Protection Sprinkler Systems are subject to approval by the
Fire Protection District which have authority in the area the premises
are located. The customer or user shall follow all requirements set forth
by the Fire Protection District as they pertain to Fire Protection
regulations.
Section
700.430
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.430
100:1345

ARTICLE XI
Industrial Wastes and Pretreatment
Section 700.440. Prohibited Discharges. [R.O. 2007 §700.440; Ord.
No. 2037 §2, 7-2-1992]
A. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, noncontact
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into any
sanitary sewer, but such waters shall be discharged into such sewers as
are specifically designated for stormwater or into a natural outlet. The
discharge into any storm sewer or into a natural outlet of any waters
which may have a deleterious effect upon the receiving stream is also
prohibited.
B. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes into any public sewer:
1. Any water or wastes that exceed the limits set forth in the City's
current Local Limits Schedule.
2. Any waters or wastes, in quantities or concentrations, which have
the potential for, or cause, Pass Through or Interference.
3. The discharge of pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard
in the POTW, including but not limited to wastestreams with a
closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees
(140°F) Fahrenheit or sixty degrees (60°C) Celsius using the test
methods specified in 40CFR 261.21, Ref. 40CFR 403.5(b)(1).
4. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases, in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to cause harm, damage, or which interfere with or
cause other detriment to any sewage treatment process, or which
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the sewage treatment plant, or
Pass Through to receiving waters.
5. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage system.
6. Any solid or viscous material which could cause any obstruction to
the treatment process or cause interference or pass through.
Examples of such materials include, but are not limited to ashes,
wax, paraffin, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, wood and
sawdust, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurries,
brewery and distillery wastes, grain processing wastes, grinding
compounds, acetylene generation sludge, chemical residues, acid
residues, and food processing bulk solids.
Section
700.440
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.440
100:1347
Section 700.450. Conditional Discharges. [R.O. 2007 §700.450; Ord.
No. 2037 §3, 7-2-1992]
7. Any liquids or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
four degrees (104°F) Fahrenheit or forty degrees (40°C) Celsius.
8. Any petroleum oils, non-biodegradable cutting oils or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause Pass Through or
Interference.
A. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in
the opinion of the City that such wastes can cause Interference or Pass
Through or can harm either the sewer, sewage treatment process, or
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance;
in forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these waters, the City
will give consideration to such factors as materials used in the
construction of sewers, the nature of the sewage treatment process, the
capacity of the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors:
1. Any waters or wastes containing fats, waxes, greases or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100)
milligrams per liter, or containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32°F) and one
hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0° and 65° Celsius).
2. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
3. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not, which
are capable of causing damage or corrosion in the sewers or the
sewage treatment plant, or which otherwise interferes with the
sewage treatment process.
4. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of ten (10).
5. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but not
limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues, or of
dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride,
calcium chloride and sodium sulfate.
b. Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to dyes,
wastes, and vegetable tanning solutions.
6. Septic tank sludge, except that such sludge may be discharge into
selected treatment plants at locations designated for this purpose
by the City.
7. Any water or wastes containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, which either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
would harm, damage, interfere or cause detriment to any
Section
700.440
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.450
100:1348
Section 700.460. Acceptance of Conditional Discharges. [R.O. 2007
§700.460; Ord. No. 2037 §4, 7-2-1992]
wastewater treatment process, or constitute a hazard to humans,
fish or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of
the system, or exceed the limitation set forth in the Categorical
Pretreatment Standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be
limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to 40CFR 403,
Appendix B, which is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
8. Any pollutants, including biological oxygen demanding pollutants
(BOD, chlorides, sulfides, etc.) released at a flow rate and or
pollutant concentration which will cause Pass Through or
Interference to the system. In no case shall a slug load have a flow
rate or contain concentrations or quantities of pollutants that
exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more
than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration,
quantities, or flow during normal operation.
9. Any water or wastes containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
of such half-life or concentration that would exceed limits
established by applicable State or Federal regulations.
10. Any wastes which cause a hazard to human life or creates a public
nuisance.
B. If it is the opinion of the City that certain wastes identified in
Subsection (A) above would not cause Interference or Pass Through or
would not harm either the sewer sewage treatment process, or
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance,
the City may grant a variance defined as an Industrial Waste Discharge
Permit or by otherwise approving by the City's express written consent.
C. A surcharge for sewer service shall also be based, where applicable,
upon B.O.D. or T.S.S. in excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per
liter; and shall be as per the following schedule: thirteen cents ($.13)
per pound B.O.D. and five point three cents ($.053) per pound T.S.S. in
excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter. The appropriate
personnel of the City of O'Fallon shall have the right to make periodic
inspections, require testing and examine test results of any person,
partnership or corporation which possibly emits sewage exceeding
these standards, and to take whatever legal steps that are necessary to
prevent excessive amounts from damaging its sewer treatment
facilities.
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged into the system, which contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in Section 700.450 and which, in the
judgement of the City may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise
creates a hazard to life or constitutes a public nuisance, the City may:
Section
700.450
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.460
100:1349
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment of the waters or wastes to meet
requirements set forth in the Local Limits Schedule and in the
City's judgment meets an acceptable condition for discharge into
the POTW; and/or
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
If the City permits the pretreated or equalized or controlled
waste flows to discharge into the public sewer, the design
and installation of the plants and/or equipment used shall be
subject to the review and approval of the City and subject to
the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
B. The City shall have the right to order the user to cease discharge or to
deny or condition discharges of waters or wastes. The City may deny or
condition new or increased contributions of pollutants to the POTW by
Users, Industrial Users and Significant Industrial Users in accordance
with 40CFR 403.8(f)(i).
C. The City has the right to evaluate each Industrial User or Significant
Industrial User to determine whether such users need a plan, in the
City's opinion, to prevent and/or control slug loadings. If the City
decides that such a plan is warranted, the plan will be consistent with
all requirements set forth in 40CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v) including description
of discharge practices, non-routine batch discharges, description of
stored chemicals, procedures for notifying the City of slug discharges
with written follow-up reports, any necessary procedures to prevent
accidental spills, including maintenance of storage areas, handling,
transfer, loading, unloading and control of materials.
D. Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards for any particular industrial subcategory, the Federal
Standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this Chapter
for sources in that subcategory, shall supersede the limitations imposed
under this Chapter.
E. The City shall have the right to enact more stringent regulations as
required by State and/or Federal laws and regulations and as required
to ensure safe and proper operation of the System and in accordance
with the provisions contained in the City's POTW NPDES Permit. These
requirements shall be enforceable on all users of the POTW System.
F. All existing and future users of the POTW System shall comply with
State, Federal, and local laws including but not limited to the Federal
Clean Water Act, pretreatment regulations, pretreatment standards
pretreatment requirements, Local Limits and Standard Conditions.
(See Exhibit C of this Chapter, which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk).
Section
700.460
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.470
100:1350
Section 700.470. Specific Pollution Limitations (Local Limits) and
Dilution Prohibition. [R.O. 2007 §700.470; Ord. No. 2037 §5,
7-2-1992; Ord. No. 3831 §2, 3-18-1999; Ord. No. 3851 §§1—2,
3-18-1999]
Section 700.480. Reporting Requirements and Permits. [R.O. 2007
§700.480; Ord. No. 2037 §6, 7-2-1992]
A. The following pollutant limits are established to prevent Pass Through
and Interference. No User, Industrial User or Significant Industrial
User shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following
instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits for the time periods
indicated in the tables below:
LOCAL POLLUTANT LIMITS
Effective 4-1-99 until further notice
Arsenic .17 mg/L
Cadmium .13 mg/L
Chromium 3.94 mg/L
Copper 3.35 mg/L
Cyanide .43 mg/L
Lead .67 mg/L
Mercury .08 mg/L
Nickel 1.03 mg/L
Silver .90 mg/L
Zinc 4.22 mg/L
BTEX 2.6 mg/L
B. Additionally, dilution is prohibited as a substitute for treatment, except
where expressly authorized by an applicable Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement, no Industrial User shall ever increase the use of process
water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment in order to achieve
compliance with a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement.
A. Industrial Users, at a minimum, shall comply with the applicable
reporting requirements set forth in 40CFR 403.12. The City, if it deems
necessary, may require more stringent monitoring and reporting from
Industrial Users than the regulations set forth in 40CFR 403.12.
1. Any Significant Industrial User shall be required to obtain an
Industrial Waste Discharge Permit from the City prior to
discharging into the POTW. Such permits shall be valid for a period
not to exceed three (3) years from the date of issuance. The City
shall have the right, however, to modify, revoke or void the permit
to the user should State or Federal regulations or Categorical
Section
700.470
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.480
100:1351
Pretreatment Standards require such modification or should
monitoring reports or other data show the characteristics of the
user discharge differ from those for which the permit was issued.
2. All new Significant Industrial Users shall, file an application for an
Industrial Waste Discharge Permit application on a form as set out
in Exhibit A of this Chapter, (which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk) a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to tentative discharge
into the POTW.
3. New customers, or users expanding existing facilities that are or
have the potential to be Significant Industrial Users shall submit an
Industrial Waste Discharge Permit Application a minimum of ninety
(90) days prior to discharging into the POTW System.
4. Any user required to install pretreatment facilities by the
promulgation of Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards in
accordance with 40CFR 403.8(f)(iv)(A) shall promptly submit a
schedule detailing the design and installation of the required
facilities to the City for its approval in addition to completion of a
new Industrial Waste Discharge Permit Application, as set out in
Exhibit A of this Chapter, (which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk). The City shall approve or disapprove the users submittal
within sixty (60) days of receipt and the user shall then begin
submitting reports as directed by the City.
5. Upon receipt of an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit Application,
see Exhibit A of this Chapter (on file in the office of the City Clerk)
the City shall review the application within sixty (60) days and
respond to the prospective user in one or a combination of the
following ways:
a. Issue an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit. Any and all such
permits shall at a minimum include all applicable Categorical
Pretreatment Standards for new and existing sources set out in
40CFR 403.8(f)(i)(ii) including any and all new or revised
regulations by Federal or State law and limitations set forth in
the City's Local Limits schedule.
b. Require the prospective user to provide laboratory test data, at
the prospective user's expense, substantiating the data or
further defining the data on the application.
c. Require that the waste stream be pretreated or equalization
facilities be installed. In this instance, a permit will be issued
upon the City's approval of the plans for the additional facilities
or the schedule for completion of the facilities.
d. Reject the application due to characteristics of the waters or
wastewater not being in compliance with the limitations of this
Chapter.
Section
700.480
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.480
100:1352
6. The Industrial Waste Discharge Permits may include any
combination or all of the following requirements to be followed by
the prospective user at the user's sole expense:
a. Limit the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
b. Limit average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
c. Specify monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards
for tests and reporting schedule;
d. Compliance schedules for installation of additional facilities.
The City may grant extensions for delays caused by
circumstances or conditions beyond the user's control.
e. Limit the term of the Industrial Waste Discharge Permit
through identification of Permit Effective and Permit
Expiration Dates. Such terms in any event shall not exceed
three (3) years.
f. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure
compliance with this Chapter.
7. When required by the City, the Owner or user of any property
discharging water or wastes through a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together
with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the City. The manhole shall be
installed by the Owner or user at their sole expense and shall be
maintained by them so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
8. When directed to do so by the City, the Owner or user of any
property discharging industrial wastes shall, at his/her expense,
obtain a representative sample of his/her wastewater (and permit
City representatives to obtain samples) and have the appropriate
physical, chemical and biological tests performed on this sample by
a qualified testing laboratory acceptable to the City. The purpose of
such tests shall be to determine the conformance of the wastewater
characteristics to ordinances of the City as well as State and
Federal regulations. A report shall be made in writing, as directed,
to the City stating the results of the tests.
9. Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the Owner
or user at his/her expense.
Section
700.480
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.480
100:1353
Section 700.490. Notification. [R.O. 2007 §700.490; Ord. No. 2037
§7, 7-2-1992]
10. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall
be determined in accordance with 40CFR Part 136, and shall be
determined at the control manhole or other such location as
determined by the City. In the event that no control manhole or
location has been provided, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outflow
from a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample should be
taken. Normally, but not always, BOD, COD, and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from twenty-four (24) hour composites of all
outfalls, whereas the pH's are determined from grab samples taken
periodically.)
11. No Industrial Waste Discharge Permit issued under the provisions
of this Chapter shall be transferred to another owner or user nor
shall modifications to the process equipment or operation be
significantly altered without the prior written approval of the City.
12. The City shall charge each Industrial Waste Discharge Permit User
permit fees to recover the costs of operating the pretreatment
program. Permit fees shall be as listed below and are for each year
of the permit's term. All fees for total permit term are due and
payable prior to permit issuance and effective date. Permits do not
become effective until all fees are paid and permits are fully
executed by all parties.
Before
Jan. 1, 1998
After
Jan. 1, 1998
Annual fee for Average
Daily Flows under 100,000
gallons per day.
$250.00 $400.00
Annual fee for Average
Daily Flows between
100,000 and 500,000
gallons per day
$750.00 $1,200.00
Annual fee for Average
Daily Flows over 500,000
gallons per day
$1,000.00 $1,600.00
A. Should any user, for any reason, discharge an excessive volume of
pollutants as defined in this Chapter or discharge prohibited materials,
the User shall immediately notify the City of the violation. This shall be
Section
700.480
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.490
100:1354
Section 700.500. Accessibility. [R.O. 2007 §700.500; Ord. No. 2037
§8, 7-2-1992]
Section 700.510. Confidential Information. [R.O. 2007 §700.510;
Ord. No. 2037 §9, 7-2-1992]
Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, Wastewater Discharge Permits,
and monitoring programs, and from City inspection and sampling activities,
shall be available to the public without restriction—unless the industrial
user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the City that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable State law. When requested and demonstrated by the
industrial user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public,
but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program,
and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as
defined by 40CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information
and will be available to the public without restriction.
Section 700.520. Cease and Desist Orders. [R.O. 2007 §700.520;
Ord. No. 2037 §10, 7-2-1992]
followed within five (5) working days with a detailed written report
describing the extent and circumstances of the violation, and the
proposed measures to prevent reoccurrence as well as, resampling and
testing of those parameters found to be in non-compliance.
B. The User shall be responsible for any expense, loss, damage, or other
liability to the system or others created by the users' water or waste
discharge or violation of this Chapter.
A. The City, or other duly authorized representative of the City and/or
State or Federal Officials bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter. This authority shall include the authority
to inspect and copy the industries or users discharge records. The City
shall have authority to inquire into any processes including
metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterways, or facilities for waste treatment.
B. While performing the necessary work on a private property referred to
in this Chapter, all such duly authorized person(s) shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises.
Section
700.490
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.520
100:1355
Section 700.530. Penalties For Violation. [R.O. 2007 §700.530; Ord.
No. 2037 §11, 7-2-1992]
A. When the City finds that a user is violating any provision of this
Chapter, the user's Wastewater Discharge Permit, any other issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that
the user's past violations are likely to recur, the City may issue an order
to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the user to:
Immediately comply with all requirements or the City may take such
appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be deemed necessary
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
B. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be prerequisite to taking
any other action against the user.
A. Any user, person, firm, corporation, governmental entity, partnership,
etc., found to be in violation of any provision of any Section of this
Article shall be subject to a maximum administrative charge (fine) of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation for each day that
said user, person, firm, corporation, governmental entity, partnership,
etc., is in violation of this Chapter. Any user found to be in violation shall
also be subject to pay for any and all increased or additional costs to
transport, collect and/or treat wastewater that violates this Chapter
and shall also be subject to stop work orders, denial, revocation or
voidance of permits, forfeiture of bond and/or any other injunctive,
punitive or other relief in a court of law or equity, whichever is deemed
appropriate. Each violation and each day of violation shall be deemed a
separate violation and enforcement shall generally be in accordance
with the Enforcement Response Guide, set out in Section 700.540 of
this Article. The charges (fines) noted in the Enforcement Response
Guide are merely guidance and Users should note that the maximum
charge (fine) available may be used as an appropriate first response.
B. The City reserves the right to disconnect potable water service to any
user who violates or continues to violate provisions of this Chapter
including provisions of Industrial Waste Discharge Permits or
administrative orders. Said water service will only be reconnected at
the users expenses and only after user has satisfactorily demonstrated
to the City its ability to comply with provisions of this Chapter, permits
or administrative orders.
C. The City shall publish annually, in a daily newspaper circulated in the
municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the industrial users
which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements
as defined in this Chapter.
Section
700.520
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.540
100:1356
Section 700.540. Rules and Regulations For Wastewater System —
Use — Enforcement Response Guide. [R.O. 2007 §700.540; Ord. No.
2037, 7-3-1992]
A. The purpose of this guide is to select and use consistent enforcement
procedures to correct identified violations of wastewater system use in
a timely fashion.
B. The City will evaluate each violation and determine whether said
violation is significant or non-significant. In this evaluation process, the
City will adopt a more stringent approach if a user continues minor,
non-significant violations resulting in non-compliance despite previous
enforcement measures. If a user commits several violations
(reoccurring or of different types) the City will evaluate and address
each violation. The City will select enforcement responses as they deem
appropriate to the violations(s). The City may use enforcement
responsive ranging from telephone conversations to termination of
service to civil and criminal prosecutions. The City will consider the
following criteria when determining an enforcement response:
1. Magnitude of the violation(s).
2. Duration of the violation(s).
3. Effect of violation(s) on the POTW.
4. Effect of violation(s) on the receiving water(s).
5. Good faith efforts of the user.
6. Compliance history of the user.
C. Enforcement response (or combination of responses) will be dependent
on the evaluation of the above criteria and may consist of formalized
responses such as:
1. Notice of violation (NOV).
2. Administrative charges or fines.
3. Administrative orders.
4. Termination of service.
5. Civil/criminal prosecution.
D. Violations which are more significant in nature will result in more
stringent enforcement responses. The table attached at the end of this
chapter lists various violations with guidelines for enforcement. If a
particular violation occurs and is identified and not listed herein, the
City reserves the right to evaluate and enforce correction of the
violation as they deem in the City's best interest. The enforcement
responses listed are generally based on the first (1st) violation of the
user.135
Section
700.540
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.540
100:1357
135. Editor's Note — Violations table referenced above is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
Section
700.540
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.540
100:1358
ARTICLE XII
Private Sources and Systems
Section 700.550. Private Sources of Water, Private Water Systems,
Private Sewer Systems. [R.O. 2007 §700.550; Ord. No. 1810 Art. II
§5, 4-17-1990]
A. Private Sources Of Water.
1. All the owners or occupants of parcels of land, buildings or
premises situated within the City who discharge domestic sewage,
commercial and industrial wastes into the sanitary sewerage
system of the City, or who derive their water in whole or in part
from sources independent of the City, shall register with the City,
the location of the lot, parcel of land, building or premises and all
wells or other private sources of water supply which furnish the
water consumed thereon, and furnish such further information as
may reasonably be requested, including the location, size, depth of
wells, the strata penetrated and stratum from which water is
drawn.
2. Within thirty (30) days after notice to do so, and as often as is
reasonably requested by the City, the owners or occupants of any
lots, parcels of land, building or premises mentioned in this
Section, at their own cost, shall have their water tested by the
Missouri State Health Department or the Missouri Department of
Natural Resource, or its agents, or some equally qualified
organization and file such report with the City as to the purity of its
water.
3. No cross-connection between a private water supply system and
public water systems is to be permitted unless protected against
backflow by an approved reduced pressure backflow prevention
device and approved in writing by the City Engineer.
B. Private Water Systems.
1. A "private water supply system", as used in this Chapter, is defined
as a system supplying and serving one (1) or more parcel of
property, apartment complex, commercial or industrial complex or
single-family residence, which is a system not owned by any taxing
authority.
2. The construction of any private water supply system within the
corporate limits of the City, is hereby prohibited, unless the
following requirements have first been met:
a. The City Council has given its approval for the construction of
such private water supply system. Such approval shall not be
given if it is determined that the City Water System has the
ability to serve the area; such extension is economically
Section
700.550
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.550
100:1359
feasible and can be accomplished to meet the immediate needs
of those proposed to be served by the private water system.
b. The operators of the private water supply system have
obtained an operating permit from the Public Service
Commission of the State of Missouri for such system.
c. Such system shall be constructed and operated according to
the rules, regulations and requirements of the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources and the Missouri Division of
Health and all other State agencies which have the authority to
set such regulations.
3. A direct connection shall be made to the public water line not later
than sixty (60) days after such public water line is made available to
the property. A public water system line shall be considered
available to the property if it is within two hundred (200) feet of any
part of the property to be connected to the water line.
4. Once the water user's line has been connected to the public water
line, the private water supply system shall be abandoned. Such
abandonment shall be accomplished immediately after the property
is connected to the public water supply; nor shall any public water
be provided until the City has inspected such property to insure
that there will be no cross-connections of the water from such
private water source with that of the public water system.
5. Private water systems shall require a meter of a size and type
approved by the City be installed at each customer connection and
the usage records of all customers be made available to the City at
a reasonable cost.
C. Private Sewer Collection Systems.
1. A "private sewer collection system" as used in this ordinance, is
defined as a system serving, collecting and/or treating sewer waste
flow from one (1) parcel or more of property, apartment complex,
commercial or industrial complex or single-family residence.
2. The construction of any private sewer collection system within the
corporate limits of the City, is hereby prohibited, unless the
following requirements have first (1st) been made:
a. The City Council has given its approval for the construction of
such private sewer collection system. Such approval shall not
be given if it is determined that; the City Sewer Collection
System has the ability to serve the area; such extension is
economically feasible, and can be accomplished to meet the
immediate needs of those proposed to be served by the private
sewer collection system.
Section
700.550
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.550
100:1360
b. The operator of the private sewer collection system has
obtained an operating permit from the Missouri Public Service
Commission.
c. Such system shall be constructed and operated according to
the rules, regulations and requirements, of the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources and all other State agencies
which have authority to set such regulations.
3. A direct connection shall be made to the public sewer line not later
than sixty (60) days after such public sewer line is made available
to the property. A public sewer line shall be considered available to
the property if it is within two hundred (200) feet of any part of the
property to be connected to the sewer line.
4. The private sewer treatment facilities shall be abandoned after the
user's line has been connected to the public sewer line. Such
abandonment shall be accomplished not more than sixty (60) days
after the property is connected to the public sewer collection
system.
Section
700.550
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.550
100:1361

ARTICLE XIII
Extensions
Section 700.560. New or Extended Water and Sewer Mains. [R.O.
2007 §700.560; Ord. No. 1810 Art. II §1, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 3049
§1, 8-5-1993; Ord. No. 3249 §1, 6-20-1995]
A. Applications for new or extended water and sewer mains by any person,
firm, corporation, partnership, etc., shall be made in writing to the City
and such applications shall be accompanied by three (3) copies of the
plan and three (3) copies of the estimated construction costs as
prepared by the applicant's engineer for the tract of land to which or in
which such new or extended water or sewer main is requested, showing
streets, alleys, easements, property lines and the proposed locations of
water lines, and all proposed connections thereto. All applications for
water taps or connections to water mains and extensions and/or sewer
taps or connections, shall be in writing and accompanied by a drawing
showing location of main or extension and the location of the proposed
connection to the main or extension. The City shall charge the applicant
a fee for water and sewer connections or tap-ons as provided herein.
B. Prior to the construction of any main or extension, the applicant shall
be required to enter into an escrow agreement with the City, controlled
by an escrow agent, totaling the estimated cost of construction of such
main or extension and connection thereto. Following completion of
construction and inspection as provided herein, and upon approval by
the City, the City shall authorize release of the applicants escrow. If the
applicant fails to complete the construction within two (2) years, the
City reserves the right to retain or expend all or any portion of the
escrow to complete construction and/or bring said construction up to
acceptable standards. If applicant believes he/she can justify the need
to extend the project for an additional year, a written request shall be
made to the City sixty (60) days before the end of the original two (2)
year period. The City may extend said construction period an additional
year if, in the City's opinion, such extension is justified.
C. All water and sewer mains and extensions thereof constructed or
installed under the provisions of this Chapter shall be inspected by the
City and are subject to repairs and corrections as outlined in this
Chapter herein and as deemed necessary by the City.
All water and sewer mains and extensions thereof constructed or
installed under the provisions of this Chapter shall be and remain the
property of the City in consideration of their perpetual upkeep and
maintenance with no compensation being paid to the applicant. The
City reserves the right to further extend and connect to any water or
sewer main or extension.
D. The pipe used in making water and sewer extensions shall be of a type
and size which will be compatible with the City's plans for total
development of the area. Such determination as to size and type of pipe
Section
700.560
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.560
100:1363
shall be solely up to the judgement of the City, as determined by the
City Engineer. The City as determined by the City Engineer reserves
the right to determine the size and type of pipe based upon the City's
long range water and sewer use plan. If the City desires to make the
extensions larger than required to provide service to the lots abutting
said extension, the additional cost due to such larger size shall be
borne by the City. All added costs will be determined in advance of
construction and be based upon an agreement entered into by the City
and the applicant prior to construction commencing.
E. Credit For Off-Site Extensions Or Improvements.
1. The City may, at its sole discretion enter into agreement with the
applicant to waive connection fees for line extensions up to an
amount equal to the actual construction cost of the off-site line
extensions(s) or improvement(s). "Off-site line extensions or
improvements" are defined as extensions or improvements needed
and constructed to bring service to a development and does not
include any improvements to distribution mains or collector sewers
within a development.
2. In cases where the construction cost of off-site extension(s) or
improvement(s) exceed the connection fees for that particular
development, no additional connection fee credit will be given.
Construction costs will include the necessary size line as
determined by the City and the responsibility of acquiring
easements will be the responsibility of the applicant. Construction
costs will not include costs of obtaining and dedicating necessary
easements to the City.
3. Providing that the City and applicant enter into an agreement
providing for waiver of connection fees, the applicant will provide
the City with copies of all invoices related to the off-site extensions
or improvements, understanding that the material and construction
costs are subject to verification by the City.
F. Upon completion of construction of the water and/or sewer extensions
and approval of construction by the City, applicant shall dedicate the
extensions(s) and all necessary easements for proper maintenance and
repair of the extension(s) to the City at no cost to the City. At such time
the applicant shall submit the following to the City.
1. One (1) reproducible mylar and three (3) copies of as-built plans
including certification of construction by the design engineer.
2. Easement deed or record plat showing appropriate easements
dedicated for City use.
3. Copy of appropriate lien waiver.
G. The City shall have the right to inspect and require any appropriate test
of any extension prior to connection to a City main line. The actual
Section
700.560
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.560
100:1364
Section 700.570. Connections To Improved Streets Along
Unimproved Property. [R.O. 2007 §700.570; Ord. No. 1810 Art. II §2,
4-17-1990]
Section 700.580. Specifications For Installation of Water Mains,
Services, Hydrants and Testing. [R.O. 2007 §700.580; Ord. No. 1810
Art. II §3, 4-17-1990]
connection shall be inspected and approved by the City. The City shall
not be liable to provide service until such time as all fees have been
paid and the extension(s) have been approved and accepted by the City.
H. Applicants constructing water and/or sewer main extensions, booster
pump station, water well, lift station or other such structure shall
provide escrow funds in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the
structure(s) cost for a one (1) year period after completion of
construction. This one (1) year period shall be considered a warranty
period to assure construction was in accordance with plans,
specifications and maintenance of the structure, with the applicant
making any necessary repairs or corrections.
A. In every street in the City of O'Fallon that shall be permanently
improved, as part of a private development, the City has the right and
duty to require the property owner to install water and the property
owner to install water and sewer taps and connections up to lots whose
property abuts the street.
B. Whenever any street is permanently improved, as part of private
development, and there is unimproved property abutting the street, the
City Engineer is hereby empowered and ordered to require the
property owner or developer to install a water and sewer tap and
connection up to the property line of the lot; and the cost shall be
computed the same as set out in Subsection (D) hereof.
C. The phrase "permanently improved" as used in this Article shall refer to
streets composed of a minimum of eight (8) inch asphalt or its
equivalent, as well as streets composed of concrete as set out in
Chapter 405.
D. The cost of the improvements under this Section shall be assessed as
follows: The cost of any and all work or improvements shall be levied as
a special assessment against the lot, parcel or tract of ground to which
the improvements were made. A special tax bill shall be issued to the
owner of each lot or tract against whom an assessment has been made,
and shall state therein the name of the owner of record of the lot or
tract assessed, a description of the lot or tract, the specific items of
improvement and the total cost thereof; and the special tax bill shall be
issued in favor of the City and shall be collected in the same manner as
other tax bills. The tax bills shall be due thirty (30) days after the date of
issuance and shall bear interest after the thirty (30) days at a rate not to
exceed eight percent (8%) per annum.
Section
700.560
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.580
100:1365
A. The installation of all water mains and services connecting with the City
Water System shall be inspected and approved by the City. The
developer's engineer must furnish the City with copies of as-built plans
and a letter of verification that all water mains and services are
properly installed according to the approved plan and meet with the
following specifications:
B. In general, water mains shall be ductile iron or Poly Vinyl Chloride
(PVC) pipe. When PVC is used, tracer wire shall be laid within three (3)
inches above the PVC pipe to enable the City to locate pipe. A three (3)
foot long pig-tail of tracer wire shall be left coiled in each valve box.
Ductile iron pipe shall conform to American Standards Association
(A.S.A.) Standard A 21.51 and have Class 51 wall thickness. Poly Vinyl
Chloride (PVC) pipe shall conform to American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM) Specification D2241. The material used to produce
the pipe shall conform to American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM) D1784, Type 1, Grade 1, two thousand (2,000) pounds per
square inch (p.s.i.) design stress. The standard dimensional ratio shall
be SDR 21, and the pipe shall be rated for two hundred (200) pounds
per square inch (p.s.i.) working pressure. Ductile iron pipe shall be
cement lined and seal coated on the interior in accordance with
American Standards Association (A.S.A.) Standard A 21.4. The exterior
ductile iron pipe shall be coated in accordance with American
Standards Association (A.S.A.) Standard A 21.51. All water main fittings
shall be ductile iron conforming to the requirements of American
Standards Association (A.S.A.) Standard A 21.10 with a pressure rating
of three hundred fifty (350) pounds per square inch (p.s.i.). The fitting
shall be cement lined and seal coated in accordance with American
Standards Association (A.S.A.) Standard A 21.4 and the exterior shall be
coated in accordance with American Standards Association (A.S.A.)
Standard A 21.10. Jointing for pipe shall be push-on type or mechanical
joints. All fittings shall have mechanical joints. The joints shall conform
to American Standards Association (A.S.A.) Standard A 21.11 and all
gaskets shall be synthetic rubber. All jointing types and methods shall
be approved by the City Engineer or Public Works Director, or his/her
designate, prior to installation. Reference Standard Water Details,
Edition I, 1990, which is on file in the City Clerk's office.
C. No person, firm, corporation, partnership, etc., shall install any water
service pipe connecting with the water mains of the City at any point,
unless such water service pipe is seamless, annealed, soft temper,
flexible copper tubing, type "K" or polyethylene pipe PE 3408 (CTS-OD)
rated at 200 p.s.i. at 73.4°F, of one (1) continuous length, without
intermediate couplings, from tap-in water main to shut-off box in the
water main and at right angles to the City water main at the place of the
tap. Where remote meters are involved, the service pipe from the shutoff
box to the water meter shall be type "K" copper or approved material
as set out in Section 700.570, and shall comply with the BOCA
Plumbing Code. In the event of damage to the water service pipe due to
cutting, stretching or weakening in any manner, the water service pipe
Section
700.580
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.580
100:1366
shall be replaced. All water lines and service lines shall have a minimum
of three and one-half (3½) feet of coverage. All service pipe shall be not
less than three-fourths (¾) inch in diameter.
D. The bottom of trench is to be cut true and even so that the barrel of the
pipe will have a proper bearing for its full length. The water pipe shall
not rest on any unyielding structure nor shall it act as a support for any
structure. The trench is to be of sufficient width to allow backfill to be
properly installed around the lower half of the pipe. Backfill for PVC or
ductile iron pipe from the trench bottom up shall be earth backfill
material free of deleterious material and water jetted when in public
rights-of-way. Where rock excavation is encountered, pipe shall be laid
on a six (6) inch bed of granular bedding (three-fourths (¾) inch sieve).
PVC pipe shall be installed with proper bedding providing uniform
longitudinal support under the pipe. Backfill material is to be worked
under the sides of the pipe to provide satisfactory haunching. Initial
backfill material shall be placed to a sufficient height over the top of the
pipe for impact protection during final backfill. All pipe embedment
material is to be selected and placed carefully, avoiding stones, frozen
lumps, and debris. Proper compaction of the haunching materials, that
section of the embedment extending from the bottom of the pipe to the
springline, shall be performed to provide soil densities as specified by
the design engineer. At road and driveway crossing, trench backfill is to
consist of crushed stone or gravel compacted by water jetting or by
mechanical tamping in ten (10) inch layers. All other trench backfill
shall be placed in the trench and then compacted by mechanical means
to a density adequate to prevent ditch settlement.
E. Concrete walls, footings, piers, abutments or any other immovable
object shall not be poured directly around the pipe; instead, sleeves or
special wall castings shall be used.
F. Thrust supports shall be constructed behind all bends, tees, caps, plugs
and fire hydrants. They shall bear against undisturbed earth and where
this is impossible, the thrust support shall be made correspondingly
larger to allow for the smaller bearing capacity of filled ground. Backfill
shall be with such material and is such a manner as will cause the least
amount of settlement as determined by the location and conditions at
the time work is being performed, and shall meet the approval of the
City standard details as provided herein. (Edition I, 1990)
G. Lubrication on pipe fittings and joints shall be water soluble, non-toxic,
non-objectionable in taste and odor imparted to the water, nonsupporting
of bacteria growth, and have no deteriorating effect on
rubber gaskets.
H. Before water mains shall be accepted and put into service, they shall be
properly sterilized, flushed, and pressure tested according to standard
practices by the landowner, developer or his/her agents, and to the
satisfaction of the City. Disinfection of mains shall conform with
American Water Works Association [AWWA] Standard C651-86. Two (2)
Section
700.580
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.580
100:1367
Section 700.590. Specifications For Installation of Sewer Mains,
Service and Testing. [R.O. 2007 §700.590; Ord. No. 1810 Art. II §4,
4-18-1990]
bacteriological tests shall be made by the landowner, developer, or his/
her agent, and must meet State of Missouri standards, and shall be
evidenced by test results furnished to the City.
I. Valves shall be American Water Works Association (A.W.W.A.) standard
left-hand thread, two hundred (200) pounds working pressure, bronze
mounted parallel type, double disc, or compression resilient seat, "O"
ring stem seals, non-rising stem with two (2) inch square nut. Valve
boxes shall be cast iron adjustable screw type—five and one-quarter
(5¼) inch shaft with base, water cover and skirt.
J. Fire hydrants shall be American Water Works Association (A.W.W.A.)
Standard Compression Drytop, two piece stand pipe, five and onequarter
(5¼) inch valve opening, with six (6) inch inlet connection; two
(2), two and one-half (2½) inch nozzles and one (1) four and one-half
(4½) inch steamer nozzle; mechanical joint inlet with cast iron retainer
glands with set screws. Center flange of hydrant is to be set three (3)
inches above finished ground line. Cast iron fittings shall be cement
mortar, lined with bituminous seal coat inside and out. Fittings twelve
(12) inches and smaller shall have a pressure rating of two hundred fifty
(250) pounds per square inch (p.s.i.). All fire hydrants shall conform to
A.W.W.A. Standard C502 and shall be Mueller Centurion A-423
breakaway or American-Darling B-62-B breakaway hydrants, or equal
and City Engineer approved with National Standard Threads. Each fire
hydrant shall be equipped with an auxiliary shut-off valve according to
valve Subsection (I) above.
A. The installation of all sewers and services connecting with City Sewer
System shall be inspected and approved by the City. It is the
responsibility of the general contractor and the owner to establish the
proper grade for the basement underground plumbing to the sanitary
sewer. Sewer lines and services shall have a minimum ground cover of
forty-two (42) inches. The developer's engineer shall provide the City a
set of as-built plans and a letter of verification that all sewers and
services are properly installed according to the approved plat and meet
with the following material specifications.
B. Materials.
1. Poly vinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe.
a. Conform to American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)
D 3034. The minimum wall thickness for Poly Vinyl Chloride
(PVC) pipe shall conform to Standard Dimension Ratio SDR-35.
Pipe bedding shall conform to ASTM D 2321 for Class I
materials. However, when PVC sewer pipe is used for a sewer
lift station force main installation, tracer wire shall be laid
Section
700.580
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.590
100:1368
within three (3) inches above the PVC pipe to enable the City
to locate pipe.
b. Joints. Flexible gasketed joints shall be compression type with
a gasket confined in either the spigot end or the bell end of the
pipe. Rubber gasket rings shall conform to the requirements of
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) D 1869.
Gaskets shall be neoprene or other synthetic material. Natural
rubber gaskets will not be acceptable.
c. Fittings. Fittings defined as the connections suitable for
assembly to four (4) inch or six (6) inch house or building
sewers shall be saddle-type fittings with stainless steel bands
or Poly Vinyl Chloride (PVC) plastic.
2. Ductile-iron pipe.
a. Conform to Class 51, WW P-421 or American National Institute
(ANSI) A21.51. Design of pipe shall be in accordance with
ANSI A21.50 laying conditions B or F.
b. Joints. Mechanical and push-on joints for ductile iron pipe and
fittings shall conform to the requirements of American
National Standard Institute (ANSI) A21.11 or WW P521-C.
Gaskets shall be neoprene or other synthetic rubber material.
Natural rubber gaskets will not be acceptable.
c. Fittings. Fittings shall be in accordance with American
National Standard Institute (ANSI) A21.10 and shall have a
pressure rating of not less than that specified for pipe. Fittings
for pipe with push-on joints shall be either mechanical joint or
push-on joint. Furnish all specials, taps, plugs and wall fittings
as required.
3. Cast iron pipe.
a. Conform to Class 22 or American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) A21.6 or A21.8. Design of pipe shall be in accordance
with ANSI A21.1. Minimum wall thickness shall be Class 22 as
shown on ANSI A21.6 or A21.8.
b. Joints. Mechanical and push-on joints for cast iron pipe fittings
shall conform to the requirements of ANSI A21.11. Gaskets
shall be neoprene or other synthetic rubber material. Natural
rubber gaskets will not be acceptable.
c. Fittings. Fittings shall be in accordance with American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) A21.10 and shall have a
pressure rating of not less than that specified for pipe. Fittings
for pipe with mechanical joints shall have a mechanical joint or
push-on joints. Furnish all specials, taps, plugs and wall fittings
as required.
Section
700.590
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.590
100:1369
d. Lining and coating. All cast iron pipe, fittings and specials shall
be cement mortar lined in accordance with American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) A21.4. Coat all pipe fittings and
specials with manufacturer's standard coal tar coating.
4. Vitrified clay pipe.
a. Provide American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) C
700 extra strength pipe and fittings in sizes eighteen (18) inch
and smaller. Provide either ASTM C 700 standard strength or
extra strength pipe and fittings in sizes twenty-one (21) inch
and larger as specified by the owner or engineer. All pipe shall
be designed Class B bedding in accordance with ASTM C12,
unless otherwise noted on the plans.
b. Joints. Flexible gasketed joints for bell and spigot clay pipe
shall be compounded of high quality poly urethane plastic
bonded to both the bell and spigot ends of the pipe and
properly molded and cured to a uniform hardness and
compressibility to form a tight compression joint. All bell and
spigot joints shall conform to ASTM C 425.
c. Fittings. Provide "fittings", if specified, defined as tee or wye
connections suitable for assembly to house or building sewers
similar to W.S. Dickey Clay Company "Perma-T" and "Perma-Y".
5. Manholes.
a. General. Manholes shall conform to the applicable City
Standard Drawing which is located for inspection in the files at
City Hall.
b. Mortar. Mortar and plaster coating for masonry manhole units
shall be two (2) parts Portland Cement to one (1) part Masonry
Cement to six (6) parts plaster sand mixed with the least
amount of potable water necessary to provide a workable
mortar.
c. Precast concrete. Precast concrete manholes shall conform to
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) C 478 and
shall have bases equal to developed base manholes. Joints shall
be of material as specified for reinforced concrete pipe joints of
a bitumastic material or performed flexible joint sealants
applied to accordance with manufacturers recommendations.
d. Waterproofing. Waterproofing will be required on the exterior
of all manholes. The bitumen shall consist of two (2) coats of
asphalt, coal-tar pitch, or a coating meeting American Society
for Testing and Materials (ASTM) D-41. Asphalt shall conform
to the requirements of ASTM D 449. Coal-tar pitch shall
conform to the requirements of ASTM D 450. Coating shall be
thirty-one (31) mils thickness.
Section
700.590
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.590
100:1370
6. Manhole castings.
a. Cast iron rings and covers shall be the following or approved
equal: Clay and Bailey No. 2008, Neenah R-1736 or Deeter
1315.
b. Iron castings.
(1) Iron castings shall conform to the requirements of
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) A 48,
class 25 and shall be of the type shown on the City
Standard Drawing.
(2) Castings shall be clean and whole, ad without blow or sand
holes or any other surface defects which would impair
serviceability. Plugging or filling of holes or other defects
will not be permitted.
(3) Parts fins and pouring gates shall be removed.
7. Bedding aggregate. All materials used for crushed stone pipe
bedding shall conform to the requirements of Midwestern Concrete
Industrial Board (MCIB) Bulletin No. 2 for coarse aggregate and
shall meet the graduation specified therein under Column III, Table
2, for three-quarter (¾) inch maximum size aggregate with the
following modification:
Sieve Size Percentage Passing
No. 4 0.5
No. 8 0.2
8. Concrete.
a. Concrete, whether reinforced or non-reinforced shall conform
to specifications or to the requirements as specified on the
Plans or on City Standard Drawing.
b. Coarse aggregate for concrete shall be limestone obtained
from the Bethany Falls Ledge or equivalent, unless prior
approval is obtained from the City Engineer for use of another
source. Also, the total shale coal and lignite content shall not
exceed five-tenths percent (0.5%) and the clay content shall be
zero percent. Soundness-Maximum lose shall be ten percent
(10%) (American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) C88
using Sodium Sulphate - 5 cycles) Los Angeles Abrasion-
Maximum loss shall be thirty-five percent (35%) (ASTM C131).
9. Reinforcing steel.
a. Reinforcing steel shall be placed as shown on the plans and
shall conform to American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM) Specifications as follows:
Section
700.590
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.590
100:1371
b. Bars and rods shall be deformed billet-steel conforming to
ASTM, Grade 40.
c. Welded wire fabric shall conform to American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM) A 185, Grade 40.
d. Fabricated steel bar and rod mats shall conform to American
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) A 184. Bar material
shall conform to ASTM A 165, Grade 40.
e. Smooth bars shall be round carbon steel bars conforming to
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) A 306,
Grade 60.
10. Pipe encasement and collars.
a. Concrete. Concrete, whether reinforced or non-reinforced,
shall be Midwestern Concrete Industrial Board (MCIB) Mix A
550-1-4.
b. Reinforcing. Reinforcing steel used in concrete encasements
shall be American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) A
615, Grade 40.
11. Tunneling, boring and jacking.
a. Steel liner plate. Steel tunnel liner plates shall be ARMCO
"Standard", Commercial Sheaving and Stamping Company
"Commercial", Republic "Truscon Paneled Out", or equal and
shall be galvanized in accordance with American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM) A 123. The design and shape of
the liner plates shall be such that assembly can take place
entirely from within the tunnel liner. The outside diameter shall
be four (4) feet and the minimum wall thickness shall be United
States Standard Gauge 12 (0.1046 inches). Sufficient sections
shall be provided with one and one-half (1½) inch or larger
grouting holes, located near the centers, so that when the
plates are installed there will be one (1) line of holes on either
side of the tunnel and one (1) at the crown. The holes at each
line shall not be more than nine (9) feet apart and, unless
otherwise approved, shall be staggered. Bolts and nuts shall
conform to ASTM A 153, A 308, A 325 and A 449 as applicable.
b. Steel casings. Steel casings for bore or jacked construction
shall be steel pipe conforming to American Society for Testing
and Materials (STM) A 139 with a minimum diameter as shown
on the Plans. Minimum walls thickness shall be in accordance
with the following table:
Section
700.590
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.590
100:1372
Nominal Wall Thickness
Diameter of
Casing
Under
Railroads All Other Uses
24 inches 0.406 inches 0.281 inches
26 inches 0.438 inches 0.281 inches
28 inches 0.469 inches 0.312 inches
30 inches 0.469 inches 0.312 inches
32 inches 0.500 inches 0.312 inches
34 inches 0.500 inches 0.312 inches
36 inches 0.500 inches 0.344 inches
Steel shall be Grade B under Railroads and Grade A on all
other uses.
c. Joints. Steel liner plates shall have bolted joints at both
longitudinal and circumferential planes. Stagger longitudinal
joints in adjacent rings when assembling. Steel pipe shall have
welded joints in accordance with American Water Works
Association (AWWA) C 206.
C. Installation.
1. Pipe laying and jointing.
a. Handling. Handle pipe materials and fittings in a manner to
insure installation in sound and undamaged condition. Do not
drop to dump. Use slings, lifting bags, hooks and other devices
designed to protect pipe, joint elements and coatings. In
handling plastic pipe of thirteen (13) feet in length or greater, a
double sling will be required unless otherwise approved by the
City. Ship, move and store with provisions to prevent
movement or shock contact with adjacent units.
b. Installation.
(1) All work shall be in accordance with the following
standards: American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM) C 12 Installing Vitrified Clay Sewer Pipe;
American Society for Testing and Material (ASTM) D 2321;
Underground installation of flexible Thermoplastic Sewer
Pipe; American Water Works Association (AWW) C 600;
Installation of cast iron water mains. Utilize equipment
methods and materials insuring installation to lines and
grades indicated. Maintain the following tolerance from
true alignment and grade:
Alignment 2 inches
Grade ± ½ inch
Section
700.590
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.590
100:1373
Joint deflection shall not exceed the
maximum allowable deflection, per joint
according to American Society for Testing
and Material (ASTM) C 425, ASTM C 594,
and American Water Works Association
(AWWA) C 600. Only one (1) correction for
alignment and/or grade shall be made
between adjacent manholes. Except where
pipe sections are being encased in concrete,
no pipe is to be supported by blocks.
Accomplish curve alignments with bends,
bevels and upper joints. Joint deflection with
clay, Poly Vinyl Chloride (PVC), cast iron or
ductile iron pipe shall not exceed the
maximum allowable deflection per joint
according to American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM) C 425, ASTM C 594
and American Water Works Association
(AWWA) C 600.
(2) Install pipe of size, material, strength class, and joint type
with embedment as shown on the City Standard Drawing
and as described within this Standard. In so far as
possible, commence laying of downstream end of line and
install pipe with spigot or tongue end downstream. Clean
interior of all pipe, fittings and joints prior to installation.
Exclude entrance of foreign matter during discontinuance
of installation. Close open ends of pipe with snug fittings
closures. Do not let water fill trench. Include provisions to
prevent flotation should water control measure prove
inadequate. Remove water, sand, mud and other
undesirable materials from trench before removal of end
cap. Install pipe only when weather and trench conditions
are suitable. Do not lay in water. Brace or anchor pipe as
required to prevent displacement after establishing final
position.
c. Pipe bedding. The sewer trench shall be carried to a point not
less than three (3) inches below bottom of pipe bell. Crushed
stone pipe bedding, compacted to fill width of trench, shall
then be placed and compacted to bottom of pipe with proper
allowance for bell joints. After each length of pipe being laid
has been shoved "home" and placed in proper alignment, shall
be securely anchored and held in position by crushed stone
deposited simultaneously on each side of the pipe. Crushed
stone or tamped selected backfill shall extend to a point not
less than twelve (12) inches above the top of the pipe bell. If
unstable subgrade conditions are encountered and it is
determined by the City Engineer that the bedding specified will
not provide suitable support for the pipe, additional excavation
Section
700.590
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.590
100:1374
to the limits determined by the Engineer will be required. This
additional excavation shall be backfilled with crushed stone
material approved by the City.
d. Jointing.
(1) General requirements.
(a) Locate joints to provide for differential movement at
changes in type of pipe embedment, concrete collars
and structures. Support pipe from wall of manhole to
first joint in normal sewer trench with concrete cradle
structurally continuous with base slab or footing.
(b) Clean and lubricate all joint and gasket surfaces with
lubricant recommended by pipe manufacturer.
(c) Utilize methods and equipment capable of fully
homing or making up joints without damage.
(d) Check joint opening and deflection for specifications
limits.
(e) Examine each piece of pipe prior to installation for
soundness and specification compliance.
(2) Provisions for jointing clay pipe.
(a) Conform with American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM) C 12 Section 8.
(b) Handle pipe having premolded joining rings or
attached couplings so that no weight, including the
weight of the pipe itself, will bear on or be supported
by the jointing material.
(3) Provisions for jointing cast iron and ductile iron pipe.
(a) Conform with American Water Works Association
(AWWA) C 600.
(b) Paint suspected damaged portions with turpentine
and dust with cement to check for cracks. Remove
turpentine and cement by washing when crack test is
satisfactorily completed. If cracks are found, the pipe
shall be rejected.
(c) Check gasket position and condition after assembly
prior to installation of next pipe section.
(4) Provisions for jointing poly chloride (PVC) pipe. Check
gasket position and conditions after assembly prior to
installation of next pipe section.
Section
700.590
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.590
100:1375
(5) Rubber gasketed joints. Check gasket position and
condition after assembly with feeler gauge prior to
installation of next section. Vertical pipe deflection after
installation shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the pipe
diameter.
(6) Cutting. Cut in neat workmanlike manner without damage
to pipe. Observe specifications regarding your locations.
Smooth cut by power grinding to remove burrs and sharp
edges. Repair lining as required and approved.
(7) Temporary plugs.
(a) Plugs. Provide and install plugs as manufactured by
pipe supplier or as fabricated by contractor if
approved. Plugs shall be water tight against heads up
to twenty (20) feet of water. Secure plugs in place in a
manner to facilitate removal when required to connect
pipe.
(b) Location. Plugs shall be installed as specified or where
shown on plans. Also the open end of the sewer shall
be plugged at the end of the work day with a suitable
mechanical plug to prevent entry of footage material
until work is resumed.
(8) Connections to existing pipeline and structures. Connect
pipe to existing structures and pipelines where indicated.
Observe pertinent articles of specifications pertaining to
joint locations. Prepare structure by making an opening
with at least two (2) inches clearance all around fitting to
be inverted. the concrete structure shall be initially cut
with a concrete saw. Opening between pipe and manhole
wall shall be filled with an expansive grout in such a
manner that a watertight condition will result or by use of
a rubber gasket. Manholes to be built on an existing sewer
shall be constructed in such a manner as will ont disrupt
service of the existing sewer. The manhole base, walls and
invert shall be completed before the top half of the sewer
pipe is cut or broken away. Rough edges of the pipe thus
exposed shall be covered with expansive grout, in such a
manner as to produce a smooth and acceptable finish. Any
portion of the existing sewer damaged by the contractor
shall be repaired or replaced at no expense to the City.
Connections between different pipe materials shall be
made using proprietary transition coupling, unless
otherwise specified on the plans.
2. Manholes and special structures.
a. General. As used herein "special structures" refers to
manholes on large sewers, special junction structures,
Section
700.590
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.590
100:1376
metering stations, siphon and similar structures constructed
on the pipeline. Manholes and special structures may be
constructed of precast concrete sections in accordance with
City Standard Drawing-Edition II, 1990, which is on file in the
office of the City Clerk.
b. Construction.
(1) General. Manholes and special structures shall be
constructed at locations indicated and in accordance with
details as shown on the plans or City Standard Drawing.
However, all manholes shall be constructed above the one
hundred (100) year flood plain elevation as required.
(2) Precast wall and reducing cone sections. Handle with care
to avoid damage to joint ends of each section. Damaged
sections may be subject to rejection at the discretion of the
City Engineer or his/her designee.
(3) When using O-Ring joints, care shall be exercised in
placing the O-Ring on the spigot end, and lowering the bell
section on to the spigot end so that a watertight seal is
obtained.
(4) When using bitumastic joints, both spigot and bell end
shall be primed with solvent material compatible to the
adhesive in the mastic. Approved bitumastic materials
shall completely fill the joints so that a minimum of onefourth
(¼) inch bead of material is visible after jointing, to
be smoothed off after completion of the jointing operation.
(5) When a flexible preformed butyl rubber of bituminous
polymer compound with modifiers is used to seal jointed
sections of manholes, the extension of sealant from the
joint is not required. The vertical spacing between
manhole sections shall not exceed one-fourth (¼) inch.
Preformed joint sealers shall remain flexible at
temperatures as low as zero degrees (0°F) Fahrenheit.
(6) All bitumastic materials or preformed flexible joint sealers
shall not be applied to wet or damp surface.
(7) Invert channels. Alignment of the invert channels shall be
as shown on the contract drawings. When no specific
details and dimensions are given, the changes in flow
direction shall be smooth, uniform and made with the
longest radius possible. The cross-sectional shape of invert
channels shall be steel-trowelled to produce a dense,
smooth surface.
(8) When filling openings around pipes through the manhole
walks, mortar and/or masonry units shall be placed so that
Section
700.590
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.590
100:1377
the resulting joints are watertight. Mortar used in the joint
closure shall not interfere with the invert channel.
c. Curing. All masonry, plaster coating and cast-in-place concrete
shall be adequately protected from freeing and loss of moisture
for the first twenty-four (24) hours. The curing methods and
materials to be used shall be approved by the City Engineer, or
his/her designate.
d. Manhole rings and adjusting rings. All rings for manhole
sewers and adjusting rings shall be set to match the existing
surfaces, except in flood plans where the plans indicate that
the ring is to be set at an elevation higher than existing
ground. Each ring shall be set on a full mortar bed of
bitumastic material. If masonry units are used to adjust rings
to grade, the masonry work shall conform to these rules and
regulations.
e. Waterproofing. Two (2) coats of an asphalt or coal-tar pitch
waterproof coating with a combined thickness of thirty-one
(31) mils shall be applied to the exterior on all precast masonry
structures from base to manhole ring. The coating shall be
applied in sufficient quantity so that no base or thin spots show.
The coating shall be applied in sufficient time to permit proper
curing prior to backfilling the excavation. Proper methods and
materials shall be used during backfilling to prevent damage to
the coating. Any damage to the coating which does occur shall
be immediately repaired.
f. Drop manholes. A drop shall be built at any manhole where a
tributary sewer enters an elevation more than two (2) feet
above the manhole invert. Drops shall be as shown on the
Standard Drawing. Concrete encasement shall be Class B
providing six (6) inches minimum cover around the pipe, and
extending out to the face of the bell of the tee in the entering
line.
3. Pipe encasement and collars.
a. General. Total or partial encasement of pipe in concrete shall
be used where the required safe supporting strength cannot be
obtained by other bedding methods. Concrete encasement
shall also be provided at locations to protect public water
supplies or where there exists the possibility that standard
bedding may be eroded by currents of water under and around
the pipe.
b. Construction. Concrete encasement shall be constructed at
locations indicated and in accordance with details as shown on
plans or City standard drawings. Start and terminate
encasement at a pipe joint. Suitably support and block pipe to
Section
700.590
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.590
100:1378
maintain position and prevent flotation. Form to dimensions
indicated or construct full width of trench.
(1) Joints. If a single section of encasement is not constructed
continuously (concrete is not placed in a single deposit),
constructed joints shall be provided in the encasement to
coincide with pipe joints. Construction joints shall be
keyed continuously around the encasement. Longitudinal
reinforcement shall be continuous through construction
joints.
(2) Curing. Concrete encasement shall be protected and cured
so as to prevent excessive evaporation of moisture or
freezing.
(3) Backfilling. Backfill trench only after concrete encasement
has obtained a minimum of two thousand (2,000) pounds
per square inch (p.s.i.) and can sufficiently support the
loads imposed by backfill and backfill operations.
4. Backfill.
a. General.
(1) Unless otherwise specified, all sewer trenches and
excavation around structures shall be backfilled to the
original surface of the ground with earth, earth and rock,
or other acceptable material. When earth and rock is used,
it shall be placed and thoroughly consolidated with
sufficient earth to completely fill all voids between the
rocks. The contractor shall so sort and stockpile the
excavated material so that the proper material is available
for backfill.
(2) The backfill material shall be compacted to a minimum
ninety percent (90%) of optimum density as determined by
the Standard Proctor Test. Backfill in street right-of-way
shall be compacted to a minimum density of ninety-five
percent (95%) of optimum density as determined by the
Standard Proctor Test. Backfill material shall be placed
and compacted only when its moisture content is between
optimum and ± two percent (2%) above or below optimum
moisture as determined by American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM) D-698 Standard.
(3) The combination of the thickness of the layer, the method
of compaction and the type of compaction equipment used
shall be at the discretion of the City Engineer and subject
to obtaining the densities as specified above.
(4) The quality of the compaction shall be subject to
compaction tests when deemed necessary by the City
Section
700.590
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.590
100:1379
Engineer. It shall be the Contractor's responsibility to
make necessary excavation in order to accommodate
compaction test at locations specified by the Engineer. The
compaction tests will be performed at no cost to the City.
If the quality of the compaction does not meet the above
requirements, the material will be removed and replaced
to meet the above requirements at the expense of the
contractor.
(5) Commercial sand backfill shall not be used.
(6) In areas so designated on the plans, the top soiled as
excavated shall be stockpiled and replaced to original
elevation, location and depth.
(7) Backfill material shall be carefully placed to avoid damage
or displacement of sewer or structures.
(8) Backfill shall not be placed when material contains frost, is
frozen, or a blanket of snow prevents proper compaction
tests at locations specified by the Engineer. The
compaction tests will be performed at no cost to the City. If
the quality of the compaction does not meet the above
requirements, the material will be removed and replaced
to meet the above requirements at the expense of the
contractor.
b. Backfill of pipe trenches.
(1) The area below a plane twelve (12) inches above the top of
pipe bell shall be backfilled in accordance with the
Standards for "Pipe Bedding".
(2) Backfill shall be made with suitable earth, earth and rock
or other acceptable material, except that the top one (1)
foot and the area below a plane one (1) foot above the pipe
bell shall not contain any excavated rock. When earth and
rock is used, the maximum dimension of the rock shall not
exceed twelve (12) inches.
c. Backfill around structure.
(1) No backfill shall be placed over or around any structure
until the concrete or mortar therein has attached a
minimum strength of two thousand (2,000) pounds per
square inch (p.s.i.) and twenty-four (24) hours and can
sufficiently support tie loads imposed by the backfill
without damage.
(2) The contractor shall use utmost care to avoid any wedging
action between the side of the excavation and the
structure that would cause any movement of the structure.
Section
700.590
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.590
100:1380
Any damage caused by premature backfill or by the use of
equipment on or near a structure will be the responsibility
of the contractor.
(3) Backfill shall be placed and compacted on all sides of the
structure simultaneously and operations shall be so
conducted that the backfill is always at approximately the
same elevation on all sides of the structure.
(4) No excavated rock larger than four (4) inches maximum
dimension shall be placed within one (1) foot of the
exterior surface of any structure.
5. Tunneling, boring and jacking.
a. Tunnel cross-section. Construct circular in cross-section of size
indicated. Alternate size and shape may be submitted for
approval subject to the following:
(1) Best suited to proposed method of excavation and lining.
(2) Clear cross-sectional area not less than clear area of
circular section indicated.
(3) Invert at grade consistent with adjoining open cut
construction.
b. Construction.
(1) General. Before starting work, complete details of the
method of operation and liner materials to be used shall be
submitted to the City Engineer. The cast iron pipe sewer, in
the area to be tunneled, bored or jacked, shall be
completed before the construction of adjacent portions of
the same sewer lateral. The purpose of this requirement is
to allow for slight discrepancies in alignment and grade
which may occur in the tunneled, bored or jacked
installation, so minor adjustments in the adjacent sewer
can be made. The maximum allowable deviation in
alignment and grade of sewer pipe shall be as shown on
the construction plans.
(2) Excavation. Excavate by approved methods applicable to
materials encountered. Boring operations shall be
performed by experienced crews using a rotary type
boring machine designed especially for this purpose.
Include dewatering and chemical and stabilization for
grouting if necessary due to existing field conditions.
Conduct excavation in a manner to prevent disturbing the
overlaying and adjacent material.
(3) Lining. Assemble liner plates immediately following the
excavation. Advance casing continuously with excavation.
Section
700.590
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.590
100:1381
When liner plates are being installed, care shall be taken
to maintain alignment, grade and circular shape of the
tunnel. All voids between liner and surrounding earth shall
be filled with grout forced in under pressure. The grout
shall consist of two (2) parts of sand to one (1) part of
Portland Cement, mixed with sufficient water to maintain
a freely pouring consistency. As the pumping through any
hole is stopped, it shall be plugged to prevent the backflow
of grout. After lining installation is complete, it shall be
cleaned of all debris and all leaks which allow flowing or
seeping water into tunnel, shall be stopped.
(4) End seals. Construct end seals after sewer pipe has been
permanently placed inside casing, tested and approved.
Brick shall be in accordance with American Society for
Testing and Materials. (ASTM) C 270.
(5) Sand fill. Fill annular space between lining and sewer pipe
with sand complying with graduation as set forth in
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) C 33.
Fine Aggregate, Midwestern Concrete Industrial Board
(MCIB) Bulletin #1. Moisture content shall not exceed
five-tenths of one percent (0.5%). Fill after sewer pipe has
been permanently placed inside casing, tested and
approved, in a manner such as not to disturb the alignment
and/or grade of the sewer pipe.
(6) Lateral end marking. Lateral sewer service lines shall be
laid from the sewer main to the lot line or property line.
The end of the lateral shall be properly plugged with a
watertight pancake. A 2 x 4 inch board shall be installed
vertically at the end of the lateral and shall extend to
within one (1) foot of the finished ground surface to mark
the end of each lateral service line.
D. Testing.
1. General. After backfilling over the sewers, the contractor shall
lamp all sewer lines. All sewer lines are subject to infiltration,
exfiltration and/or air tests as determined by the City Engineer.
Immediately prior to conducting a test, the ground water level shall
be determined by augering a hole adjacent to the pipe and
measuring the distance to the water level, or by determining if
water is flowing through a one (1) inch diameter pipe installed
horizontally through the upstream manhole wall and having a flow
line elevation even with the top of the pipe being tested. If a pipe is
installed through the manhole wall to determine the water level,
the contractor shall seal the pipe with mortar upon completion of
the testing. Infiltration tests shall be performed. All other pipe shall
be tested by exfiltration tests, or at the option of the contractor, air
tests. If any section of pipe passes either the exfiltration or air test
Section
700.590
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.590
100:1382
as specified below, that section shall be accepted by the City. Each
reach of sewer shall meet the requirements of the acceptance
tests. All defects shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the City, or
his/her designate. Inspection by use of a closed circuit television
system may be required where lamping proves to be an
unsatisfactory means of inspection.
2. Lamping. Each section of the sewer line between manholes shall be
straight and uniformly graded. Each such section will be lamped.
Lamping will be performed by the City. The contractor shall furnish
suitable assistants to help the City.
3. Exfiltration. Exfiltration tests shall be conducted by blocking off the
other openings in the upper manhole and plugging the line where it
enters the lower manhole of the reach to be tested, filling the line
and the manhole with water (but not more than five (5) feet deep),
and measuring the water required to keep the manhole full. The
total exfiltration shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) gallons
per inch of nominal pipe diameter per mile of pipe per day for each
reach tested. For purposes of determining the maximum allowable
leakage manholes shall be considered as sections of forty-eight (48)
inch pipe. The exfiltration test shall be maintained on each reach
for at least two (2) hours and as much longer as necessary, in the
opinion of the City Engineer or his/her designate, to locate all
leaks.
The contractor shall provide, at his/her own expense, all necessary
piping between the reach to be tested and the source of water
supply, together with equipment and materials required for the
tests. The methods used and the time of conducting the exfiltration
tests shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer or his/
her designate. If the leakage in any reach exceeds the allowable
maximum, it shall be retested after the leaks are repaired.
4. Infiltration. If at any time the infiltration between two (2) adjacent
manholes is observed and measured by the City Engineer or his/her
designate, to exceed two hundred (200) gallons per inch nominal
pipe diameter per mile of sewer per day, the contractor shall locate
the principal leakage and shall make such repairs as are necessary
to control the infiltration. The infiltration shall be measured by use
of a weir furnished and installed by the contractor.
5. Air. The contractor shall conduct an air test on each reach of sewer
between manholes. The air test shall be performed in accordance
with the following specifications.
a. Equipment. Cherne Air-Loc Equipment as manufactured by
Cherne Industrial of Hopkins, Minnesota, or approved equal.
Equipment used shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Pneumatic plugs shall have a sealing length equal to or
greater than the diameter of the pipe to be inspected.
Section
700.590
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.590
100:1383
(2) Pneumatic plugs shall resist internal test pressure without
requiring external bracing or blocking.
(3) All air used shall pass through a single control panel.
(4) Three (3) individual hoses shall be used for the following
connections:
(a) From the control panel to pneumatic plugs for
inflation;
(b) From the control panel to sealed line for introducing
the low pressure air;
(c) From sealed line to control panel for continually
monitoring the air pressure rise in the sealed line.
b. Procedures. All pneumatic plugs shall be seal-tested before
being used in the actual test installation. One (1) length of pipe
shall be held on the ground and sealed at both ends with the
pneumatic plugs to be checked. Air shall be introduced into the
plugs to twenty-five (25) pounds per square inch (gauge)
(psig). The plugs shall hold against this pressure without
bracing and without movement of the plugs out of the pipe.
After a manhole to manhole reach of pipe has been backfilled,
and cleaned and the pneumatic plugs are checked by the above
procedures, the plugs shall be placed in the line at each
manhole and inflated to twenty-five (25) pounds per square
inch (gauge) (psig). Low pressure air shall be introduced into
this sealed line until the internal air pressure reaches four (4)
pounds per square inch (gauge) (psig). At least two (2) minutes
shall be allowed for the air pressure to stabilize. After the
stabilization period (3.5 psig minimum pressure in the pipe),
the air hose from the control panel to the air supply shall
be disconnected. The portion of the line being tested shall be
termed "acceptable" if the time required in minutes for the
pressure to decrease from 3.5 to 2.5 psig is not less than that
shown in the following "Allowable Time Table":
ALLOWABLE TIME TABLE
Time Time
Pipe
Size
Min. Sec. Pipe
Size
Min. Sec.
6" 2 15 36" 17 00
7" 3 18 42" 19 50
8" 3 57 48" 22 40
10" 4 43 54" 25 30
12" 5 40 60" 28 20
Section
700.590
O'FALLON CITY CODE Section
700.590
100:1384
ALLOWABLE TIME TABLE
Time Time
Pipe
Size
Min. Sec. Pipe
Size
Min. Sec.
15" 7 5 66" 31 10
18" 8 30 72" 34 00
21" 9 50 84" 39 40
24" 11 20 96" 47 00
27" 12 45 103" 51 00
30" 14 10
Due to the danger of a plug deflating, and shooting
out of the pipe, the contractor shall not allow any
person to enter a manhole adjacent to a reach of
pipe being tested while the reach is under air
pressure. The manholes shall be inspected visually
and all leaks repaired to the satisfaction of the
City. If the air leakage in any reach exceeds the
allowable, it shall be retested after the leaks are
repaired.
Section
700.590
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.590
100:1385

ARTICLE XIV
Enforcement
Section 700.600. Penalties For Violation. [R.O. 2007 §700.600]
A. General. These penalties cover all violations of this Chapter, except for
Article XI of Chapter 700, "Industrial Wastes and Pretreatment".
Penalties for violations of Article XI of Chapter 700 are specifically
covered in Section 700.530.
B. Penalties. Any user, person, firm, customer, corporation, partnership,
etc., found to be in violation of any provision of this Chapter or who fails
to comply with any of the requirements stated herein shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per occurrence and/
or imprisonment up to ninety (90) days. Each day shall count as a
separate occurrence.
C. Discontinuance Of Service. The City shall have the option and authority,
in addition to the above penalties, to discontinue water and/or sewer
service to the premises in violation of the requirements and regulations
of this Chapter. Water and/or sewer service shall not be restored until
the violations have been corrected or eliminated to the satisfaction of
the City. Upon disconnection of service all fines and charges must be
paid prior to restoration of service.
D. Corrective Actions And Police Enforcement. Nothing contained herein
shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions as
necessary to protect the health and safety of the public and/or to
prevent damage to the City water and sewer systems and facilities.
Every Police Officer of the City shall, in connection with his/her duties
imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
Section
700.600
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.600
100:1387