CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, MISSOURI 
____________ 
Adopted: September 28, 2009 
Effective: September 28, 2009 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
PLEASANT HILL, MISSOURI 
(2013) 
____________ 
John VanGorkom 
Mayor 
____________ 
C.J. Hicks 
Steve Long 
Paul Beason 
Ed Lust 
City Council 
____________ 
Mark Randall 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Kevin Anderson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Nici Wilson 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS of the CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, MISSOURI AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Terry C. Wilson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Pat Bates 
Larry Rosanbalm 
Paul Beason 
Steve Long 
City Council 
____________ 
Mark Randall 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Kevin Anderson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Nici Wilson 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1994 Code, as supplemented through May 12, 2002, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1994 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTERCHT:1RELATED LAWSRL:1SPECIAL ACTSSA:1CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLECHTCT:1RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLERLCT:1SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLESACT:1CODECD1:1CODE APPENDIXCDA:1CODE COMPARATIVE TABLESCCT:1STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLESLT:1CHARTER INDEXCHTi:1CODE INDEXCDi:1 
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and K. Barrington, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mark Randall, City Administrator; Sandi Beatty, City Clerk and Finance Director; Nici Wilson, Deputy City Clerk; Kevin Anderson, City Attorney; and Randy Miller, Director of Community Development, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri. 
;copy;;en;;hg;Copyrighted material.;eol;Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri. 2009. 
;copy;;en;;hg;Copyrighted material.;eol;Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri. 2009> 
ORDINANCE NO.1677 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, MISSOURI; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 58, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 27, 2009, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or a jail sentence not exceeding 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after April 27, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon passage by the City Council of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri. 
    Passed and adopted by the City Council of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri this 28th day of September , 2009 . 
     Mayor  ATTEST: 
     City Clerk  Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council, held on the ____________ day of ____________, ____________. 
     City Clerk  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord./Res. No. Date
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 1 1556 9-27-2004Include11658 8-25-2008Omit11667 6-22-2009Omit11668 7-13-2009Include11669 7-13-2009Omit1169911-22-2010Omit11670 7-13-2009Include11672 8-10-2009Omit11673 8-24-2009Omit11674 8-24-2009Omit11675 8-25-2009Omit11676 8-24-2009Omit11677 9-28-2009Include1167810-12-2009Omit1167910-12-2009Include1168010-26-2009Include1168112-14-2009Omit11682 1-11-2010Include11683 3- 8-2010Include11684 4-12-2010Include11685 4-26-2010Include11686      2010Omit11688 5-24-2010Include11689 5-24-2010Omit11690 8-23-2010Omit11691 8-23-2010Include11692 8-23-2010Omit11693 8-24-2010Omit11694 9- 8-2010Omit11695 9- 8-2010Omit11696 9-20-2010Omit11697 9-20-2010Omit1169811- 8-2010Include11700 2-14-2011Omit11701 3-14-2011Omit11702 3-14-2011Omit11703 6-13-2011Include11704 8-22-2011Omit1170510-10-2011Omit1170610-10-2011Include1170712- 2-2011Omit1170812- 2-2011Omit11709 2- 2-2011Omit11710 1- 9-2012Include11710A 4-30-2012Include11711 5-14-2012Omit11712 8-27-2012Omit11713 8-27-2012Omit11714 8-27-2012Include11715 8-29-2012Omit11716 9-18-2012Omit1171711-26-2012Include11718 1-17-2013Omit11719 2-11-2013Include11720 3-11-2013Omit11721 3-25-2013Include11722 6-24-2013Omit11723 7-22-2013Omit1 
PART I - CHARTER 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri, being the Act of March 14, 1859, as adopted by the Missouri Legislature. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. Sections 6 through 17 of the Act of March 14, 1871, have been included in this compilation as sections [24] through [35] in conformity with the Charter compilation set out in the city's ordinance books. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Certain cities declared to be special charter cities, RSMo 81.010; procedure for amendment of charter, RSMo 81.013. (Back)
Sec. 1. - [Boundaries]. 
    That all that district of [the] country contained within the following described limits, to wit: beginning at a point one-half mile north of the intersection of Main and Rice streets, as laid off in the original plat of said city; thence east one-half mile; thence south to south line of section twenty (20), township forty-six (46), range thirty (30); thence west to southwest corner of section nineteen (19), township forty-six (46), range thirty (30); thence northeastwardly to the southwest corner of the original limits of the City of Pleasant Hill; thence north one mile; thence east one-half mile to place of beginning; shall be and is hereby incorporated, erected and established as a city by the name of Pleasant Hill; and the inhabitants thereof shall be, and they are hereby, constituted a body politic and corporate by the name and style of the City of Pleasant Hill, and by that name shall be known in law, have perpetual succession, sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, defend and be defended in all courts of law and equity having competent jurisdiction; and in all actions and matters whatever, may grant, lease, purchase, hold property, real and personal, within said town and no other, and may do all other acts as natural persons; may have a common seal, and may change and alter the same at pleasure. 
(Act of 3-7-1867, § 1) 
State law reference- Extension of boundaries by special charter cities with populations of less than 20,000, RSMo 81.080. 
Sec. 2. - [City's powers and duties.] 
    The corporate powers and duties of said city shall be vested in a Mayor and four Councilmen, and such other officers as are hereafter mentioned. 
Sec. 3. - [Mayor.] 
    The Mayor of the city shall be chosen by the qualified voters of said city, shall hold his office for the term of one year, and until his successor is elected and duly qualified; and shall be at the time of his election at least twenty-five years of age, and a citizen of the United States, shall have resided in said city at least one whole year next preceding his election, and shall be a householder in said city. 
State law reference- Election of certain officers in special charter cities having populations between 3,000 and 10,000, RSMo 81.070. 
Sec. 4. - [Composition of council; president; president pro tempore.] 
    The Mayor and Councilmen shall constitute a City Council, of which the Mayor shall be ex officio President; but he shall not be entitled to vote, except in case of a tie. The Council, at the first meeting after their election, shall choose from their own number a President pro tempore, who shall preside at the meetings of the City Council in the absence of the Mayor. 
Sec. 5. - [Clerk.] 
    The Council shall appoint a Clerk, who shall keep a faithful record of all their proceedings, and preserve in his office all records, public papers and documents belonging to the city, and perform such other duties as the Council by ordinance shall prescribe. 
Sec. 6. - [Council meetings.] 
    The Council shall fix the time and place of holding their stated meetings, and the Mayor, or in his absence the President pro tempore; may call a meeting at any time. 
Sec. 7. - [Style of ordinances.] 
    The style of the laws of said corporation shall be "Be it ordained by the Council of the City of Pleasant Hill," and all ordinances passed by said Council shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, and published for the information of the inhabitants of said city, in some newspaper published in said city, or in such other manner as the Council may direct, and from time to time shall be designated, and distributed in such manner as the Council may direct. 
Sec. 8. - [Quorum of council; taxing powers.] 
    A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum to do business, and they shall have power by ordinance to levy and collect, not exceeding one dollar in any one year, on all male inhabitants of the city of the age of twenty-one years, and not over fifty years; also, to levy and collect taxes on all real and personal property in said city subject to taxation by law not exceeding one percent, on the assessed valuation thereof. 
(Act of 3-19-1868, § 1) 
Sec. 9. - [Council's ordinance powers generally.] 
    The council shall have power by ordinance to prevent and remove nuisances, to prevent, restrain and suppress bawdy houses and other disorderly houses in the city, to restrain and prohibit gambling, to license and tax merchants and retailers and taverns, billiard tables, pigeonhole tables, bagatelle tables, ten pin alleys and all other gaming devices, hackney carriages, wagons, carts, drays, pawnbrokers, hawkers and peddlers, restaurants, eating houses and livery stables, theatrical performances, circuses and all shows of whatever kind, singing concerts and other amusements in said city; to levy and collect a tax on dogs in said city; to prevent and regulate the use of gunpowder and other explosive compounds; to tax and license and regulate dram shops and tippling houses and saloons, and regulate the sale of spirituous liquors under merchants' licenses; to prevent furious driving, riding and unnecessary running of any horse or other animal in said city; to establish night watches and patrols; to prevent the introduction and spreading of disease; to prevent and extinguish fires; to regulate the building and compel the repairing of chimneys and flues, fireplaces, stoves, grates and stove pipes, as in their judgment may be proper, to prevent the occurrence of fires in said city; to organize and establish fire companies; to build market houses; to establish and regulate markets, to license, tax and regulate peddlers and auctioneers; to regulate weights and measures; to provide for the inspection of wood, coal and provisions, hay, corn, oats, potatoes, wheat, rye, barley and all provisions whether meat or vegetables brought into said town and offered for sale; to establish and open streets and alleys, drains and sewers; to change, alter and vacate the same as in their judgment may be for the public good; to establish and improve public squares; to pave, plank and improve the streets and alleys of the city; to keep the streets, alleys and commons clean and generally to regulate and promote the sanitary condition of said city; to establish and regulate the width of streets and alleys; to regulate the width of sidewalks and the materials of which they shall be constructed; to erect and regulate lamp posts and lamps and cause them to be lighted; to regulate the storage of gunpowder, tar, pitch and other combustible materials; to regulate, if necessary, the planting of trees, pillars or posts in or upon any public street, alley or ground in the city; and from time to time pass such ordinances to carry into effect this act and the powers hereby granted as in their judgment the good of the inhabitants may require; they shall have power to impose appropriate fines and forfeitures and penalties for a breach of any of the ordinances of said city, and pass such ordinances for the regulation and police of said city as they shall deem necessary, not repugnant to the laws of this State. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 1) 
Sec. 10. - [Council's powers re penalties.] 
    The council shall have power by ordinance to punish by fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding sixty days in the municipal or county jail, or such other place as the council may deem proper, any person or persons who shall violate any provisions of any ordinance made by the council in pursuance of the powers delegated to them in the preceding section of this act, and the council shall have power by ordinance to impose a like punishment upon any person or persons who shall willfully disturb the peace of the city by loud or offensive or indecent conversation, or by hallowing or by threatening, quarrelling, challenging or fighting, or upon any person who shall be found intoxicated in the streets, alleys or commons, or at any place of public resort or entertainment, and they may cause any person who shall be found disturbing the peace or intoxicated as above recited, after sunset, to be imprisoned until the next day, and if the next day be Sunday, then until the next Monday, when such person shall be brought to trial. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 2; Ord. No. 1203, § 2, 2-9-1987) 
Sec. 11. - [Council's powers to require sidewalk paving and repair.] 
    The Council shall have power to cause the owners or occupiers of real estate to pave and repair the sidewalks adjacent to the property which they may own or occupy; and if any such owner or occupier shall fail to pave or repair the same, as required by ordinance, the Council may cause the same to be done, and may recover the full expense thereof by an action of debt in the name of the corporation; and if any tenant be required to pave or repair the sidewalks adjacent to the property occupied by him, the expense or cost thereof shall be a good set-off against so much of the rent, due the owner; but no tenant shall be required to expend more than the rent for the time he occupied the property. If any owner of any real estate, not a resident of the city, fail to pave or repair a sidewalk as aforesaid, the Council may cause such real estate, or so much thereof as may be necessary, to be sold to defray the expenses of such improvement. 
Sec. 12. - [Council's powers re property taxation.] 
    The council shall have power by ordinance to regulate and enforce the assessment of real and personal property in said city for purposes of taxation, to regulate and enforce the collection of taxes, and they may empower the city collector, if taxes are not paid as required by ordinance, to seize and sell the property of the person so liable for taxes in the same manner that property is or may be seized and sold under execution upon a judgment at law. The council shall have power to enforce the collection of taxes against real estate, and to this end they shall have power to cause real estate to be sold for delinquent taxes, and conveyed to the purchaser, and to provide for the redemption thereof in such manner as may not be inconsistent with the laws of this State, and all deeds of real estate authorized by this act may be acknowledged before the city clerk and attested by the corporate seal of said city. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 3) 
Sec. 13. - [Officers.] 
    The Council shall have power to appoint a Treasurer and Attorney, and such other officers as may be necessary, and not herein otherwise provided for, describe their duties, fix their compensation, and remove them from office whenever they may deem it proper and necessary; they shall also have power to appoint a constable of said city, who shall be ex officio Collector, and shall hold his office for the term of one year, and until his successor is appointed and qualified; said constable shall have been one year a resident of said town at the time of his appointment and during his continuance in office. Said constable shall possess the same powers and perform the same duties within the limits of said city as constables possess and perform in their respective townships, and he shall execute and return all process which shall be issued by the Mayor of said city; and he may serve Council process, warrants and subpoenas any where within the limits of Cass county for offenses committed within the limits of said corporation, and shall perform such other duties as the Council by ordinance may prescribe; and he shall be entitled to fees as sheriffs and constables of townships have a right to demand for similar services. 
State law reference- Election of certain officers in special charter cities having populations between 3,000 and 10,000, RSMo 81.070. 
Sec. 14. - [Mayor's powers generally.] 
    The Mayor shall be conservator of the peace within the limits of said city, and it shall be his duty to see that all ordinances of the Council are rightly enforced; and ten days before the general election of city officers, he shall cause to be made out a correct statement of all moneys received and expended on account of said city for the preceding year, and shall cause the same to be published in some newspaper in said town, or else by posting up the same in four of the most public places in said city; and he shall also cause public notice to be given of the time and place of holding each election for city officers, by posting four handbills, at four of the most public places in said city, at least twenty days before such election; and in case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, or his inability, from any cause, to discharge the duties aforesaid, the same shall devolve on the President pro tempore. 
Sec. 15. - [Mayor's judicial powers.] 
    The Mayor shall have, within the limits of said city, all the powers and jurisdiction vested in justices of the peace, in civil and criminal cases, and shall perform and execute all the duties and powers devolving on justices of the peace in similar matters, in like manner, and he shall be entitled to similar fees; and appeals may be taken from his judgments and decisions, to the Circuit Court, in like manner as from justices' courts in said county. The Mayor shall have jurisdiction in all cases arising under this act, and under all ordinances in conformance with this act; he may issue his warrant, and cause to be apprehended and brought to summary trial, any person accused of violating any of the city ordinances; he shall grant the accused the right to be tried by six competent jurors, who, if they find him guilty, shall assess his fine according to the ordinance; and if any person fined as aforesaid, shall refuse to pay such fine, the Mayor may send him to the county jail for a period not exceeding ten days; fines, penalties and forfeitures may be recovered in the summary manner aforesaid, or they may be recovered by action of debt in the Mayor's Court, or any other court of competent jurisdiction. 
Sec. 16. - [Assessor.] 
    The Council shall have power to appoint an Assessor for said city, who shall hold his office for one year, and until his successor is appointed and qualified; and they shall prescribe his duties and fix his compensation by ordinance. 
Sec. 17. - [Filling of vacancies in offices of mayor or council member.] 
    All vacancies in the office of Mayor or Councilmen, shall be filled by a special election, to be ordered by the Mayor, President pro tempore, or some of said Councilmen. 
Sec. 18. - [General election dates.] 
    The general election for city officers shall be held on the first Tuesday in April in each year, but in case of a failure to elect on that day, the council shall cause the election to be held on some other day. The council shall appoint judges of the city election, and by ordinance prescribe their duties and the manner of conducting such elections and making returns thereof, and on any day appointed for the holding of elections, if the judges or any of them so appointed by said council should fail to attend, the electors may appoint a judge or judges to hold such election. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 4; Ord. No. 1246, § 1, 6-12-1989; Ord. No. 1256, § 1, 12-19-1989) 
Sec. 19. - [Officers' oath.] 
    The Mayor and Councilmen, and all other officers created under this act, or appointed by said Council, shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take an oath or affirmation to support the Constitution of the United States and of this State, and faithfully to demean themselves whilst in office. 
Sec. 20. - [Annexations.] 
    If at any time an addition to said city shall be laid off, upon the application of the owners thereof to that effect, the Council shall have power to extend over it all the laws and ordinances of said city; and such addition, from the time it is received, shall become to all intents and purposes, a part and parcel of said city. 
Sec. 21. - [Act declared public act.] 
    This act is declared to be a public act, and may be read as evidence in all courts of law and equity in this State, without further proof. 
Sec. 22. - [When effective; notice of first election.] 
    The provisions of this act shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage; and it shall be the duty of the County Court of the county of Cass, to cause notice to be given of the manner, of time, and place for holding the first election (on the first Monday in May next) for Mayor and Councilmen of said city, and to appoint judges of such election. The judges of elections under this act shall take an oath or affirmation as provided for judges of elections in this State. 
Sec. 23. - [Exemption from road work or taxes.] 
    All citizens residing within the limits of said corporation shall be exempt from working on any road without the limits of said corporation and from paying any road tax. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 5) 
Sec. [24. - Penalties.] 
    Any person who, for violation of any of the ordinances of the said city, shall be fined, and shall refuse or neglect to pay such fine, such person may be confined in the calaboose or workhouse, or may be required to work on the streets of said city until such fine is paid at the rate of one dollar per day. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 6) 
Sec. [25. - Compensation for property taken for streets.] 
    When it shall be necessary to take private property for opening, widening or altering any public street, lane, avenue, square or alley, the corporation shall make a just compensation therefor, to the person whose property is so taken, and if the amount of such compensation cannot be agreed on, the mayor shall cause the same to be assessed by a jury of six disinterested freeholders of said city. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 7) 
Sec. [26. - No compensation for property where all owners petition for street improvements.] 
    When the owners of all the property on the street, lane, avenue, square or alley shall petition for the opening, widening or altering thereof, no compensation shall in such case be made to those whose property shall be taken for the opening, widening or altering of such street, lane, avenue, square or alley. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 8) 
Sec. [27. - Benefits to offset damages in property taking for streets.] 
    In assessing the amount of compensation for property taken for opening or widening or altering, any street, lane, avenue, square or alley, the benefit as well as the injury happening by such opening, widening or altering, shall be taken into consideration. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 9) 
Sec. [28. - Jurors' oath and return in property taking cases.] 
    All jurors empanelled to enquire into the amount of benefit or damage which shall happen to the owners of property proposed to be taken for opening, widening or altering any street, lane, avenue, square or alley, shall be first sworn to that effect, and shall return to the mayor their inquest in writing, signed by each juror. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 10) 
Sec. [29. - Mayor's authority to order new assessment in property taking cases.] 
    The mayor shall have power, for good cause shown, within ten days after any inquest shall have been returned to him as aforesaid, to set the same aside and cause a new inquest to be made, which new assessment shall be final. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 11) 
Sec. [30. - Bond issues authorized.] 
    That for the purpose of paying the floating debt of the city of Pleasant Hill, and all obligations for the payment and satisfaction of which the city may be bound by virtue of any ordinance or resolution passed by the council prior to the date of this act becoming a law, the council may consolidate such indebtedness by an issue of bonds of said city, with interest coupons attached, which bonds shall be due and payable ten years after the date thereof, and shall bear interest at the rate of ten per centum per annum, payable semiannually at the office of the city treasurer of the said city, which said interest shall be provided for and paid out of the yearly revenue of said city, and the principal of said bonds may be paid out of the yearly revenue of said city; provided, however, that said bonds, or any portion of them, may, at the option of said city, be paid off and fully discharged at any time before their maturity; said bonds so to be issued shall be in sums of not less than fifty nor more than five hundred dollars each. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 12) 
Sec. [31. - Borrowing powers.] 
    The council of said city shall have power to borrow money on the credit of the city; provided, that no sum or sums of money shall be borrowed at a greater interest than ten percent per annum, nor shall the interest on all sums borrowed and outstanding ever exceed one-half the city revenue arising from taxes on real property within the limits of the corporation. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 13) 
Sec. [32. - Council may require certain taxes to be paid in money.] 
    The city council may, by ordinance, require that portion of the tax arising from real and personal property which may be necessary to pay the indebtedness that may be incurred under sections twelve and thirteen of this act, to be paid in lawful money of the United States. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 14) 
Sec. [33. - Collector's duties and power re collection of taxes in money or city warrants.] 
    In the collection of all special taxes authorized by law, the city collector shall only receive lawful money of the United States, or the matured or maturing evidences of debt for the payment of which the tax is specially levied; but in the collection of general taxes, except when otherwise directed and required by ordinance as provided in section fourteen of this act, he shall receive in payment all claims against the city, which have been regularly allowed and audited, and for which orders on the city treasury have been drawn, commonly known as city warrants. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 15) 
Sec. [34. - Irregularities in renewal of city not to affect elections or ordinances.] 
    That any irregularity in the renewal of the corporation of the city of Pleasant Hill, shall not destroy the legality of any election held in pursuance thereof, nor shall such irregularity impair the binding and legal force of any ordinance of the city council of said city, duly elected by reason of the revival of said corporation, which is not in violation of the Constitution and laws of this State, or the law under which said corporation was organized. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 16) 
Sec. [35. - Repeal of conflicting acts.] 
    That all acts and parts of acts contrary to and inconsistent with the provisions of this act are hereby repealed. This act shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage. 
(Act of 3-14-1871, § 17) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ACTS/ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Act/Ordinance
NumberDateSectionSection
this Charter 3- 7-1867(Act.)11 3-19-1868(Act.)18 3-14-1871(Act.)1935 2103124185237-1324-3014-1732-35 1203 2- 9-19872101246 6-12-1989118125612-19-1989118 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State laws and statutes, RSMo 1.010 et seq.; ordinance codification and revision procedure, RSMo 71.940 et seq.; municipal ordinances to conform to state law on the same subject matter, RSMo 71.010; certain cities declared to be special charter cities, RSMo 81.010; classification and consolidation of cities, RSMo 72.010 et seq.; special charter cities, RSMo 81.010 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 1-1. - Code designation and citation. 
    This Code shall be known and may be cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri," or simply as "the Code of Ordinances" or "the Code" or "Pleasant Hill Code." 
(Code 1994, § 1-1) 
State law reference- Codification of municipal general ordinances, RSMo 71.943; codification defined, RSMo 71.940; style or ordinances, RSMo 77.080. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. 
    City. The term "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if followed by the term "of Pleasant Hill, Missouri." 
    City council. The term "city council" means the city council of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri. 
    Code. The term "the Code" or "this Code" means the "Code of Ordinances, City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri." 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code or by any notice or order issued pursuant thereto, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Sunday. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the counties of Cass and Jackson. 
    Day. The term "day" is any period of 24 hours. 
    Daytime, nighttime. The term "daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. The term "nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision shall designate otherwise. 
    Fiscal year. The term "fiscal year" refers to the period beginning July 1 and ending June 30, which is the city's fiscal year. 
    Gender. Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
    In the city. The term "in the city" means and includes all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Law. The term "law" denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state, the ordinances of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Newspaper. Whenever in this Code or other ordinance of the city it is required that notice be published in the "official newspaper" or a "newspaper of general circulation published in the city," and if there is no such newspaper published within the city, the notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, regardless of its place of publication. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Notice. Whenever notice may be required under the provisions of this Code or other city ordinances, the same shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)	By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same at his residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion. 
(2)	By mailing such notice by certified or registered mail to such owner at his last known address. 
(3)	If the owner is unknown, or may not be notified under the requirements of subsection (1) or (2) of this definition, then by posting such notice in some conspicuous place on the premises at least five days before the act or action concerning which the notice is given is to take place. No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer, unless permission is given by such officer. 
The provisions of this rule shall not apply to those chapters of this Code wherein there is a separate definition of notice. 
    Nuisance. The term "nuisance" means anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community. 
    Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the term "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Offense; violation. The terms "offense" and "violation" mean any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code. 
    Officers, departments, etc. Officers, departments, boards, commissions, committees and employees referred to in this Code mean officers, departments, boards, commissions, committees and employees of the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Official time. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, it means Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time, as may be in current use in the city. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read as "and" and the term "and" may be read as "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company and any other group acting as a unit. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever the term "person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a fine or penalty, as to partnerships or associations, the term shall include the partners or members thereof, and as to corporations, shall include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such section. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Process. The term "process" includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Public way. The term "public way" includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare. 
    Real property. The term "real property," "premises," "real estate" or "lands" shall be deemed to be co-extensive with lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    RSMo. The abbreviation "RSMo" means the Revised Statutes of Missouri, as amended. 
    Shall; may. The term "shall" is mandatory. The term "may" is permissive. 
    Signature or subscription by mark. Where the written signature of any person is required, the proper handwriting of such person or his mark shall be intended. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but, a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" or "state" means the State of Missouri. 
    Street. The term "street" means and include any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley or other public thoroughfare, and each of such words shall include all of them. 
    Tangible personal property. The term "tangible personal property" includes goods, chattels and all personal property, except intangible personal property. 
    Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present. 
    Week. A week consists of seven consecutive days. 
    Wholesale, wholesaler, etc. The terms "wholesale," "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" relates to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for purposes of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer, who sells in smaller quantities direct to the consumer. 
    Writing. Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless expressly provided otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1994, § 1-3) 
State law reference- Definitions, rules of construction, RSMo 1.020 et seq.; construction of words and phrases, RSMo 1.090. 
Sec. 1-3. - Ordinances saved from repeal; Code does not affect. 
    Nothing contained in this Code of Ordinances or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the following: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)	Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)	Any ordinance providing for personnel regulations or fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city not inconsistent with such Code. 
(4)	Any appropriation ordinance.
(5)	Any right or franchise granted by the city council to any person.
(6)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating or in any way affecting any street or public way in the city. 
(7)	Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(8)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor.
(9)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city.
(10)	Any ordinance annexing property to the city, or providing for the boundaries of the city. 
(11)	Any zoning ordinance of the city.
(12)	Any ordinance levying taxes, not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
Such repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance which is repealed by this Code. 
(Code 1994, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-4. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1994, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified, either expressly or by implication, by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the subsequent ordinance repealing or modifying the prior ordinance shall go into effect unless therein otherwise expressly provided. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(c)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(d)	When an ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall itself be repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it be expressly so provided and such former ordinance, clause or provision is set forth at length. 
(Code 1994, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1994, § 1-6) 
State law reference- Severability of state statutes, RSMo 1.940. 
Sec. 1-7. - Catchlines of sections; history notes. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history notes and state law references that appear in this Code in footnote form are not part of this Code and are provided only for the convenience of the user of this Code. 
(c)	Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(Code 1994, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; 
but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(d)	Ordinances which are of a general or permanent nature shall be prepared for insertion in this Code and be deemed a part hereof. 
(Code 1994, § 1-8) 
State law reference- Ordinance codification and revision procedure, RSMo 71.940 et seq. 
Sec. 1-9. - Official copy. 
    The official copy of this Code, bearing the signature of the mayor and attestation of the city clerk as to its adoption shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. A copy of this Code shall be kept in the city clerk's office available for public inspection. 
(Code 1994, § 1-9) 
State law reference- Copy of code on file; availability for inspection by the public, RSMo 71.948. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code, in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1994, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations; suspension of sentence. 
(a)	Whereby any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, the doing of or the failure to do any thing or act is prohibited, declared to be a misdemeanor, an offense or unlawful, and no other penalty or punishment is provided therefor, the same shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or a jail sentence not to exceed 60 days or by both such fine and jail sentence unless a different penalty is required by law, in which event the punishment shall be the penalty required by law, any provision of this Code or other ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding. The term "misdemeanor" shall be construed to mean a violation of any ordinance of the city. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided, every day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)	If any person is found guilty of violating an ordinance of the city, the municipal judge shall have the right to suspend the imposition of sentence therefor in his sole discretion for a period of up to two years. 
(Code 1994, § 1-11; Ord. No. 1215, § 1, 8-24-1987; Ord. No. 1305, § 1, 7-27-1992) 
State law reference- Fine and costs for violation of municipal ordinances, RSMo 479.080; probation as penalty for ordinance violation, RSMo 559.607. 
Sec. 1-12. - Schedule of fines, court costs and bonds. 
    The city council has adopted a schedule of fines, court costs and bonds for certain violations of this Code. The schedule is included as appendix C to this Code. In the event no fine is provided in the schedule for a violation of this Code, then section 1-11 shall be controlling. 
Sec. 1-13. - Working off fines. 
(a)	The city hereby authorizes the municipal court, or other court having jurisdiction, to cause all persons who have been convicted and sentenced for violation of an ordinance of the city, whether the punishment is by fine or imprisonment, or by both, to be put to work and perform labor on the public streets, highways or alleys and other public works or buildings of the city, for such purposes as the city may deem necessary. 
(b)	The chief of police or other proper officer of the city shall have the power and be authorized and required to have or cause all such prisoners as may be directed by the court or other such chief officer of the city to work out the full number of days for which they may have been sentenced, at working upon such public streets, highways or alleys or other public works or buildings of the city as may have been designated. 
(c)	If the punishment is by fine, and the fine is not paid, then for every $20.00 of such judgment the prisoner shall not work more than one day. And it shall be deemed a part of the judgment and sentence of the court that such prisoner may be worked as herein provided. 
(Code 1994, § 1-12; Ord. No. 1017, §§ 1-3, 3-9-1976) 
State law reference- Labor on public works by city prisoners, RSMo 71.220. 
Sec. 1-14. - Installment payment of fine. 
    When a fine is assessed for a violation of an ordinance, it shall be within the discretion of the judge or other official assessing the fine to provide for the payment of the fine on an installment basis under such terms and conditions as he may deem appropriate. 
(Code 1994, § 1-13) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 71.200. 
Sec. 1-15. - When same offense punishable under different ordinances, etc. 
    In all cases wherein the same offense may be made punishable, or shall be created, by different provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city, or by different clauses or sections of the same ordinance, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery or penalty shall be had or enforced against the same person for the same offense, provided that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty or recovery being enforced or had. 
(Code 1994, § 1-14) 
Sec. 1-16. - Parties to an offense. 
    Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit, or aids or abets in the commission of any act declared herein to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons or as principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such unlawful act or offense or misdemeanor, and every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any provision hereof shall likewise be guilty. 
(Code 1994, § 1-15) 
Sec. 1-17. - Enforcement proceedings. 
    The various chapters of this code shall be enforced pursuant to the procedures described in this code. In addition, the city shall have all other legal rights of action, including, but not limited to, injunction, the general penalties found in section 1-11, and all other appropriate forms of legal relief found in the city's ordinances, state or federal statutes, or otherwise by law. 
Sec. 1-18. - Publication of ordinances by posting. 
(a)	Any ordinance, upon adoption, shall be posted in the city hall or in such manner as the council may direct, and from time to time shall be designated, and distributed, in such manner as the council may direct, and the same shall be deemed sufficient publication and information to the inhabitants of the city and to the general public, that the ordinance so posted is in full force and effect. All ordinances so posted shall remain for public inspection for a space of three days. 
(b)	Any person, except an officer of this city or one authorized to do so, who shall tear down, mark, alter, deface or in any way disturb any such copy posted as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction of the same shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 
(Code 1994, § 1-16; Ord. No. 389, § 2, 10-6-1914) 
Sec. 1-19. - Conflict of provisions. 
(a)	If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b)	If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(c)	If any of the provisions hereof conflict, and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general. 
Sec. 1-20. - Fees established by resolution; fee schedule. 
    Fees for permits, licenses, and other city services shall be as established from time to time by resolution or ordinance, as required by law, of the common council and set forth in the separate fee schedule adopted and maintained by the city. The city fee schedule is included as appendix B to this Code. 
Sec. 1-21. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri, is hereby amended to read as follows: "____________." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________, which said section reads as follows: "____________." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, with reference to the subject matter, as the case may be. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Classification of cities, RSMo 72.030 et seq.; charter cities, RSMo 81.010 et seq.; election of certain officers in special charter cities having populations between 3,000 and 10,000, RSMo 81.070; public officers and employees; bonds and records, RSMo 103.003 et seq.; conduct of public business, RSMo 610.010 et seq.; regulation of conflict of interest and lobbying, RSMo 105.450 et seq.; Missouri Ethics Commission, RSMo 105.955; removal and impeachment of county and municipal officers, RSMo 106.220; bonds of officers and contractors for public works, RSMo 107.010 et seq.; public and business records, RSMo 109.005 et seq.; depositories for public funds, RSMo 110.010 et seq.; taxes and fees associated with candidates for municipal office, RSMo 71.005; purchase of Missouri products by cities required, RSMo 71.140; property qualifications for officers prohibited, RSMo 71.150; financial administration and indebtedness in special charter cities, RSMo 95.415 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Open meetings and records. 
(a)	All meetings, records and votes are open to the public, except the city council may close any meeting, record or vote relating to the following: 
(1)	Legal actions, causes of action or litigation involving a public governmental body and any confidential or privileged communications between a public governmental body or its representatives and its attorneys. However, any vote relating to litigation involving a public governmental body shall be made public upon final disposition of the matter voted upon; provided, however, in matters involving the exercise of the power of eminent domain, the vote shall be announced or become public immediately following the action on the motion to authorize institution of such a legal action. Legal work product shall be considered a closed record. 
(2)	Leasing, purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental body where public knowledge of the transaction might adversely affect the legal consideration therefor. However, any vote or public record approving a contract relating to the leasing, purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental body shall be made public upon execution of the lease, purchase or sale of the real estate. 
(3)	Hiring, firing, disciplining or promoting an employee of a public governmental body. However, any vote on a final decision, when taken by a public governmental body, to hire, fire, promote or discipline an employee of a public governmental body must be made available to the public within 72 hours of the close of the meeting where such action occurs. Any employee so affected shall be entitled to prompt notice before such decision is made available to the public. 
(4)	Nonjudicial mental or physical health proceedings involving identifiable persons, including medical, psychiatric, psychological or alcoholism or drug dependency diagnosis or treatment. 
(5)	Testing and examination materials, before the test or examination is given or if it is to be given again, before so given again. 
(6)	Welfare cases of identifiable individuals.
(7)	Preparation, including any discussions or work product, on behalf of a public governmental body or its representatives for negotiations with employee groups. 
(8)	Software codes for electronic data processing and documentation thereof.
(9)	Specifications for competitive bidding, until either the specifications are officially approved by the public governmental body or the specifications are published for bid. 
(10)	Sealed bids and related documents, until the earlier of either when the bids are opened, or all bids are accepted or all bids are rejected. 
(11)	Individually identifiable personnel records, performance ratings or records pertaining to employees or applicants for employment, except that this exemption shall not apply to the names, positions, salaries and lengths of service of officers and employees of public agencies once they are employed as such. 
(12)	Records which are protected from disclosure by law.
(13)	Meetings and public records relating to scientific and technological innovations in which the owner has a proprietary interest. 
(b)	Pursuant to RSMo 610.021, all records that may be closed are hereby deemed closed records, unless the city council votes to make them public. Before closing a meeting to the public, a majority of a quorum of the city council must vote to do so in a public vote. The vote of each member of the council on the question of closing the meeting by reference to a specific exception shall be announced at a public meeting and entered into the minutes. 
(c)	The city council shall give notice of the time, date and place of a closed meeting and the reason for holding it by reference to specific exception. The notice shall be the same as in subsection (d) of this section. No other business may be discussed in a closed meeting which does not directly relate to the specific reason announced to close the meeting to the public. 
(d)	The city council shall give notice of the time, date, place and tentative agenda of each meeting. The notice shall be placed on the appropriate bulletin board at city hall at least 24 hours prior to the meeting. If an emergency makes it impossible to give 24 hours' notice, the reasons must be reflected in the minutes. Notice shall also be given to any representative of the news media who requests notice of a particular meeting. 
(e)	Each meeting shall be held at a place reasonably accessible to the public, and a time reasonably convenient to the public, unless for good cause such a place or time is impossible or impractical. When it is necessary to hold a meeting on less than 24 hours' notice or at a place that is not reasonably accessible to the public, or at a time that is not reasonably convenient to the public, the nature of the good cause justifying that departure from the normal requirements shall be stated in the minutes. 
(f)	A formally constituted subunit of a parent governmental body may conduct a meeting without notice during a lawful meeting of the parent governmental body, a recess in that meeting, or immediately following that meeting, if the meeting of the subunit is publicly announced at the parent meeting and the subject of the meeting reasonably coincides with the subjects discussed or acted upon by the parent governmental body. 
(g)	The city clerk shall be the custodian of records and will be responsible for maintenance and control of all records. The custodian shall provide public access to all public records as soon as possible but no later than the third business day following the date the request is received by the custodian. If additional delay is necessary, the custodian shall give a detailed explanation for the delay and the place and earliest time and date the record will be available for inspection. If a request for access is denied, the custodian shall provide, upon request, a written statement of the grounds for such denial. Such statement shall cite the specific provision of law under which access is denied and shall be furnished to the requester no later than the end of the third business day following the date that the request for the statement is received. The custodian shall charge records fees as provided in the city fee schedule. The custodian may designate deputy custodians in the following departments: police, fire and building inspection. 
(Code 1994, § 2-1; Res. No. 87-119, § 7, 11-9-1987) 
State law reference- Open meetings and records, RSMo 610.020 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2. - Confidentiality of employee records. 
    All records of the city regarding the hiring, firing, disciplining or promoting of any particular employee where personal information about the employee is discussed or recorded, or when there is a discussion or decision as to whether to hire, fire, promote or discipline any particular employee, and all other personal information relating to the performance or merits of individual employees are hereby declared to be closed. 
(Ord. No. 1633, § 1, 6-25-2007) 
Sec. 2-3. - City website. 
    The city council has authorized and there has been created a city website that will be administered, amended, and maintained as provided from time to time by the city council by such personnel as may be directed by the council. The address of the city's website is http://www.pleasanthill.com. 
Secs. 2-4-2-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Election of certain officers in special charter cities having populations between 3,000 and 10,000, RSMo 81.070; division of city into wards; councilmen, RSMo 77.030; qualifications of councilmen, RSMo 77.060; certain powers of mayor and council retained upon adoption of city administrator form of government, RSMo 77.048. (Back)
Sec. 2-25. - Meeting dates, times. 
    Regular meetings of the city council shall be held the second and fourth Monday of every month at 6:30 p.m. or other times that the council deems appropriate. The location of such regular meetings shall be at the designated council chambers. 
(Code 1994, § 2-26; Ord. No. 1308, 8-27-1992; Ord. No. 1710A, § 1, 4-30-2012) 
Sec. 2-26. - Members to be city residents during term of office. 
    Each member of the city council shall be a resident of the city throughout the term for which the member was elected, and a resident of the precinct for which the member was elected. 
(Code 1994, § 2-27) 
Secs. 2-27-2-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-56. - Established. 
    The various departments of the city shall be such as are established by the city council from time to time and funded through the annual budget. 
(Code 1994, § 2-46) 
Secs. 2-57-2-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-86. - Commission and boards addressed in other chapters. 
    In addition to the boards, commissions, committees, and authorities included in this article, the city has established a planning commission, as set forth in chapter 54, and a historic preservation commission and board of zoning and adjustments, as set forth in chapter 58. 
Secs. 2-87-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARK BOARD 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to establish a park board, RSMo 90.520 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 2-116. - Established, appointment. 
    A park board is established and the mayor, by and with the consent of the city council, shall appoint a park board consisting of nine directors, chosen from the qualified citizens of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 58-26; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 9-20-1955) 
Sec. 2-117. - Term of office. 
    The park board directors, after the terms of the initial members, shall hold office for three years. 
(Code 1994, § 58-27; Ord. No. 790, § 2, 9-20-1955) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 90.530. 
Sec. 2-118. - Removal. 
    The mayor may, with the consent of the city council, remove any park board director for misconduct or neglect of duty. 
(Code 1994, § 58-28; Ord. No. 790, § 4, 9-20-1955) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 90.530. 
Sec. 2-119. - Vacancies; compensation. 
    Vacancies on the park board occasioned by removal, resignation or otherwise shall be reported to the city council and be filled in like manner as original appointments. No director shall receive compensation for service on the board. 
(Code 1994, § 58-29; Ord. No. 790, § 5, 9-20-1955) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 90.540. 
Sec. 2-120. - Organization; exclusive control of expenditures. 
    The park board directors shall immediately after their appointment meet and organize by the election of one of their number as president, and by the election of such other officers as they may deem necessary. They shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for their guidance and for the government of the park as may be expedient, not inconsistent with RSMo 90.500-90.570. They shall have exclusive control of the expenditures of all money collected to the credit of the park fund and of the supervision, improvement, care and custody of the park. All moneys received for the park shall be deposited in the treasury of the city to the credit of the park fund and shall be kept separate and apart from the other moneys of the city and drawn upon by the proper officers of the city upon the properly authenticated vouchers of the park board. The board shall have the power to purchase or otherwise secure grounds to be used for such park; shall have the power to appoint a suitable person to take care of the park and necessary assistants for such person, and fix their compensation; shall have the power to remove such appointees; and shall in general carry out the spirit and intent of RSMo 90.500-90.570 in establishing and maintaining public parks. 
(Code 1994, § 58-30; Ord. No. 790, § 6, 9-20-1955) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 90.550. 
Sec. 2-121. - Additional powers. 
    The park board shall have the power to exclude any person from any recreational activities on the lake or grounds for drunken and disorderly conduct of any kind or for failing to comply with this article or the rules and regulations set by the park board. 
(Code 1994, § 58-31; Ord. No. 1278, § 17, 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 2-122. - Annual report. 
    The park board of directors shall make, on or before the second Monday in June, an annual report to the city council stating the condition of their trust on May 1 of that year accounting for the various sums of money received from the park fund and other sources, and how much moneys have been expended and for what purposes, with such other statistics, information and suggestions as they may deem of general interest. The financial statement of the park board shall be published. All such portions of such report as relate to the receipt and expenditures of money shall be verified by affidavit. 
(Code 1994, § 58-32; Ord. No. 790, § 7, 9-20-1955) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 90.560. 
Sec. 2-123. - Donations, gifts, etc. 
    Any person desiring to make donations of money, personal property or real estate for the benefit of the park shall have a right to vest the title to the money or real estate so donated in the park board created under RSMo 90.500-90.570, to be held and controlled by such board when accepted according to the terms of the deed, gift, devise or bequest of such property; and as to such property, the board shall be held and considered to be special trustees. 
(Code 1994, § 58-33; Ord. No. 790, § 8, 9-20-1955) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 90.570. 
Secs. 2-124-2-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Election of certain officers in special charter cities having populations between 3,000 and 10,000, RSMo 81.070; option for appointment of certain officers in third class cities, RSMo 77.040; appointment, discharge, and regulations concerning certain officers of third class cities, RSMo 77.046. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-145. - Personnel manual. 
    The city has compiled a personnel manual that has been approved by the city council and is hereby adopted, as if fully set forth herein, together with such future amendments as may be approved by the city administrator. 
Secs. 2-146-2-173. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OFFICERS 

Sec. 2-174. - Elective officers. 
    At the general city election in even-numbered years, there shall be elected a mayor and four councilmen, one at large and one from each of the three voting precincts. 
(Code 1994, § 2-101; Ord. No. 997, § 1, 9-12-1972; Ord. No. 1044, § 3, 6-14-1977) 
Sec. 2-175. - Compensation. 
    The compensation to be paid to officers of the city elected or appointed shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 2-102; Ord. No. 1258, § 1, 12-19-1989) 
Sec. 2-176. - Filling of vacancies. 
(a)	If a vacancy occurs in any elective office, the mayor or the person exercising the duties of the mayor shall cause a special election to be held to fill such vacancy, giving at least ten days' notice thereof by publication in some newspaper published in the city, or at least 20 handbills posted up at as many public places within the city. 
(b)	When any such vacancy occurs within six months of a general municipal election, no election shall be called to fill such vacancy, but the same shall be filled by the mayor or the person exercising the duties of the mayor by appointment. 
(c)	If a vacancy occurs in any office not elective, the mayor shall appoint a suitable person to discharge the duties of such office until the first regular meeting of the city council thereafter, at which time the vacancy shall be permanently filled. 
(Code 1994, § 2-103; Ord. No. 738, 7-14-1949) 
Secs. 2-177-2-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest, RSMo 105.450 et seq.; financial interest statements; local ordinances allowed, RSMo 105.485. (Back)
Sec. 2-206. - Declaration of policy. 
    The proper operation of government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a procedure for disclosure by certain officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the city. 
(Code 1994, § 2-116; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 8-26-1991; Ord. No. 1324, § 1, 9-13-1993; Ord. No. 1345, § 1, 9-12-1994; Ord. No. 1370, § 1, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 1424, § 1, 8-10-1998; Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 1-24-2000; Ord. No. 1519, § 1, 8-12-2002; Ord. No. 1552, § 1, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 1613, § 1, 8-28-2006; Ord. No. 1660, § 1, 8-25-2008; Ord. No. 1691, § 1, 8-23-2010; Ord. No. 1714, § 1, 8-27-2012) 
Sec. 2-207. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)	All elected and appointed officials as well as employees of a political subdivision must comply with RSMo 105.454 on conflicts of interest as well as any other state law governing official conduct. 
(b)	Any member of the governing body of a political subdivision who has a "substantial or private interest" in any measure, bill, order or ordinance proposed or pending before such governing body must disclose that interest to the secretary or clerk of such body and such disclosure shall be recorded in the appropriate journal of the governing body. Substantial or private interest is defined as ownership by the individual, his spouse, or his dependent children, whether singularly or collectively, directly or indirectly of: 
(1)	Ten percent or more of any business entity; or
(2)	And interest having a value of $10,000.00 or more; or
(3)	The receipt of a salary, gratuity, or other compensation or remuneration of $5,000.00 or more, per year from any individual, partnership, organization, or association within any calendar year. 
(Code 1994, § 2-117; Ord. No. 1287, § 2, 8-26-1991; Ord. No. 1324, § 2, 9-13-1993; Ord. No. 1345, § 2, 9-12-1994; Ord. No. 1370, § 2, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 1400, § 2, 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 1424, § 2, 8-10-1998; Ord. No. 1457, § 2, 1-24-2000; Ord. No. 1519, § 2, 8-12-2002; Ord. No. 1552, § 2, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 1613, § 2, 8-28-2006; Ord. No. 1660, § 2, 8-25-2008; Ord. No. 1691, § 2, 8-23-2010; Ord. No. 1714, § 2, 8-27-2012) 
Sec. 2-208. - Disclosure reports. 
    Each elected official, the chief administrative officer, the chief purchasing officer, and the full-time general counsel shall disclose the following information by May 1, if any such transactions occurred during the previous calendar year: 
(a)	For such person, and all persons within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity of such person, the date and the identities of the parties to each transaction with a total value in excess of $500.00, if any, that such person had with the political subdivision, other than compensation received as an employee or payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political subdivision, and other than transfers for no consideration to the political subdivision. 
(b)	The date and the identities of the parties to each transaction known to the person with a total value in excess of $500.00, if any, that any business entity in which such person had a substantial interest, had with the political subdivision, other than payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political subdivision or transactions involving payment for providing utility service to the political subdivision, and other than transfers for no consideration to the political subdivision. 
(c)	The chief administrative officer and the chief purchasing officer also shall disclose by May 1 for the previous calendar year the following information: 
(1)	The name and address of each of the employers of such person from whom income of $1,000.00 or more was received during the year covered by the statement; 
(2)	The name and address of each sole proprietorship that he owned; the name, address and the general nature of the business conducted of each general partnership and joint venture in which he was a partner or participant; and the name and address of each partner of coparticipant for each partnership or joint venture unless such names and addresses are filed by the partnership or joint venture with the Secretary of State; the name, address and general nature of the business conducted of any closely held corporation or limited partnership in which the person owned the percent of more of any class of the outstanding stock or limited partnership units; and the name of any publicly traded corporation or limited partnership that is listed on a regulated stock exchange or automated quotation system in which the person owned two percent or more of any class or outstanding stock, limited partnership units or other equity interests; 
(3)	The name and address of each corporation for which such person served in the capacity of a director, officer or receive. 
(Code 1994, § 2-118; Ord. No. 1287, § 3, 8-26-1991; Ord. No. 1324, § 3, 9-13-1993; Ord. No. 1345, § 3, 9-12-1994; Ord. No. 1370, § 3, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 1400, § 3, 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 1424, § 3, 8-10-1998; Ord. No. 1457, § 3, 1-24-2000; Ord. No. 1519, § 3, 8-12-2002; Ord. No. 1552, § 3, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 1613, § 3, 8-28-2006; Ord. No. 1660, § 3, 8-25-2008; Ord. No. 1691, § 3, 8-23-2010; Ord. No. 1714, § 3, 8-27-2012) 
Sec. 2-209. - Filing of reports. 
(a)	The financial interest statements shall be filed at the following times, but no person is required to file more than one financial interest statement in any calendar year; 
(1)	Every person required to file a financial interest statement shall file the statement annually not later than May 1 and the statement shall cover the calendar year ending the immediately preceding December 31; provided that any member of the council may supplement the financial interest statement to report additional interest acquired after December 31 of the covered year until the date of filing of the financial interest statement. 
(2)	Each person appointed to office shall file the statement within 30 days of such appointment or employment; 
(b)	Financial disclosure reports giving the financial information required in section 2-208 shall be filed with the local political subdivision and with the Secretary of State prior to January 1, 1994. After January 1, 1994, reports shall be filed with the local political subdivision and the Missouri Ethics Commission. The reports shall be available for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(Code 1994, § 2-119; Ord. No. 1287, § 4, 8-26-1991; Ord. No. 1324, § 4, 9-13-1993; Ord. No. 1345, § 4, 9-12-1994; Ord. No. 1370, § 4, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 1400, § 4, 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 1424, § 4, 8-10-1998; Ord. No. 1457, § 4, 1-24-2000; Ord. No. 1519, § 4, 8-12-2002; Ord. No. 1552, § 4, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 1613, § 4, 8-28-2006; Ord. No. 1660, § 4, 8-25-2008; Ord. No. 1691, § 4, 8-23-2010; Ord. No. 1714, § 4, 8-27-2012) 
Secs. 2-210-2-226. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATOR 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- City manager form of government, RSMo 77.010; employment of city administrator authorized in third class cities, RSMo 77.042; certain powers of mayor and city council retained, RSMo 77.048. (Back)
Sec. 2-227. - Office established. 
    There is hereby created and established the office of city administrator. 
(Code 1994, § 2-131; Ord. No. 1231, § 1, 8-22-1988) 
Sec. 2-228. - Appointment and tenure. 
    A qualified person shall be appointed city administrator by the mayor and such appointment shall be approved by a majority of the city council. The person so appointed shall serve for an indefinite term. 
(Code 1994, § 2-132; Ord. No. 1231, § 2, 8-22-1988) 
Sec. 2-229. - Qualifications. 
    The person appointed to the office of city administrator shall be at least 25 years of age; and shall be a graduate of an accredited university or college, majoring in public or municipal administration; or shall have the equivalent qualifications and experience in financial, administration and/or public relations fields. 
(Code 1994, § 2-133; Ord. No. 1231, § 3, 8-22-1988) 
State law reference- Qualifications of city administrator, RSMo 77.044. 
Sec. 2-230. - Bond. 
    The city administrator, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall file with the city a bond in the amount of $50,000.00; such bond shall be approved by the city council and such bond shall insure the city for faithful and honest performance of the duties of the city administrator and for rendering a full and proper account to the city for funds and property which shall come into the possession or control of the city administrator. The cost of such bond shall be paid by the city; however, should the city administrator be covered by a blanket bond to the same extent, such individual bond shall not be required. 
(Code 1994, § 2-134; Ord. No. 1231, § 4, 8-22-1988) 
Sec. 2-231. - Compensation. 
    The city administrator shall receive such compensation as may be determined from time to time by the city council and such compensation shall be payable biweekly. 
(Code 1994, § 2-135; Ord. No. 1231, § 5, 8-22-1988) 
State law reference- Compensation of city administrator, RSMo 77.044. 
Sec. 2-232. - Removal. 
    The city administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. The mayor, with the consent of a majority of the city council, may remove the city administrator from office at will, and the city administrator may also be removed by a majority vote of the city council independently of the mayor's approval or disapproval. If requested, the mayor and city council shall grant the city administrator a public hearing within 30 days following notice of such removal. During interim, the mayor, with the approval of a majority of the city council, or by majority vote of the city council without the mayor's approval, may suspend the city administrator from duty, but shall continue his salary for two calendar months following the final removal date; provided, however, that if the city administrator shall be removed for acts of dishonesty or acts of moral turpitude, such salary shall not be continued. 
(Code 1994, § 2-136; Ord. No. 1231, § 6, 8-22-1988) 
Sec. 2-233. - Duties. 
(a)	Administrative office. The city administrator shall be the chief administrative assistant to the mayor and as such shall be the administrative officer of the city government. Except as otherwise specified by ordinance or by the law of the state, the city administrator shall coordinate and generally supervise the operation of all departments of the city. 
(b)	Purchasing. The city administrator shall be the purchasing agent for the city and all purchases amounting to less than $10,000.00 shall be under his direction and supervision, and all such purchases shall be made in accordance with purchasing rules and procedures approved by the city council. 
(c)	Budget. The city administrator shall be the budget officer of the city and shall assemble estimates of the year and shall prepare a program of activities within the financial power of the city, embodying in it a budget document with proper supporting schedules and an analysis to be proposed to the mayor and city council for their final approval. 
(d)	Financial reports. The city administrator shall make monthly reports to the mayor and city council relative to the financial condition of the city. Such reports shall show the financial condition of the city in relation to the budget. 
(e)	Annual report. The city administrator shall prepare and present to the mayor and city council an annual report of the city's affairs, including in such report a summary of reports of department heads and such other reports as the mayor and city council may require. 
(f)	Personnel system. The city administrator shall act as the personnel officer of the city and shall recommend an appropriate position classification system and pay plan to the mayor and city council. The city administrator, after consultation with department heads, shall approve advancements and appropriate pay increases within the approved pay plans and position classification system. The city administrator shall have the power to appoint and remove (in accordance with personnel system regulations approved by the city council) all subordinate employees of the city. The city administrator shall make recommendations of appointment and removal of department heads. 
(g)	Policy formation. The city administrator shall recommend to the mayor and city council adoption of such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the city or for the improvement of administrative services for the city. 
(h)	City council agenda. The city administrator shall submit to the mayor and city council a proposed agenda for each council meeting at least 48 hours before the time of the regular council meeting. 
(i)	Boards and committees. The city administrator shall work with all city boards and committees to help coordinate the work of each. 
(j)	City council meetings. The city administrator shall attend all meetings of the city council. 
(k)	Bid specifications. The city administrator shall supervise the preparation of all bid specifications for services and equipment, and receive sealed bids for presentation to the city council. 
(l)	State and federal aid programs. The city administrator shall coordinate federal and state programs which may have application to the city. 
(m)	Conference attendance. The city administrator shall attend state and regional conferences and programs applicable to his office and the business of the city whenever such attendance is directed and approved by the city council and mayor. 
(n)	Press releases. The city administrator shall be responsible for keeping the public informed in the purposes and methods of city government through all available news media. 
(o)	Recordkeeping. The city administrator shall keep full and accurate records of all actions taken by him in the course of his duties, and he shall safely and properly keep all records and papers belonging to the city and entrusted to his care; all such records shall be and remain the property of the city and be open to inspection by the mayor and city council at all times. 
(p)	Miscellaneous. In addition to the foregoing duties, the city administrator shall perform any and all other duties or functions prescribed by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1994, § 2-137; Ord. No. 1231, § 7, 8-22-1988) 
Sec. 2-234. - Powers. 
(a)	City property. The city administrator shall have responsibility for all real and personal property of the city. He shall have responsibility for all inventories of such property and for the upkeep of all such property. Personal property may be sold by the city administrator only with approval of the city council. Real property may be sold only with the approval of the city council by resolution or ordinance. 
(b)	Administrative policies. The city administrator shall have the power to prescribe such rules and regulations as he shall deem necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies subject to his authority, and he shall have the power to revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of the administrative service except those prescribed by the city council. 
(c)	Coordinate departments. The city administrator shall have the power to coordinate the work of all the departments of the city and, at times of an emergency, shall have authority to assign the employees of the city to any department where they are needed for the most effective discharge of the functions of city government. 
(d)	Investigate and report. The city administrator shall have the power to investigate and to examine or inquire into the affairs or operation of any department of the city under his jurisdiction, and shall report on any condition or fact concerning the city government requested by the mayor or city council. 
(e)	Coordinate officials. The city administrator shall have the power to overrule any action taken by a department head, and may supersede him in the functions of his office. 
(f)	Appear before council. The city administrator shall have the power to appear before and address the city council at any meeting. 
(g)	Scope. At no time shall the duties or powers of the city administrator supersede the action by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1994, § 2-138; Ord. No. 1231, § 8, 8-22-1988) 
Sec. 2-235. - Interference by members of council. 
    No member of the city council or the mayor shall directly interfere with the conduct of any department or duties of employees subordinate to the city administrator except at the express direction of the city council or with approval of the city administrator. 
(Code 1994, § 2-139; Ord. No. 1231, § 9, 8-22-1988) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Liquor control law, RSMo ch. 311; nonintoxicating beer, RSMo ch. 312; municipal authority to license and regulate alcoholic beverages and nonintoxicating beer, RSMo 311.220, 312.140. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Closed place means a place where all doors are locked and where no patrons are in the place or about the premises. 
    Intoxicating liquor means alcohol for beverage purposes, alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt or other liquors, or combination of liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous or fermented, and all preparations or mixtures for beverage purposes, containing in excess of one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, except for nonintoxicating beer as defined in RSMo 312.010. 
    Nonintoxicating beer means any beer manufactured from pure hops or pure extract of hops, and pure barley malt or other wholesome grains or cereals, and wholesome yeast, and pure water, and free from all harmful substances, preservatives and adulterants, and having an alcoholic content of more than one-half of one percent by volume and not exceeding 3.2 percent by weight. 
    Person means any individual, firm, association, stock company, syndicate, copartnership, partnership, corporation, receiver, trustee, conservator or other officer appointed by any state or federal court. 
    Resort means any establishment having at least 40 rooms for the overnight accommodation of transient guests, having a restaurant or similar facility on the premises at least 60 percent of the gross income of which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food, or means a restaurant provided with a special place and accommodations where, in consideration of payment, food, without lodging, is habitually furnished to travelers and customers, and which restaurant establishment's annual gross food sales for the past two years immediately proceeding its application for a license shall not have been less than $100,000.00 per year, or means a seasonal resort restaurant with food sales as determined in section 4-75(b) or means a new restaurant establishment having been in operation for at least 90 days preceding the application for such license, with a projection based upon its sale of food during the preceding 90 days which would exceed not less than $100,000.00 per year. 
    Sale by the drink means the sale of any intoxicating liquor except malt liquor, in the original package in any quantity less than 50 milliliters, and may be made only by the holder of a retail liquor dealer's license and when so made, the container in every case shall be emptied and the contents thereof served as any other intoxicating liquors sold by the drink are served. 
(Code 1994, § 6-1; Ord. No. 1129, §§ 2-5, 12-8-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.020, 311.100, 311.200(2), 312.010, 312.020. 
Sec. 4-2. - Prohibited hours of sale. 
(a)	No person having a license under this chapter, or any employee of such person, shall sell, give away, otherwise dispose of, or suffer the same to be done upon or about his premises, any intoxicating liquor in any quantity between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays. 
(b)	If the person has a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink, his premises shall be and remain a closed place as defined in this section between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays. Where such licenses authorizing the sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink are held by clubs or hotels, this section shall apply only to the room in which intoxicating liquor is dispensed; and where such licenses are held by restaurants whose business is conducted in one room only and substantial quantities of food and merchandise, other than intoxicating liquors, are dispensed, then the licensee shall keep securely locked during the hours and on the days specified in this section all refrigerators, cabinets, cases, boxes and taps from which intoxicating liquor is dispensed. 
(c)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the sale or delivery of any intoxicating liquor during the hours or on any of the days specified in this chapter by a wholesaler licensed under the provisions of this chapter or under the provisions of state law to a person licensed to sell intoxicating liquor at retail. 
(Code 1994, § 6-2; Ord. No. 1129, § 15, 12-8-1981; Ord. No. 1237, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1318, §§ 1, 2, 6-14-1993) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.290. 
Sec. 4-3. - Sunday sales. 
(a)	Upon payment of the permit fee as provided herein, it shall be lawful for a permit holder who is otherwise licensed to sell liquor at retail to sell liquor at retail on Sundays within the city limits, if said permit holder has all necessary permits and has met all necessary requirements of the state. 
(b)	Sales on Sunday as allowed herein shall be subject to the requirements and limitations of the state insofar as hours of operation, method of sale and all other applicable requirements and restrictions of any kind whatsoever. 
(c)	When December 31 falls on a Sunday, any person having a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink may open for business and sell intoxicating liquor by the drink under the provisions of his license on that day after 1:00 p.m. and until the time which would be lawful on another day of the week, notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter or any other provision of law to the contrary. 
(Code 1994, §§ 6-2, 6-3; Ord. No. 1129, §§ 15, 16, 12-8-1981; Ord. No. 1237, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1318, §§ 1, 2, 6-14-1993) 
State law reference- Sunday sales, RSMo 311.089, 311.090, 311.097, 311.098, 311.102, 311.293, 311.298, 311.481. 
Sec. 4-4. - Unauthorized liquors prohibited on premises licensed for sale by the drink. 
    It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license authorized by this chapter for the sale of any intoxicating liquor at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold, to keep or secret, or to allow any other person to keep or secret, in or upon the premises described in such license any intoxicating liquor other than the kind of liquor expressly authorized to be sold by such license. No person, agent or employee of any other person in any capacity shall sell intoxicating liquor in any other place than that designated in the license or at any other time or otherwise than is authorized by this chapter and the regulations herein provided. 
(Code 1994, § 6-4; Ord. No. 1129, § 17, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-5. - Possession restricted. 
    No person shall possess intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer within the city, unless the same has been acquired from some person holding a duly authorized license to sell the same under this chapter, or other licensed dealers outside of the city, or unless the intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer is had or kept with the written or printed permission of the state supervisor of liquor control, and the package in which intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer is contained and from which it is taken for consumption has, while containing intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, been labeled and sealed with the official seal prescribed under the state law and the regulations thereunder. Nothing in this chapter shall be so construed as to prevent the natural fermentation of fruit juices in the home for the exclusive use of the occupants of the home and their guests. 
(Code 1994, § 6-5; Ord. No. 1129, § 18, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-6. - Regulations as to druggists and physicians. 
(a)	Any druggist may have in his possession intoxicating liquor purchased by him from a licensed vendor under a license pursuant to this chapter, or intoxicating liquor lawfully acquired at the place of acquisition and legally transported into this state and lawfully inspected, gauged and labeled as provided for in RSMo ch. 311, such intoxicating liquor to be used in the business of a druggist in compounding medicines or as a solvent or preservant. 
(b)	Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a regularly licensed druggist in that after he procures a license therefor in compliance with this chapter, from selling intoxicating liquor in the original package, but not to be drunk or the packages opened on the premises where sold. 
(c)	Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting the right of a physician to prescribe intoxicating liquor in accordance with his professional judgment for any patient at any time or prevent a druggist from selling intoxicating liquor to a person on prescription from any regularly licensed physician as above provided. If any druggist operates only under the federal permit, he shall file a sworn record of each prescription filed with the city clerk monthly. 
(Code 1994, § 6-6; Ord. No. 1129, § 20, 12-8-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.470. 
Sec. 4-7. - Sales to or by certain persons restricted. 
    No person or his employee shall sell or supply intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer or permit the same to be sold or supplied to a habitual drunkard or to any person who is under or apparently under the influence of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer. Intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer shall not be given, sold or otherwise supplied to any person under the age of 21 years but this shall not apply to supplying of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer to a person under such age for medical purposes only, or by the parents or guardian of such person, or to administering of such intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer to such person by a physician. No person under the age of 21 years shall sell or assist in the sale or dispensing of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, with these exceptions: 
(1)	In any place of business licensed in accordance with this chapter, where at least 50 percent of the gross sales made consists of goods, merchandise or commodities other than intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer in the original package, persons at least 18 years of age may stock, arrange displays, accept payment for and sack for carryout intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer. Delivery of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer away from the licensed business premises cannot be performed by anyone under the age of 21 years. 
(2)	In any distillery, warehouse, wholesale distributorship or similar place of business which stores or distributes intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer but which does not sell intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer at retail, persons at least 18 years of age may be employed and their duties may include the handling of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer for all purposes except consumption, sale at retail, or dispensing for consumption or sale at retail. 
(3)	Persons 18 years of age or older may, when acting in the capacity of a waiter or waitress, accept payment for or serve intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer in places of business which sell food for consumption on the premises if at least 50 percent of all sales in those places consists of food; provided, that nothing in this section shall authorize persons under 21 years of age to mix or serve across the bar intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer. 
(Code 1994, § 6-7; Ord. No. 1129, § 21, 12-8-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.310, 312.400. 
Sec. 4-8. - Purchases by or for, or possession by, underage persons. 
(a)	Any person of the age of 17 years and under the age of 21 years who represents that he has attained the age of 21 for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any way receiving intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer, shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)	Any person under the age of 17 years who represents that he has attained the age of 21 years for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any way receiving intoxicating liquor, except in cases authorized by law, or nonintoxicating beer, shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of RSMo ch. 211, the Missouri Juvenile Code. 
(c)	Any person under the age of 21 years, who purchases or attempts to purchase, or has in his possession, any nonintoxicating beer or intoxicating liquor is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)	Any person who shall purchase, abet, aid, assist or connive in any manner to procure nonintoxicating beer or intoxicating liquor for the use or consumption by any minor shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1994, § 6-8; Ord. No. 1072, § 7, 12-12-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.310, 311.320, 311.325, 312.400, 312.405, 312.407. 
Sec. 4-9. - Financial interest of wholesalers. 
    Distillers, wholesalers, winemakers, brewers or their employees, officers or agents, shall not under any circumstances, directly or indirectly, have any financial interest in the retail business for sale of intoxicating liquors, and shall not directly or indirectly loan, give away or furnish equipment, money, credit or property of any kind, except ordinary commercial credit for liquors sold to such retail dealers. Proof of the violation of this section shall forfeit the license of such wholesaler and retailer. 
(Code 1994, § 6-9; Ord. No. 1129, § 29, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-10. - Use of property for unlawful purpose. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate, lease, occupy or control any building, car, shed, room, basement, structure, tent or booth and knowingly permit intoxicating liquor to be unlawfully manufactured, sold, stored, kept or consumed therein or thereon. 
(Code 1994, § 6-10; Ord. No. 1129, § 30, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-11. - Regulation of sale in original packages. 
    Intoxicating liquor shall be sold at retail in the original package of not less than 50 milliliters only upon a license granted by the city council and intoxicating liquor so sold shall not be consumed upon the premises where sold, nor the original package opened on such premises of the vendor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No intoxicating liquor purchased in the original package shall be consumed or permitted to be consumed upon any premises where intoxicating liquor is legally authorized to be sold. 
(Code 1994, § 6-11; Ord. No. 1129, § 24, 12-8-1981) 
Secs. 4-12-4-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license and regulate sale of intoxicating liquor, RSMo 311.22(2); authority to license and regulate sale of nonintoxicating beer, RSMo 312.140. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 4-41-4-68. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 4-69. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell or expose for sale, either at wholesale or retail, in the city, intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer in any quantity without first having obtained a license from the city therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-41; Ord. No. 1129, § 6, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-70. - Fees. 
(a)	No person shall manufacture, distill, blend, sell or offer for sale intoxicating liquor within this city at wholesale or retail, or solicit orders for the sale of intoxicating liquor within the city without procuring a license from the city clerk authorizing him to do so. For such license, there shall be paid to, and collected by the city collector, annual charges as established by the city council. 
(b)	Solicitors, manufacturers and blenders of intoxicating liquor shall not be required to take out a merchant's license for the sale of their products at the place of manufacture or in quantities of not less than one gallon. 
(Code 1994, § 6-48; Ord. No. 1129, § 10, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-71. - Licenses not specifically enumerated. 
    In addition to the licenses specifically enumerated in this chapter, the clerk may issue, upon compliance with all provisions of this chapter, such other alcoholic beverages licenses as are recognized and issued by, and for which local license issuance is permitted under, applicable state law. 
Sec. 4-72. - Application. 
(a)	Application for license under the provisions of this chapter shall be made in writing to the city clerk, who shall present the same to the city council at the next regular meeting of the council. Application, except for sale of malt liquors not in excess of five percent of alcohol by weight, shall be accompanied by a detailed inventory and appraised valuation of stock of goods, having a value, according to invoices, of at least $1,000.00 exclusive of fixtures and intoxicating liquors, sworn to by the applicant. 
(b)	All applications for all licenses mentioned under this chapter shall be made accompanied by a proper remittance made payable to the city. 
(c)	Upon approval of any application for a license, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant the appropriate license. 
(Code 1994, § 6-42; Ord. No. 1129, §§ 13, 22, 27, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-73. - Qualifications of applicant. 
    No person shall be granted a license under this chapter unless such person is of good moral character, nor shall any corporation be granted a license under this chapter unless the managing officer of such corporation is of good moral character, and no person shall be granted a license or permit under this chapter whose license as such dealer has been revoked, or who has been convicted of a violation of the provisions of any law applicable to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor, or who employs in his business as such dealer, any person whose license has been revoked or who has been convicted of violating such law since the date aforesaid. 
(Code 1994, § 6-43; Ord. No. 1129, § 25, 12-8-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.060. 
Sec. 4-74. - Issuance; scope; contents. 
(a)	Upon payment of a license tax provided in this chapter, the city clerk shall grant the applicant a license to conduct business in the city from the granting of the license to December 31 of such year, and if upon the first day of the year, for the period of one year. 
(b)	A separate license shall be required for each place of business. Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall particularly describe the premises at which intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer may be sold thereunder, and such license shall not be deemed to authorize or permit the sale of different kinds of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer at that or any other place than that described therein. 
(c)	The city clerk shall not deliver to any person a license under the provision of this chapter until such person shall produce the receipt of the city collector showing that the license taxes levied on the same have been paid. 
(Code 1994, § 6-44; Ord. No. 1129, § 23, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-75. - Sale of liquor by the drink license prohibited. 
    No license shall be issued for the sale of intoxicating liquor, other than malt liquor containing liquor not in excess of five percent by weight, by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises where sold. The provisions of this section shall not apply if sale by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises where sold shall have been authorized by a vote of the majority of the qualified voters of the city in accord with RSMo 311.110, or unless the population of the city exceeds 20,000 inhabitants. 
(Code 1994, § 6-45; Ord. No. 1129, § 7, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-76. - License for sale of liquor by the drink in resorts; resort defined; bond. 
(a)	Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any person who possesses the qualifications required by this chapter, and who now or hereinafter meets the requirements of and complies with the provisions of this chapter, may apply for and the city clerk may issue a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises of any resort as described in the application. 
(b)	A seasonal resort restaurant is a restaurant which is not a new restaurant establishment and which is open for business six or fewer consecutive months in any calendar year. Fifty percent of all gross sales of such restaurant shall be sales of prepared meals. Any new seasonal resort restaurant establishment having been in operation for less than 12 weeks may be issued a temporary license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises for a period not to exceed 90 days if the seasonal resort restaurant establishment can show a projection for annualized gross sales of which 50 percent shall be sales of prepared meals. The temporary license fee and the annual license fee shall be prorated to reflect the period of operation of the seasonal resort restaurant. The license shall be valid only during the period for which application was made and for which the fee was paid. Any seasonal resort restaurant upon resuming business for its season of operation shall not be considered a new establishment for purposes of issuing a temporary license. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a seasonal resort restaurant from becoming a resort restaurant upon application, payment of fees, and compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)	The times for opening and closing the establishments shall be as set out in sections 4-2 and 4-3. The authority for the collection of fees shall be as provided in section 4-70, and all other laws and regulations of the city relating to the sale of liquor by the drink or consumption on the premises where sold shall apply to resorts in the same manner as applied to establishments licensed under this chapter. 
(d)	Any new resort or restaurant establishment having been in operation for less than 90 days may be issued a temporary license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises for a period not to exceed 90 days if the resort or restaurant establishment can show a projection of an annual business from prepared meals or food which would exceed not less than $100,000.00 per year. The license fee shall be prorated for the period of the temporary license based on the cost of the annual license for the establishment. 
(Code 1994, § 6-46; Ord. No. 1129, § 8, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-77. - License for special hours of sale by restaurant bars. 
(a)	Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any person who possesses the qualifications required by this chapter, and who now or hereafter meets the requirements of and complies with the provisions of this chapter, may apply for and the city clerk may issue a license to sell intoxicating liquor between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sunday by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises of any restaurant bar, as described on the application. As used in this section, the term "restaurant bar" means any establishment having a restaurant or similar facility on the premises at least 50 percent of the gross income of which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on such premises or which has an annual gross income of at least $275,000.00 from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on such premises. 
(b)	The authority for the collection of fees, as set out in section 4-70, and all other laws and regulations of the city relating to the sale of liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold shall apply to the restaurant bar in the same manner as they apply to other establishments licensed under this chapter, and in addition to all other fees required by law, a restaurant bar shall pay an additional fee per year, as provided in section 4-70, payable at the same time and in the same manner as its other licensed fees. 
(Code 1994, § 6-47; Ord. No. 1129, § 9, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-78. - Wine manufacturers' fees. 
    For the privilege of manufacturing wine, in quantities not to exceed 500,000 gallons, not in excess of 18 percent of alcohol by weight exclusively from grapes, berries, other fruits, fruit products, honey, and vegetables grown in the state, there shall be paid to and collected by the city clerk or the city collector in lieu of the charges provided in section 4-70, a license fee in the amount provided in section 4-70. A manufacturer licensed under this section shall be privileged to sell to consumers at the winery in lots not to exceed 47/8 gallons and to sell to duly licensed wholesalers or duly licensed retailed dealers in lots of five gallons or more. 
(Code 1994, § 6-49) 
Sec. 4-79. - Retail liquor dealers; fees; application. 
(a)	No license shall be issued for the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package, not to be consumed upon the premises where sold, except to a person engaged in, and to be used in connection with the operation of one or more of the following businesses: drugstore, cigar or tobacco store, grocery store, general merchandise store, confectionery or delicatessen store, nor to any such person who does not have and keep in his store a stock of goods having a value according to invoices of at least $1,000.00 exclusive of fixtures and intoxicating liquors. Under such license, no intoxicating liquor shall be consumed upon the premises where sold nor shall any original package be opened on the premises of the vendor except as otherwise provided in this chapter. For every license for sale at retail in the original package the licensee shall pay an annual fee in the amount provided in section 4-70 
(b)	For a license authorized in the sale of malt liquor containing alcohol in excess of 3.2 percent by weight and not in excess of five percent by weight by grocers and other merchants and dealers in the original package directed toward consumers but not for resale, the licensee shall pay an annual fee in the amount provided in section 4-70. The term "original package" shall be construed and held to refer to any package containing three or more standard bottles of beer. This license shall permit the holders thereof to sell nonintoxicating beer in the original package directed to consumers but not for resale. 
(c)	Malt liquor containing alcohol in excess of 3.2 percent by weight and not in excess of five percent by weight, manufactured from pure hops or pure extract of hops or pure barley malt or wholesome grains or cereals and wholesome yeast and pure water, or light wines containing not in excess of 14 percent of alcohol by weight exclusively from grapes, berries and other fruits and vegetables, or both such malt liquor and wine may be sold by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises where sold when the person, partnership or corporation desiring to sell such malt liquor or wine, or both, by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises where sold shall have been licensed by the city. No licensee authorized to sell malt liquor or wine or both at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold shall be permitted to obtain a license for the sale of intoxicating liquors by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises where sold, other than malt liquor or wine, or both, in the original package, except if authorized by voter approval, pursuant to RSMo 311.110. 
(d)	For every license issued for the sale of all kinds of intoxicating liquor at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises of the licensee, which shall include the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package, the licensee shall pay to the city the annual license fee provided in section 4-70 
(e)	All applications for licenses shall be made upon such forms and in such manner as the city council may prescribe. No license shall be issued until the sum prescribed in section 4-70 for such license shall be paid to the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-50; Ord. No. 1129, § 12, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-80. - Proximity of premises to churches or schools. 
    No license shall be granted for the sale of intoxicating liquor within 100 feet of any school, church or other building regularly used as a place of religious worship, except that when a school, church or place of worship shall hereafter be established within 100 feet of any place of business licensed to sell intoxicating liquor, the license shall not be denied for being within the prohibited distance. 
(Code 1994, § 6-51; Ord. No. 1129, § 19, 12-8-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 311.080. 
Sec. 4-81. - Revocation or suspension. 
    The city council may, on hearing, suspend any license for a number of days, not exceeding 90, or revoke any license for duration of the license issued under the provision of this chapter, if the licensee has not at all times kept an orderly place or if he has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or of applicable state law, or for any other good cause shown, first having given such licensee not less than ten days' notice, in writing, of the application to revoke or suspend his license prior to the order of revocation or suspension. The notice shall contain the grounds for such revocation or suspension set out therein, and shall command the licensee to be present at the regular or called meeting of the city council and show cause, if any, why the license should not be revoked or suspended. Such licensee shall have full right to be represented by counsel at the hearing. Such notice of revocation or suspension hearing shall be served by the city police, signed by the mayor and may be served upon the licensee by leaving a copy thereof with the licensee or any person or employee in charge of the place of business of the licensee. 
(Code 1994, § 6-52; Ord. No. 1129, § 26, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-82. - Revocation upon conviction of violation of chapter; duty of judge. 
(a)	Upon final conviction of any person for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of state law, such conviction shall automatically operate to revoke any license issued under this chapter to such party. The term "conviction" as herein used shall mean conviction upon final determination of any prosecution for any violation of this chapter. No person having been convicted of the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be issued a license or renewal thereof for a period of one year from the date of such conviction. 
(b)	Upon conviction of any person under the provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the judge to certify such conviction to the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 6-53; Ord. No. 1129, §§ 31, 32, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-83. - City not to return any part of license fee paid in cases of revocation or forfeiture. 
    In case of revocation or forfeiture of any license granted and issued under the provisions of this chapter for cause or otherwise, the city shall not return any part of the license fee paid for such license. 
(Code 1994, § 6-54; Ord. No. 1129, § 33, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-84. - Duration. 
    Each license issued in compliance with this chapter shall be dated and issued as of January 1 of each year, and shall be for the period of one year, unless revoked or suspended for cause as herein provided. Any license issued during the year shall be issued only for the remaining months of the year, and the license fee shall be prorated. 
(Code 1994, § 6-55; Ord. No. 1129, § 14, 12-8-1981) 
Secs. 4-85-4-111. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 4-112. - Temporary location for liquor by the drink; permit and fee required. 
(a)	The city clerk may issue a temporary permit to caterers and other persons holding licenses to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, who furnish provisions and service for use at a particular function, occasion or event at a particular location other than the licensed premises, but not including a "festival" as defined in RSMo ch. 316, effective for a period not to exceed 120 consecutive hours, which shall authorize the service of alcoholic beverages at such function, occasion or event during the hours at which alcoholic beverages may lawfully be sold or served upon premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. For every permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the permittee shall pay to the city clerk the permit fee, as provided in section 4-70, for each calendar day, or fraction thereof, for which the permit is issued. 
(b)	Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, all provisions of the liquor control law and the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city shall extend to such premises and shall be in force and enforceable during all the time that the permittee, its agents, servants, employees or stock are in such premises. This section will not include the sale of packaged goods covered by this temporary permit. 
(c)	Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, any caterer who possesses a valid state and valid local liquor license may deliver alcoholic beverages, in the course of his catering business, in this city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-66; Ord. No. 1129, § 28, 12-8-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.485. 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT (RESERVED) 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Licensed gaming activities, RSMo 313.001 et seq.; shows, circuses, amusement buildings, and festivals, RSMo 316.010 et seq.; boxing and wrestling, RSMo 317.001 et seq.; pool tables, RSMo 318.010 et seq. (Back)
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Agriculture and animals, RSMo 261.010 et seq.; disposal of dead animals, RSMo 269.010 et seq.; animals restrained from running at large, RSMo 270.010 et seq.; strays, RSMo 271.010 et seq.; fences and enclosures generally, RSMo 272.010 et seq.; local option regarding fences and enclosures, RSMo 272.210; dogs and cats, RSMo 273.010 et seq.; local option dog tax, RSMo 273.040 et seq.; animal care and facilities licensing and regulation, RSMo 273.325 et seq.; adoption and purchase of animals from shelters and human societies, RSMo 273.400 et seq.; pet spay and neuter fund, RSMo 301.387; authority for municipal inspection of animals intended as food, RSMo 71.730. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    ACO means the city animal control officer, also referred to as the humane officer. 
    Animal boarding/pet-sitting establishment means a business holding a valid business license that provides temporary shelter or boarding to animals owned by other people and returns those animals to the owners after a temporary period. This term "animal boarding/pet-sitting establishment" also includes licensed veterinarians who provide similar shelter or boarding services. 
    Animal shelter means the facility operated by the city or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law and in charge of an animal control officer or ACO employed by or duly authorized to act as such by the city. 
    Assistance dog means a dog that has been or is being trained as a guide dog, hearing dog, or service dog. The department may require that owners, keepers, or maintainers of assistance dogs produce appropriate proof that the dog was formally trained for work as an assistance dog and is being used for such purposes. The term "assistance dog" is further defined as follows: 
(1)	Guide dog means a dog that has been or is being specially trained to aid a particular blind or visually impaired person. 
(2)	Hearing dog means a dog that has been or is being specially trained to aid a particular deaf or hard of hearing person. 
(3)	Service dog means a dog that has been or is being specially trained to aid a particular person with a disability other than sight or hearing. 
    Breeder means a Pleasant Hill, Missouri, resident possessing an occupational license for breeding dogs of a breed recognized by a purebred registry, sport association, or competition association. 
    Cat means a cat of either sex, if over the age of six months. 
    Commercial animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, auction, riding school, stable, kennel, guard dog service, dog trainer, business keeping animals in stock for retail or wholesale trade, or any establishment performing one or more of the principal activities of the aforementioned establishments. 
    Competition dog means a dog which is used to show, to compete, or to breed, which is recognized by and registered with a valid registry approved by the department and meets one of the following requirements: 
(1)	The dog has competed in at least one dog show or sporting competition recognized by the department, within the last 365 days; 
(2)	The dog has earned a conformation, obedience, agility, carting, herding, protection, rally, sporting, working, or other title from a purebred dog registry referenced above or other registry or dog sport association approved by the department; or 
(3)	The owner or custodian of the dog is a member of a purebred dog breed club approved by the department, which maintains and enforces a code of ethics for dog breeding that includes restrictions from breeding dogs with genetic defects and life threatening health problems that commonly threaten the breed. 
    Dangerous animal means: 
(1)	Any animal observed by the humane officer as having a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or other domestic animals. 
(2)	Any animal which has been known to attack a human being or other domestic animal one or more times, or without provocation bitten one or more persons. 
(3)	Any animal which, in the opinion of the humane officer, based on repeated reports from neighbors or other citizens, puts the public in reasonable fear of said animal. 
Any owner of an animal declared dangerous pursuant to this definition shall have the right to have said declaration reviewed by the chief of police, provided such request is made in writing within ten days after said animal is declared dangerous. The review shall be completed and a final written decision returned to the owner within 30 days. The owner and the humane officer shall each have the right to submit any relevant evidence they wish relating to the animal's dangerous propensities, or lack thereof. Said animal shall remain in confinement at an approved animal shelter during the appeal process at the expense of the owner. 
    Department means the animal control unit of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri Police Department. 
    Electronic fence or electronic collar means a fence or collar that controls the movement of a dog by emitting an electrical shock when the animal wearing the collar nears the boundary of the owner's, keeper's, harborer's, or maintainer's property. The collar may be controlled manually by a person or automatically in a predetermined manner. It is not considered herein to be a suitable or adequate enclosure or barrier. 
    Exotic animal means any nondomesticated animals taken out of their natural habitat to be taken home as pets. 
    Humane officer means any animal control officer or ACO, police officer or other employee of the city designated by the city council; an agent of a kennel, pound, shelter, or licensed veterinary hospital designated by the city council. 
    Neutered dog or cat means a dog or cat certified by a licensed veterinarian to have been neutered. 
    Owner means any person owning, keeping or harboring an animal or who shall allow any animal to habitually remain or to be lodged or fed within his house, store, yard, enclosure or place. 
    Public nuisance means any animal (or group of animals which contains any animal) which: 
(1)	Molests any passerby or chases passing vehicles including bicycles;
(2)	Attacks any other animal;
(3)	Is in heat and not properly confined as provided in section 8-59 
(4)	Is at large in violation of section 8-57 
(5)	Damages public or private property;
(6)	Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive fashion which is hereby defined as continuous or untimely so as to disturb the sleep or peace of an individual who is a neighbor (a neighbor, for this purpose, is hereby defined as an individual residing in a residence structure which is within 100 yards of the property on which the animal is kept or harbored); 
(7)	Causes injury to people;
(8)	Threatens or causes a condition which endangers public health; or
(9)	Impedes refuse collection by ripping any bag or tipping any container of such.
    Unaltered means not surgically spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian. 
    Under restraint means an animal is within a fully enclosed or fenced area or under the hand-held leash of the owner, keeper, harborer, or maintainer, or a leash attached to a fixed object or structure, or confined to the premises of the residential property of their owner by an electronic fence or an electronic collar, provided the owner, keeper, harborer, or maintainer of the animal has the animal under direct supervision. 
    Under supervision means that an owner, keeper, harborer, or maintainer of an animal is outside in close physical proximity to the animal, and in a position which allows him to maintain visual contact with the animal and allows him to readily respond in the event that a threat is posed to the animal or the animal poses a threat to another human being, animal, or property. 
(Code 1994, § 10-1; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(4), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-1, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- Dog defined, RSMo 273.010, 273.040; boarding kennel, commercial breeder, commercial kennel, contract kennel, dealer, hobby or show breeder, and pet shop defined, RSMo 273.325; dangerous animals, RSMo 578.023. 
Sec. 8-2. - Inhumane treatment. 
    No person shall inhumanely, cruelly or unreasonably whip or abuse any animal or abandon such animal to die or fail to furnish such animal with proper food or drink. 
(Code 1994, § 10-4; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(1), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-4, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-3. - Fowl, livestock running at large. 
    No person shall own or harbor chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys, or other fowl or livestock of any kind, including hogs, horses, mules, asses, cattle, goats, sheep, etc., in the city limits in any area other than is presently zoned for the purpose. No owner, keeper, or harborer of chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys or other fowl shall permit fowl or livestock to run unrestrained outside of the enclosure of such owners, keepers or harborers in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 10-5; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(2), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-5, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- Domestic animals to be restricted from running at large, RSMo 270.010. 
Sec. 8-4. - Exotic animals. 
    No person shall own, keep, harbor, or maintain any exotic animal within the city limits except as provided for by the state department of conservation in the state statutes or federal law. 
(Code 1994, § 10-6; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(43), 12-11-1982; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-6, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- Keepers of dangerous wild animals must register, RSMo 578.023. 
Sec. 8-5. - Abandonment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to abandon any animal. For the purpose of this section, the term "abandon" means for the owner or keeper to leave an animal without demonstrated or apparent intent to recover or to resume custody; to leave an animal for more than 12 hours without providing for adequate food and shelter for the duration of the absence; or to turn out or release an animal for the purpose of causing it to be impounded. 
(Code 1994, § 10-7; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(17), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-7, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- Animal abuse, RSMo 578.012; animal neglect or abandonment, RSMo 578.009. 
Sec. 8-6. - Domestic animals causing injuries when running at large; animals putting persons in fear; animals interfering with utility or postal service employees. 
(a)	Any person owning, controlling, harboring, possessing, or having the management or care, in whole or in part, or any domestic animal running at large, in violation of this chapter, which causes injury to any human being or other domestic animal, shall be guilty of a violation in accordance with section 1-11 
(b)	No person shall own, control, harbor, possess, or have the management or care of any domestic animal that is not securely confined, as defined herein, which by attempting to bite, jump upon, charge toward, or otherwise threaten any other person shall cause such other person to have a reasonable fear of immediate serious physical injury. Any person cited pursuant to this subsection may state as a defense, subject to proof, that the threatening behavior of the animal was instigated or provoked by the complainant or that the fear expressed by the complainant was not a reasonable fear of immediate serious physical injury. The court shall give any such defense such weight as the court, in its judicial discretion, finds to be appropriate in the circumstances of the case. Complaints under this subsection may only be lodged by a humane officer. 
(c)	No person shall own, control, harbor, possess, or have the management or care of any domestic animal in such manner as to hinder, obstruct, or interfere with access to an outside utility meter, utility pole, or mailbox by any authorized employee of a utility, and any animal so harbored, or possessed as to hinder, obstruct, or interfere with access to an outside utility meter, utility pole, or mailbox may be removed by a humane officer and impounded pursuant to sections 8-121 through 8-123 and 8-125 
(Code 1994, § 10-8; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(23), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-8, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-7. - Care. 
    The owner of an animal shall provide it with humane shelter from heat, cold, rain, wind, and snow, and it shall give it food and water adequate to keep the animal in good health and comfort. Doghouses, kennels and other shelters for animals shall be soundly constructed, dry and provided with clean bedding. All animals shall be given the opportunity for vigorous daily exercise and shall be provided by their owners with veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering. Any animal not afforded the care and treatment described in this section may be impounded in accordance with the provisions of section 8-121. 
(Code 1994, § 10-9; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(24), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-9, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- Animal abuse, RSMo 578.012; animal neglect or abandonment, RSMo 578.009. 
Sec. 8-8. - Trapping. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to set or use traps of the type commonly referred to as steel-jawed traps or leg-hold traps for purposes of trapping any animal within the corporate limits of the city. Humane officers, police officers and their agents performing their official duties are excepted from the prohibitions of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 10-10; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(33), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-10, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-9. - Poisoning. 
    No person shall willfully administer any poison to any domesticated animal or shall willfully expose any poisonous substance where the same may be likely to be eaten by any domesticated animal. Humane officers performing their official duties are excepted from the prohibitions of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 10-11; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(34), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-11, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-10. - Noisy animals, destruction of property. 
    No person shall own or keep any animal which by making excessive noise disturbs a neighborhood. The term "excessive noise" means and includes any noise produced by an animal which is so loud and continuous or untimely as to disturb the sleep or peace of a neighbor. The term "neighbor" means an individual residing in a residence structure which is within 100 yards of the property on which the animal is kept or harbored. It shall also be unlawful for a person keeping any animal to carelessly, willfully or maliciously permit such animal to destroy or damage property. 
(Code 1994, § 10-12; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(25), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-12, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- Owner responsible for damages caused by animals, RSMo 270.010. 
Sec. 8-11. - Confinement or destruction of dangerous animals. 
    No person owning, harboring, maintaining, or allowing to be in or upon any premises occupied by him or under his charge or control any animal which has been deemed to be a dangerous animal without such animal being securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, subject to inspection and approval by the city animal control officer. 
(Code 1994, § 10-13; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(27), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-13, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-12. - Dangerous and prohibited animals. 
(a)	The keeping or harboring of dangerous animals other than dogs and cats within the city is hereby prohibited. Other than as to dogs and cats, the humane officer shall have the authority to declare an animal dangerous because of past behavior, violations, or the inherently dangerous nature of the animal as to persons. Such a declaration shall be grounds for the impoundment and destruction of the animal unless, without danger to the public, it can be and is removed from the city within 48 hours. 
(b)	Within any residential area (for purposes of this section defined as any area not zoned for commercial, agricultural, or industrial purposes), the keeping or harboring of any poisonous animal or any warm-blooded carnivorous or omnivorous animal (including but not limited to raccoons, skunks, foxes, leopards, panthers, tigers, and lions, but excluding fowl, dogs, house cats, and small rodents of varieties used for laboratory purposes) is hereby prohibited. Nonpoisonous snakes shall be kept in escape-proof cages except when being handled. No snake shall be permitted by the owner, keeper, or handler to escape from a cage or while being handled. 
(Code 1994, § 10-14; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(28), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-14, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-13. - Commercial animal establishment standards. 
    Any person operating a commercial animal establishment shall keep and maintain the animals, and all structures, pens, or yards in which animals are kept, in such a manner as to prevent a nuisance or health hazard to humans and to avoid injury to these animals. All cages and holding areas must be properly sanitized so as to keep the animals enclosed therein free of diseases. All such caged animals shall be provided with a constant supply of wholesome food and water or, in lieu of this, the proprietor shall prominently and publicly post and shall follow a schedule for adequate feeding and watering. All disease-infested animals shall be removed and treated to prevent the spread of disease or euthanized and if the owner or keeper fails or refuses to provide for such, the humane officer may remove such animals to the animal shelter for disposition as provided by this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 10-15; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(30), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-15, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-14. - Hospitals, clinics, etc., exempt from provisions of chapter; exceptions. 
    Hospitals, clinics and other facilities operated by veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from all provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 10-16; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(31), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-16, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-15. - Enforcement of chapter. 
(a)	The enforcement of the terms and provisions of this chapter are made the duty of the animal control officer or anyone having the authority of humane officer or city police officer. 
(b)	The humane officer or any police officer is authorized to enter upon any enclosed or unenclosed grounds adjacent to private dwellings within the corporate limits of the city for the sole purpose of pursuit, apprehension, and removal of the dog and/or cat in violation of this chapter and it shall be unlawful to interfere with the officer's performance of his duty. 
(Code 1994, § 10-17; Ord. No. 1254, §§ 2(6), 2(29), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-17, 7-28-2008) 
Secs. 8-16-8-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dogs and cats, RSMo ch. 273. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-34. - Intent of article. 
    The intent of this article is to require dog and cat owners to comply with the law, not merely to operate an impoundment program. The enforcement of this article shall therefore place primary emphasis upon apprehending and initiating prosecution of violators of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 10-41; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(5), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-41, 7-28-2008) 
Secs. 8-35-8-56. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONFINEMENT AND CONTROL 

Sec. 8-57. - Permitting dog to run at large prohibited; allowable distance for staking dogs. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person owning, controlling, harboring, possessing, or having the management or care, in whole or in part, of any dog, to permit such dog to run at large. For the purpose of this article, every dog when on any street, alley, or any other public place in the city or when on private property within the city, which is either not attached to a leash, the other end of which is securely held or which is not so confined as to prevent its straying from the premises, shall be deemed running at large. 
(b)	When not confined as set forth herein, dogs must be fastened to a leash not more than four feet in length of sufficient strength to control the dog securely held by a person who is physically capable of controlling the dog. 
(c)	It shall be a defense to a charge of violating this section that the dog involved is: 
(1)	A trained police dog under the control of police personnel;
(2)	A dog participating in an organized competition or organized training exercise under the control of a competent trainer; 
(3)	A working dog trained to assist disabled persons and under the control of a competent person; or 
(4)	A dog in a vehicle adequately secured to prevent escape.
(Code 1994, § 10-42; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(15), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-42, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- Domestic animals to be restrained from running at large, RSMo 270.010; dogs prohibited from running at large, RSMo 322.020. 
Sec. 8-58. - Cats not under control prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, control, harbor, possess, manage, or care for or have the management or care, in whole or part, of any cat which is not under control. For the purpose of this article, cats which cause injury to persons or damage to property shall be deemed not under control. 
(Code 1994, § 10-43; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(16), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-43, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-59. - Confinement of female dogs or cats in heat. 
    The owner shall confine any female dog or cat in heat within a building, in such a manner that the dog or cat shall not be accessible to other dogs or cats except for planned breeding. 
(Code 1994, § 10-44; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(26), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-44, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-60. - Tethering of dogs. 
(a)	No owner, keeper, harborer, or maintainer of a dog may tether, fasten, chain, or tie a dog, or allow his dog to be tethered, fastened, chained, or tied to any permanent or temporary structure, any post attached to the ground or any permanent or temporary structure, or to any weight designed to restrict the dog's freedom of movement to a limited area of space, except where: 
(1)	The tethering, fastening, chaining, or tying of the dog to any structure, post, or weight is temporary, as set forth in subsection (b) of this section; and 
(2)	The tethering, fastening, chaining, or tying of the dog to any structure, post, or weight is under supervision of the owner, keeper, harborer, or maintainer or a responsible person to whom the task of supervision is delegated or the dog is enclosed behind a fence at least four feet high. 
(b)	The temporary tethering, fastening, chaining, or tying of a dog to any structure or post shall be: 
(1)	No more than one hour at any one time; and
(2)	No more than a total of three hours within a 24-hour period.
(c)	No owner, keeper, harborer, or maintainer of a dog may tether, fasten, chain, or tie a dog, or allow his dog to be tethered, fastened, chained, or tied to any structure, post, or weight under any circumstances, whether temporary and under supervision or not, in area of property that is considered frontage and other applicable sections of this Code, except: A dog may be tethered temporarily and while under supervision in an area of property that is considered frontage when the only area of the property available to the owner, keeper, harborer, or maintainer for such purposes is frontage. 
(d)	Any violation of this section shall be considered an act of animal abuse.
(Ord. No. 1656, § 10-45, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-61. - Fencing and enclosures. 
(a)	No owner, keeper, harborer, or maintainer of a dog shall allow that dog to remain in the yard of any property unless the dog is leashed or tethered under supervision, as defined herein or confined as provided in this section. If the dog is not under supervision while remaining in the yard of any property, the dog must be securely confined by enclosed fencing or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, structure, or run. Such fencing or pen, structure or run must be suitable for preventing the animal from escaping. A locked pen, structure, or run must have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet and must have secure sides. One hundred square feet is required for dogs in excess of 45 pounds. Side walls shall be a minimum four feet high, or six feet for animals able to jump over a four-foot fence. A secure top at least six inches above the dogs head, installed on an enclosure less than six feet, may be substituted for the six-foot fence requirement. A combination of a four-foot fence and a electronic fence may also be substituted for the six-foot fence requirement as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. An enclosure with a top must be installed if an animal is able to jump or climb out of a six-foot enclosure. Sidewalls must be constructed so as to prevent the dog from escaping by going beneath or through sidewalls. The enclosure must also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
(b)	If the dog is confined to the residential property of the owner, keeper, harborer, or maintainer by an electronic fence or an electronic collar, the dog shall not be permitted to be nearer than five feet away from any public street, sidewalk, or property line that is contiguous to neighboring property and must be under constant supervision as defined herein. Dogs so restrained may not be left unsupervised except when a four-foot fence is also erected on the outside perimeter of a buried electronic fence. Electric fences shall not be allowed in front yards. No dog having been found as a dangerous dog, as defined in section 10-1, shall be confined by an electronic fence or an electronic collar. Electronic collars may not be used to control a dog when it is off the owner's, keeper's, harborer's, or maintainer's property. 
(c)	All enclosures are subject to inspection by the animal control officer.
(d)	Any person granted a dog license under this chapter accepts said license under the understanding that they will abide by the enclosure requirements contained herein. Failure to provide a suitable enclosure shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1656, § 10-46, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-62. - Dangerous dogs-Confinement or destruction. 
(a)	No person owning, harboring, maintaining, or allowing to be in or upon any premises occupied by him or under his charge or control any animal which has been deemed to be a dangerous animal without such animal being securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure. Such pen or structure must have secure sides, a secure top and a bottom which is imbedded no less than one-foot into the ground and secured to the sides and must not be less than 100 square feet and a minimum five feet wide. 
(b)	No person owning, harboring, maintaining, or having the care of a dangerous animal shall permit such animal to go beyond the premises of such person unless such animal is securely leashed and muzzled. 
(c)	It shall further be the duty of the owner of such animal to post a notice on the premises, conspicuously visible to the public and reading in letters of not less than two inches high, "bad dog," "bad cat," "beware of dog" or otherwise identifying the dangerous animal. In addition to a conviction for the violation of any provision of this section, the municipal judge may order the destruction of the animal in a humane manner and for that purpose, the humane officer may enter upon any private premises to carry out such order. 
(d)	Enclosures for dangerous dogs must be approved in advance by the humane/animal control officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1254, § 2(27), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-47, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-63. - Same-Microchip requirement. 
    All owners or keepers of dangerous dogs must have such dogs implanted with an identifying microchip in a manner approved by the animal control officer. Owners or keepers shall then provide the animal control officer the microchip number, and shall notify the animal control officer and the national registry applicable to the implanted chip of any change of ownership of the dog, or any change of address or telephone number. Any costs associated with the microchip shall be borne by the owner or keeper. 
(Ord. No. 1656, § 10-48, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-64. - Same-Liability insurance. 
    The owner or keeper of a dangerous dog shall present to the animal control officer proof that the owner or keeper has procured liability insurance in the amount of at least $300,000.00, covering the 12-month period during which licensing is sought. This policy shall contain a provision requiring the city to be notified by the insurance company of any cancellation, termination, or expiration of the policy. 
(Ord. No. 1656, § 10-49, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-65. - Kennels; standards of operation, inspection and inspection fee. 
(a)	Generally. Any person who shall own and keep or harbor upon his premises more than four dogs and/or cats which are six months of age or older shall be deemed the operator of a kennel. It shall be unlawful to operate a kennel within the corporate limits of the city which violates the zoning ordinance or the standards of operation established in this section. 
(b)	Standards of operation. Kennel premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and sanitary methods shall be used to obliterate or prevent any offensive odors. 
(c)	Registration. Any person who is deemed to be the operator of a kennel within the corporate limits of the city shall register such kennel on a form provided by the city hall. 
(d)	Inspection fee. At the time of initial registration of each kennel and annually thereafter, the operator of a kennel shall pay an inspection fee. Inspection fees shall be as set forth in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1254, § 2(36), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-50, 7-28-2008) 
Secs. 8-66-8-88. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE 

Sec. 8-89. - Required; application, tags, records of city collector, certificate of vaccination required. 
(a)	No person shall own, keep, harbor, or maintain any dog or cat, six months of age or older, within the city unless such dog or cat is licensed as herein provided. 
(b)	Written application for a dog or cat license shall be made to the finance department. The applications shall state the name, address, telephone number, if any, and a driver's license number (or in lieu of a driver's license number, a social security number) of the owner, proof of current rabies vaccination for any dog or cat over six months of age and the name, breed, color, sex, and distinguishing marks of the dog or cat. No individual under 17 years of age shall make application for a dog or cat license. 
(c)	The finance director is authorized to promulgate appropriate rules and regulations in order to establish and administer a program in which veterinarian clinics serve as a place where citizens can apply for and obtain licenses provided under this chapter. Participating veterinarian clinics may collect the application fees and a portion of such fees may be retained by a participating veterinarian clinic for providing such services in relation to this program. 
(Code 1994, § 10-56; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(7), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-56, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- Local option dog tax, RSMo 273.040 et seq. 
Sec. 8-90. - Exemption for nonresidents. 
    The licensing provision of this division shall not apply to nonresidents of the city, unless they keep a dog or cat within the city for more than 30 days. 
(Code 1994, § 10-57; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(8), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-57, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-91. - Fees. 
(a)	The annual license fees for dogs and cats shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. Proof of spaying or neutering from a licensed veterinarian, if applicable, must be provided with the application for licensure. 
(b)	License fees as provided in this section shall not apply to any dog used for service by a government law enforcement agency. 
(c)	License fees as provided in this section may be waived upon proof that a dog to be licensed is trained as a service dog for a handicapped person and is regularly used for such service. 
(Code 1994, § 10-58; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(9), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-58, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- Amount of local option dog tax, RSMo 273.060. 
Sec. 8-92. - Term; date of issuance, penalty for failure to procure on time, proration of fee. 
    All dog and cat licenses shall be issued for one year beginning with January 1. The owner may apply for the license during January, February, or March without penalty for the delay, but when an application which should have been made by January 1 is not made until after March 31, a late fee in an amount as provided in the city fee schedule, will apply in addition to the normal fee provided for in section 8-91. If an applicant became the owner of the dog after January 1 or the dog attained the age of six months after January 1, the license fee may be prorated to the nearest quarter. A late fee in an amount as provided in the city fee schedule for delinquency shall be added 60 days after the date when the license should have been procured. 
(Code 1994, § 10-59; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(10), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-59, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- When dog tax due, RSMo 273.050. 
Sec. 8-93. - Duplicate or replacement; fee. 
    If a license is destroyed or lost, a duplicate or replacement may be obtained from the city collector for a fee according to the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1994, § 10-60; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(11), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-60, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-94. - Transfer; fee. 
    If ownership of a dog or cat is transferred, the new owner may have the current license transferred to his name upon payment of a fee in the amount established by the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 10-61; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(12), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-61, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-95. - Wearing of collar or harness and tag. 
    The owner shall keep on the dog or cat at all times when the dog or cat is not inside a private building, a collar or harness, and the tag issued by the city collector shall be affixed to the collar or harness in such a manner that the tag can be easily seen. 
(Code 1994, § 10-62; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(13), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-62, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- License to be affixed to collar, RSMo 273.080. 
Sec. 8-96. - Use of tag on another dog or cat prohibited. 
    No person shall use for any dog or cat a tag issued for a different dog or cat. 
(Code 1994, § 10-63; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(14), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-63, 7-28-2008) 
Secs. 8-97-8-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 8-121. - When authorized; place of impoundment. 
    Dogs and cats not licensed pursuant to this chapter, or found running at large or not under control, or abandoned, unaltered without license, improperly tethered, confined, or supervised, or otherwise in violation of provisions set forth herein, shall be seized and impounded in a humane manner by the humane officer or any police officer. Impoundment may be in any registered kennel, pound, animal shelter or licensed veterinary clinic. 
(Code 1994, § 10-86; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(19), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-86, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- Impounding of dogs, RSMo 273.100; impoundment of animal found off custodian's property, RSMo 578.016. 
Sec. 8-122. - Notice. 
    If a dog or cat wears a license tag or if the owner can by any other reasonable means be identified and located, the owner shall within 24 hours be notified that the dog or cat has been impounded, or if the owner of any dog or cat is unknown, written notice shall be posted for five consecutive days at a conspicuous place at the animal shelter and such notice shall describe the dog or cat and the place and time of taking. 
(Code 1994, § 10-87; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(20), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-87, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-123. - Destruction of unredeemed dogs and cats. 
    If a dog or cat is not redeemed by the owner within seven working days after impoundment, the dog or cat may be disposed of by a painless method approved by the Humane Society of the United States. Alternatively, the humane officer may, at his discretion, hold the animal for an additional four working days during which the animal may be adopted by any interested parties with payment of the proper fee as outlined in section 8-125. 
(Code 1994, § 10-88; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(21), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-88, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-124. - Rescue of animals from vehicles. 
    Whenever any animal is found confined in a motor vehicle in a public place under weather conditions that endanger its life as determined by the humane officer, the humane officer is hereby authorized, with assistance from the police which are hereby authorized, to enter such vehicle and rescue such animal and thereafter impound it in accordance with section 8-121. A prominent written notice shall be left on or in the vehicle advising that the animal has been removed under the authority of this section and impounded in accordance with section 8-5, 8-7, or 8-121. 
(Code 1994, § 10-89; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(18), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-89, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-125. - Charges and impoundment fees payable before redeeming or adopting; procedure. 
(a)	Anyone redeeming or adopting a dog, cat or other animal from impoundment shall pay to the city collector, before release, a boarding charge for each 24 hours or fraction thereof that the animal has been impounded, plus an impoundment fee for the first offense, second offense, and third and all subsequent offenses in an amount as provided in the city fee schedule. Any person adopting an animal that they did not previously own shall pay only the impoundment fee in the amount as provided in the city fee schedule. Redemption fees are in addition to any license fees or vaccination fees that may be required. 
(b)	If an impounded animal is required to be vaccinated for rabies in accordance with section 8-151 but has not been so vaccinated, the person wishing to adopt or redeem the animal shall pay a vaccination fee before release. They will be given a vaccination voucher which may be presented to a participating licensed veterinarian in lieu of payment for vaccination services. The veterinarian may redeem the voucher for payment by presenting the voucher to the animal control officer, who shall verify payment. All such vaccinations shall be made within seven calendar days from release. If a registered veterinarian determines it would be temporarily dangerous to the health of the animal to vaccinate it during this seven-day period, the owner will be given an extension of up to 30 days after the animal's release from impoundment in which to obtain the vaccination. Any owner asserting that the animal being redeemed has already been vaccinated must provide evidence to that effect in the form of a receipt from a licensed veterinarian, or other such proof as to indicate to the satisfaction of the humane officer that vaccination has been done. 
(Code 1994, § 10-90; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(22), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-90, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-126. - Sale of animals not redeemed or adopted. 
    Any animal impounded that is not redeemed or adopted within the time allowed in this chapter or state law may be sold at public or private sale by the humane officer with the proceeds then being returned to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 10-91; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(3), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-91, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- Animal neglect, RSMo 578.009; animal abuse, RSMo 578.012. 
Secs. 8-127-8-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies control, RSMo ch. 322. (Back)
Sec. 8-151. - Inoculation required. 
    No person shall own, keep, harbor, or maintain any dog or cat within the city which has not been vaccinated with rabies vaccine by a licensed veterinarian. No license tag required by this chapter shall be issued until the owner of the animal furnishes a certificate, signed by a licensed veterinarian, showing that the animal has been inoculated against rabies. This certificate shall be deemed current if it does not expire within 90 days of the beginning of the current license year. Recognition shall be given to a certificate which indicates a three-year inoculation period for dogs and cats, if duly signed by a licensed veterinarian. The owner must present proof of vaccination annually, and can present the same certificate for the three-year period in which it is valid. 
(Code 1994, § 10-111; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(42), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-111, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-152. - Exposure to rabies. 
    An animal has been exposed to rabies within the meaning of this article if it has been bitten by any other animal known or reasonably suspected to be infected with rabies. 
(Code 1994, § 10-112; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(37), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-112, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-153. - Confinement of animals after biting incident. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person to harbor any animal that has bitten any person or has so injured any person as to cause an abrasion to the skin, to sell or give away such animal or to permit or allow such animal to be taken from the owner's premises, except under the care of a licensed veterinarian, humane officer, or police officer. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of any person injured through having been bitten or clawed by a dog or cat or any animal to report same as soon as possible directly to the humane officer or the police department. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of such owner or keeper of such dog, cat, or any animal upon receiving notice of the character of the aforesaid, to immediately inform the humane officer or the police department and to confine such animal in a licensed veterinary hospital, at the owner's expense, for a period of at least ten days from the date of the bite or the alternatives for confinement found in section 8-154. The humane officer shall maintain animal bite reports for a period of not less than two years after the court date or, if no court date is involved, then not less than two years after the date that the bite occurrence is reported. 
(d)	If any such dog or cat or other animal is dangerous, fierce, or vicious, and cannot safely be taken into custody and impounded, such dog or cat or other animal may be rendered harmless by using a tranquilizer weapon, such weapon to be used only by the humane officer or police officer. 
(e)	Should any animal so held for observation be found to be suffering from rabies or be of such nature to endanger the public generally, the humane officer shall cause such animal, after examination by a licensed veterinarian, to be destroyed in a humane manner. The humane officer and any police officer may, for the purpose of this section, enter upon any private premises. If such animal is not afflicted, it may be returned to its owner as hereinafter provided. If the animal is confined under the provisions of this section, the owner thereof shall be liable for any fees and costs which accrued because of the detention of such animal. 
(f)	Before any such dog or cat or other animal shall be released, the person to whom it is released shall have a licensed veterinarian administer a rabies inoculation unless such dog or cat or other animal has a current rabies inoculation. 
(g)	If the animal shall die while in confinement for any reason, the head of such animal shall be removed by a veterinarian or other qualified person and submitted to the official state laboratory for examination, which expense shall be paid by the owner or keeper of the dog, cat or other animal. 
(Code 1994, § 10-113; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(38), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-113, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- Duty of officials to kill dogs, RSMo 322.060; quarantine order to be issued by mayor, RSMo 322.040. 
Sec. 8-154. - Alternatives for confined animal. 
    In cases where a dog, cat, or other animal has bitten or so injured his owner or member of the owner's family so as to cause an abrasion of the skin, the dog or other animal may be held on the premises of the owner for the lawful observation period. 
(Code 1994, § 10-114; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(39), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-114, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-155. - Killing or removal from city of animal exposed to rabies. 
    No person shall kill an animal exposed to rabies, nor remove such an animal from the city without permission from the humane officer or a police officer, except when it is necessary to kill such animal to prevent it from escaping or from biting any other animal or person. 
(Code 1994, § 10-115; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(40), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-115, 7-28-2008) 
State law reference- Duty of official to kill dogs, exceptions, RSMo 322.060. 
Sec. 8-156. - Surrender of body of animal. 
    The body of any animal dead of rabies or having been exposed to rabies prior to death shall be surrendered by the owner upon demand from the humane officer or a police officer. 
(Code 1994, § 10-116; Ord. No. 1254, § 2(41), 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1656, § 10-116, 7-28-2008) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Taxation and revenue generally, RSMo 135.010 et seq.; occupations and professions generally, RSMo 324.001 et seq.; municipal taxing authority generally, RSMo 71.610; taxation in special charter cities, RSMo 94.340 et seq.; authority to impose business licenses taxes as granted by municipal charters, RSMo 71.610; merchant, manufacturer, itinerant vendor, and peddler licenses and taxes, RSMo 150.010 et seq.; business corporations, RSMo 351.010 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of beauty and barbershop closing hours, RSMo 71.750; authority for municipal regulation of dairies and milk, RSMo 71.720. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Oaths and subpoenas. 
    The city clerk or his employees or agents duly designated and authorized by him shall have power to administer oaths and take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceedings in the exercise of their powers and duties under this chapter. The city clerk shall have power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents to secure information pertinent to the enforcement of this chapter and to examine them in relation thereto. 
(Code 1994, § 82-94; Ord. No. 1390, § 9, 10-28-1996) 
Secs. 10-2-10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSE TAX 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of special charter cities to collect license tax on certain businesses, RSMo 94.360; powers, rights, and remedies for collection of delinquent taxes by special charter cities, RSMo 94.390. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business, trade, vocation, profession or occupation means every person who shall deal in the selling of any goods, wares, merchandise or services or who shall, as a practice in the conduct of such business, trade, vocation, profession or occupation, make or cause to be made any wholesale or retail sales of goods, wares, merchandise or services to any person or association of persons, and shall be classified as a business, whether such sales are accommodation sales, made from a stock of goods on hand or by ordering from another source, or by listing, and whether the subject of such sales or services are similar or different than the type, if any, regularly offered or performed by the seller. 
    Employee means every individual natural person deriving either wages, tips, commissions, fees or draw accounts, or any combination thereof, from an employer, business, trade, vocation, profession or occupation. 
    Licensee means any person who shall apply and obtain a license under the terms and/or provisions of this article and in accordance therewith. 
    Manufacturer means every person who shall hold or purchase personal property for the purpose of adding to the value thereof by any process of manufacturing, or by the combination of different materials, or shall sell or purchase manufactured articles such as are manufactured by it, or such as are used in manufacturing. 
(Code 1994, § 82-52; Ord. No. 994, § 2, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-22. - Applicability; exemptions. 
    This article shall apply to all corporations, joint stock associations, partnerships, co-partnerships, and persons and/or their lessees, duly constituted trustees or receivers, heirs, administrators or assigns, who shall engage in any business, trade, vocation, profession; specifically excepting those professions or callings exempted from license requirements by virtue of RSMo 71.620 and by any other applicable provision of state law, as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1994, § 82-53; Ord. No. 994, § 1, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-23. - Payment prerequisite to doing business. 
    There are hereby levied license taxes as provided in this article, due and payable from any and all persons engaged in any business or manufacturing within the city, as contemplated by this article, and no such person shall engage in any such business or manufacturing without first having obtained a license therefor, paying the license tax, and registering such business or manufacturing establishment with the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 82-54; Ord. No. 994, § 3, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-24. - No tax due statement prerequisite to license issuance. 
    Pursuant to RSMo 144.083, no city license shall be issued or renewed under this chapter unless the license or license renewal application is accompanied by a statement issued by the state department of revenue indicating that the applicant owes no taxes under RSMo 144.010-144.510 or RSMo 143.191-143.261. The date of issuance on the statement that the applicant owes no tax due shall be no more than 90 days before the date of submission to the city of the application for license issuance or renewal. 
Sec. 10-25. - Workers' compensation statement required for contractor's license. 
    Pursuant to RSMo 287.061, no city license shall be issued or renewed under this chapter for any contractor in the construction industry unless the license or license renewal application is accompanied by a certificate of insurance for workers' compensation coverage or an affidavit, in the form required by RSMo 287.06, signed by the applicant attesting that he is exempt. It is unlawful for any contractor to provide fraudulent information regarding workers' compensation coverage or exemption. 
Sec. 10-26. - False statements in application. 
(a)	No person shall knowingly make a false statement in his application for a license as to any conditions or factors upon which the license fee is or shall be based. 
(b)	Any person found making a false statement in his application for a license as to the average number of employees in an amount less than the true number thereof, or knowingly making a false statement as to any other condition or factor upon which the license fee is or shall be based, the effect of which was or would be to reduce the amount of such fee, shall, in addition to all other penalties now provided by law, pay to the city clerk, upon demand therefor, the additional amount of license fee found to be due, plus a penalty of 25 percent of such additional fee together with interest on the additional license fee of one percent per month, not to exceed ten percent, for each month or fraction thereof, after the date when the original license fee was due and payable; and any license theretofore issued to any such person shall be subject to suspension or revocation if so determined by the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 82-55; Ord. No. 994, § 22, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-27. - License year. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided by ordinance, the license year for all business or manufacturer licenses issued under this division shall coincide with the fiscal year, beginning July 1 and ending June 30. The fees for all such licenses shall be due and payable on or before August 1 of each year. 
(Code 1994, § 82-56; Ord. No. 994, § 6, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-28. - Issuance or denial; appeal. 
(a)	All licenses required by this division shall not be issued until a validation receipt is issued by the city clerk. If, for good cause shown, the city clerk shall disapprove the application for a license or shall fail to act within 15 days from the date of filing of the application, the applicant may within 30 days following the date of disapproval, submit a written appeal to the city council with the right of hearing, by filing such written appeal with the city clerk who shall thereupon docket the appeal with the city council for consideration and decision at the next regular or special duly convened meeting of the council. 
(b)	All licensees shall comply in every respect with the provisions of this Code and any other ordinances of the city. On all new applications the codes enforcement officer shall certify that the premises meet minimum code standards as established by the city before issuance of the license. 
(c)	Upon approval of the application it shall be the duty of the city clerk to collect the required license fee and to issue a proper validation receipt therefor prior to issuance of the license. Then it shall be the duty of the city clerk to issue a proper license. 
(Code 1994, § 82-57; Ord. No. 994, § 7, 6-5-1972) 
State law reference- Time of payment of license tax, RSMo 71.265. 
Sec. 10-29. - Record of licenses issued. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep a complete and accurate record of all licenses issued under this article, showing the nature of the license, its date of issuance, to whom issued and the amount of the fee collected therefor. 
(Code 1994, § 82-58; Ord. No. 994, § 8, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-30. - License to be prominently displayed. 
    All licenses issued by the city under this article shall be carefully preserved and prominently displayed in a conspicuous manner in the place of business authorized to be conducted by the licensee. 
(Code 1994, § 82-59; Ord. No. 994, § 9, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-31. - Separate license for each separate legal business entity. 
    A separate license shall be obtained for each separate legal business entity conducted, operated, maintained or carried on by every person engaged in any business or manufacturing plant for which a license is required by this article. 
(Code 1994, § 82-60; Ord. No. 994, § 10, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-32. - Location change; nontransferability to another person. 
    A license may be amended to authorize the conduct of the same business or manufacturing plant at a different location, provided the control remains in the same person, upon filing with the city clerk an amended application, within 15 days of the change, showing the change of address accompanied by a location change fee as provided in section 10-38. It shall also be compulsory that section 10-26(b) be complied with in respect to the new location and premises. A license issued to any person under the provisions of this article shall not be transferable from one person to another person in the event of a change of ownership. 
(Code 1994, § 82-61; Ord. No. 994, § 11, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-33. - More than one business at the same address. 
    Whenever any person making an application for a license under the provisions of this division is engaged in more than one business and the businesses are not operated as separate legal business entities at the same address, such person shall combine the information for all businesses conducted at the same address, as required for the purpose of determining the license fee, the same as if all were conducted as a single business operation. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit or authorize the city to levy more than one license tax on any business establishment at one location even though in the conduct of such business, several types of related, diversified businesses are conducted, even though such related businesses are set out separately in the list of business categories in this article. 
(Code 1994, § 82-62; Ord. No. 994, § 12, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-34. - Business license required. 
    Except as otherwise provided for in sections 10-32 and 10-33, every person engaged in a business (excluding those exempted by RSMo 71.620 and as set forth in section 10-22) shall procure a license as required in this article. 
(Code 1994, § 82-65; Ord. No. 994, § 15, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-35. - Formula for determining average number of employees. 
    The formula to be used in determining the average number of employees, for purposes of calculating licenses fees and taxes, shall be as follows: add the total number of employees paid on the last pay period of each month in the preceding calendar year and divide this total by 12 to obtain the average number of employees for the purpose of obtaining licenses and determination of fee. 
(Code 1994, § 82-66; Ord. No. 994, § 16, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-36. - Alternate formula in event of dispute. 
    The alternate formula to be used in determining the average number of employees as contemplated in section 10-34 in the event of a dispute, shall be as follows: prevailing minimum wage × 40 hours × 52 weeks = average yearly pay. Average yearly pay divided into the total wages reported on Form W-3 (reconciliation of income tax withheld from wages) = average number of employees. The prevailing minimum wage shall be the one in effect as set by the federal government under the minimum wage law at the time of computing the license fee. Form W-3 herein referred to is the U.S. Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service Form and shall serve as the basis for total wages paid all employees in determining the average number of employees paid by the business or manufacturer unless the applicant or licensee can prove to the satisfaction of the city clerk that a fewer number of employees were paid. 
(Code 1994, § 82-67; Ord. No. 994, § 17, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-37. - Liquor sales not authorized. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as authorizing any person to sell intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beer by virtue of such license. 
(Code 1994, § 82-68; Ord. No. 994, § 18, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-38. - Term of license; fees; proration. 
    All licenses provided for in this division shall expire on June 30 of each year and no license shall be issued for a period of less than three months. Fees for issuance and transfer of licenses shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. Any application for a new license under this article received after July 1 of any fiscal year shall be prorated during the terms and in the percentages as follows: 
After July 1 and prior to Sep. 30100% of yearly feeOn or after Oct. 1 and prior to Dec. 31 75% of yearly feeOn or after Jan. 1 and prior to Mar. 31 50% of yearly feeOn or after Apr. 1 and prior to June 30 25% of yearly fee 
(Code 1994, § 82-69; Ord. No. 994, § 19, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-39. - Delinquencies, penalties. 
    All licenses or occupational taxes required to be paid by this article or any ordinance of the city shall be deemed delinquent if not paid on the date such payment is due, and all persons so delinquent in the payment of such taxes shall be required to pay an additional ten percent of the tax found to be due for the first month, or fraction thereof, and one percent per month, or fraction thereof, during such time that such delinquency shall continue. The penalty provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other penalty prescribed by ordinance. 
(Code 1994, § 82-70; Ord. No. 994, § 20, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-40. - Claims for refund. 
    No claims for refunds shall be allowable under the structure of this division as ample provision is provided for in sections 10-35 and 10-36 to settle disputes prior to payment of the license fee. 
(Code 1994, § 82-71; Ord. No. 994, § 21, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-41. - Payment of personal tax or other obligation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a business or manufacturing plant, engage in a trade, vocation, profession or occupation unless and until all personal taxes, merchant taxes, manufacturer taxes, other license fees, inspection fees or any other financial obligations, which are delinquent and owing to the city, have been paid. No license provided for or required under this division, or any other ordinance of the city, shall be issued by any department until compliance with this section has been fulfilled. 
(Code 1994, § 82-72; Ord. No. 994, § 4, 6-5-1972) 
State law reference- Collection of personal tax by special charter cities, RSMo 94.370. 
Sec. 10-42. - Applications, forms, where filed. 
    All applications for licenses provided for in this article shall be filed with the city clerk. The city council shall prescribe the form of application and license form. Except as otherwise provided by this division, all licenses issued under this article shall be signed by the mayor and the city clerk and shall be invalid for any purpose, unless so signed. 
(Code 1994, § 82-73; Ord. No. 994, § 5, 6-5-1972) 
Sec. 10-43. - Suspension or revocation; hearing, notice. 
(a)	The city council shall have the power to suspend or revoke any license granted under this article whenever it shall be shown, or whenever they have knowledge that a licensee is conducting a business or manufacturing plant in violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the city. The city council shall have the power to issue subpoenas and all necessary processes and to require the production of papers, to administer oaths and to take testimony and to make findings thereon. 
(b)	The city council shall not suspend any license granted under this article for a period in excess of 60 days. 
(c)	Where action of suspension or revocation is to be taken pursuant to this section, the licensee shall have five days' written notice of the city council's intention to suspend or revoke the license prior to the hearing on such suspension or revocation. The written notice shall be directed by certified or registered U.S. mail to the business address of the licensee on the licensee's application on file in the office of the city clerk, and shall specify the grounds upon which the license is sought to be suspended or revoked. 
(d)	The licensee shall have full right to be represented by counsel at such hearing, to produce witnesses in his behalf, and any such hearing, as provided in this section, shall be before the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 82-74; Ord. No. 994, § 23, 6-5-1972) 
Secs. 10-44-10-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CIGARETTES SALES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Cigarette tax, RSMo 149.055; wholesaler's license required, RSMo 149.035; retail sales tax license for cigarette sales, RSMo 407.934. (Back)
Sec. 10-75. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cigarette means an item manufactured of tobacco or any substitute therefor, wrapped in paper or any substitute therefor, weighing not to exceed three pounds per one thousand cigarettes and which is commonly classified, labeled or advertised as a cigarette. 
    Consumer means a person who comes into possession of tobacco for the purpose of consuming it, giving it away or disposing of it in any way. 
    Dealer means any person dealing directly with the manufacturer of cigarettes in their purchase and in the business of selling cigarettes as a first seller. 
    First seller means and includes all persons who make the initial or first sale or distribution of cigarettes within the city. 
    Package means a container of any type composition in which is normally contained 20 individual cigarettes, except as in special instances when the number may be more or less than 20. 
    Retailer includes persons other than a dealer or wholesaler as defined in this section, who is engaged in the business of selling cigarettes at retail, who shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes, irrespective of quantity, number of sales, giving the same away or exposing the same where it may be taken, or purchased, or otherwise acquired. 
    Sale includes sales, barters, exchanges and every other manner, method and form of transferring the ownership of personal property from one person to another. The term "sale" also means the possession of cigarettes or tobacco products by any person other than a manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer and shall be prima facie evidence of possession for consumption. 
    Vending machine operator includes all persons engaged in the distribution or sale of cigarettes by means of coin-operated vending machines. 
    Wholesaler includes any person organized and existing, or doing business, primarily to sell cigarettes or tobacco products to, and render service to, retailers in the territory the person chooses to serve; that purchases cigarettes or tobacco products directly from the manufacturer; that carries at all times at his or its principal place of business a representative stock of cigarettes or tobacco products for sale; and that comes into the possession of cigarettes or tobacco products for the purpose of selling them to retailers or to persons outside or within the state who might resell or retail the cigarettes or tobacco products to consumers. This shall include any manufacturer, jobber, broker, agent or other person, whether or not enumerated in this article, who so sells or so distributes cigarettes or tobacco products. 
(Code 1994, § 82-86; Ord. No. 1390, § 1, 10-28-1996) 
Sec. 10-76. - Intent. 
    This is the one and only license or other tax that cigarette dealers or wholesalers shall pay to the city. 
(Code 1994, § 82-87; Ord. No. 1390, § 2, 10-28-1996) 
Sec. 10-77. - Payment of tax required. 
    This tax shall be paid by the dealer or wholesaler, as defined in section 10-75, selling cigarettes or offering them for sale. 
(Code 1994, § 82-88; Ord. No. 1390, § 3, 10-28-1996) 
Sec. 10-78. - Tax levy. 
    Every dealer or wholesaler engaged in the business of selling cigarettes or offering or displaying the same for sale within the city shall pay an occupation tax at the rate provided in the city fee schedule for all cigarettes sold or offered or displayed for sale. This tax shall be paid but once, as provided for in section 10-80, and only by the dealer selling cigarettes or displaying or offering them for sale. 
(Code 1994, § 82-89; Ord. No. 1390, § 4, 10-28-1996) 
Sec. 10-79. - Payment discount. 
    The tax provided for in section 10-78 shall be paid to the city clerk, and in the collection of such tax, the city clerk shall allow a discount of five percent of the face value thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 82-90; Ord. No. 1390, § 5, 10-28-1996) 
Sec. 10-80. - Monthly payment. 
    It shall be the duty of every dealer or wholesaler, as defined in section 10-75, selling, offering or displaying for sale any package of cigarettes, to remit the monthly cigarette tax reporting form and full payment by the tenth day of each following month. The canceled check, accompanied by the monthly cigarette tax reporting form, shall be proof of payment. 
(Code 1994, § 82-91; Ord. No. 1390, § 6, 10-28-1996) 
Sec. 10-81. - City clerk to maintain records; power to adopt rules and regulations relating to delegation of his powers. 
    For the purpose of enabling the city clerk to enforce the terms of this article, the following provisions are enacted: 
(1)	Each dealer in the city and those wholesalers and retailers as defined in section 10-75 shall procure and retain invoices showing the amount and value of the shipment of cigarettes received by him, the date thereof, and the name of the shipper, and shall retain this invoice for a period of three years subject to the use and inspection of the city clerk. 
(2)	All dealers, wholesalers and retailers as defined in section 10-75 within the city shall maintain and keep for a period of three years such other records of cigarettes received, sold or delivered within the city as may be required by the city clerk. 
(3)	The city clerk or his duly authorized representatives, are authorized to examine the books, papers, invoices and other records, stock of cigarettes in and upon any premises where they are placed, stored or sold, and equipment of any such dealer, wholesaler or retailer pertaining to the sale and delivery of cigarettes taxable under this division. 
(4)	To verify the accuracy of the occupation tax imposed and assessed by this division, each person, as defined in section 10-75, is directed and required to give to the city clerk or his duly authorized representative, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations as are herein provided for and required. 
(5)	In addition to the powers herein granted to the city clerk, he is authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the delegation of his powers to a deputy or other employee of his office and any other matter or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this office. 
(6)	Cigarette tax reporting information received from the state shall be held in confidence and used solely for verifying cigarette tax payments. 
(Code 1994, § 82-92; Ord. No. 1390, § 7, 10-28-1996) 
Sec. 10-82. - Refunds. 
    The city clerk is authorized to adopt, prescribe and promulgate rules and regulations including a monthly cigarette tax reporting form with regard to the presentation and proof of claim for refunds and credits as he may deem advisable. 
(Code 1994, § 82-93; Ord. No. 1390, § 8, 10-28-1996) 
Sec. 10-83. - Dealers outside city. 
    Any dealer whose place of business is outside the corporate limits of the city shall be bound by all of the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1994, § 82-96; Ord. No. 1390, § 11, 10-28-1996) 
Secs. 10-84-10-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WASTE COLLECTORS 

Sec. 10-110. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining an annual permit therefor from the city; provided, however, that this provision shall not be deemed to apply to employees of the holder of any such permit. 
(Code 1994, § 74-71; Ord. No. 1235, § 6.1, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 10-111. - Contents of application. 
    Each applicant for a permit under this division shall state in his application: 
(1)	The nature of the permit desired, as to collect, transport, process or dispose of solid waste or any combination thereof. 
(2)	The characteristics of solid waste to be collected, transported, processed or disposed.
(3)	The number of solid waste transportation vehicles to be operated thereunder.
(4)	The precise locations of solid waste processing or disposal facilities to be used.
(5)	Boundaries of the collection area.
(6)	Such other information as may be required by the director.
(Code 1994, § 74-72; Ord. No. 1235, § 6.3, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 10-112. - Liability insurance prerequisite to issuance. 
(a)	No permit shall be issued under this division until and unless the applicant, in addition to all other requirements, shall file and maintain with the director evidence of a satisfactory public liability insurance policy, covering all operations of such applicant pertaining to such business and all vehicles to be operated in the conduct thereof, in the amount of not less than $100,000.00 for each person injured or killed, and in the amount of not less than $300,000.00 in the event of injury or death of two people and $50,000.00 for damage to property. 
(b)	Such policy may be written to allow the first $2,500.00 of liability for damage to property to be deductible. Should any such policy be cancelled, the director shall be notified of such cancellation by the insurance carrier in writing not less than ten days prior to the effective date of such cancellation, and provisions to that effect shall be incorporated in such policy, which shall also place upon the company writing such policy the duty to give such notice. 
(Code 1994, § 74-73; Ord. No. 1235, § 6.2, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 10-113. - Issuance; fee. 
(a)	If the application shows that the applicant will collect, transport, process or dispose of solid wastes without hazard to the public health or damage to the environment and in conformity with the laws of the state and this chapter, the director may issue the permit authorized by this division. The director shall have the authority to limit the number of annual permits issued under this section in order to preserve the health, comfort, safety and welfare of the residents, to promote energy conservation and to provide for collection and disposal consistent with good solid waste management practices. 
(b)	The permit shall be issued for a period of one year and each applicant shall pay a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule for each solid waste processing or disposal facility to be operated. If modifications can be made to the application regarding service, equipment or mode of operation, so as to bring the application within the intent of this division, the director shall notify the applicant in writing setting forth the modification to be made and the time in which it shall be done. 
(Code 1994, § 74-74; Ord. No. 1235, § 6.4, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 10-114. - Denial of application. 
    If the applicant does not make the modifications pursuant to the notice in section 10-113(b) within the time specified therein, or if the application does not clearly show that the collection, transportation, processing or disposal of solid wastes will create no public health hazard or be without harmful effects on the environment, the application shall be denied and the applicant notified by the director, in writing, stating the reason for such denial. Nothing in this section shall prejudice the right of the applicant to reapply after the rejection of his application, provided that all aspects of the reapplication comply with the provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall prevent the denial of a permit should the total number of permissible annual permits have already been issued. 
(Code 1994, § 74-75; Ord. No. 1235, § 6.5, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 10-115. - Suspension or revocation. 
    In all cases, when the corrective measures have not been taken within the time specified, the director shall suspend or revoke the permit involved in the violation. However, in those cases where an extension of time will permit correction and there is no public health hazard created by the delay, one extension of time not to exceed the original time period may be granted. 
(Code 1994, § 74-76; Ord. No. 1235, § 6.8, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 10-116. - Injunctive relief against persons operating without permit. 
    If a permit issued under this division is revoked and the person continues to operate, the director may request a court of law to enjoin the acts and to enforce compliance with this chapter or any applicable ordinance, rule or regulation. In any such action, the court may grant to the city such prohibitory or mandatory injunctive relief as the facts may warrant. 
(Code 1994, § 74-77; Ord. No. 1235, § 6.9, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 10-117. - Renewal, transfer fee. 
    The annual permit under this division may be renewed upon payment of the renewal fee provided in the city fee schedule if the business has not been modified, the collection vehicles meet the requirements of chapter 38, article IV, pertaining to transportation, and the renewal is approved by the director. If modifications have been made, the applicant shall reapply for a permit as set forth in sections 10-111 and 10-112. No permits authorized by this division shall be transferable. 
(Code 1994, § 74-78; Ord. No. 1235, § 6.6, 9-26-1988) 
Chapter 12 - COURTS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Courts generally, RSMo 476.001 et seq.; courts and attorney is municipalities generally, RSMo 98.030 et seq.; municipal and traffic courts, RSMo 479.010 et seq.; authority of special charter cities to establish municipal court and appoint municipal judge, RSMo 479.020; clerks of court, RSMo 483.010; court costs generally, RSMo 488.005 et seq.; court costs in certain cities, RSMo 488.2205 et seq.; evidence and legal advertisements, RSMo 490.010 et seq.; civil procedure and limitations, RSMo 506.010 et seq.; criminal procedure, RSMo 540.021 et seq.; erection and maintenance of city courthouses and jails, RSMo 71.300; establishment and maintenance of city jail in special charter cities with populations of less than 10,000, RSMo 81.090. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Established. 
    There is established in this city a municipal court, a division of the 17th judicial circuit court of the state. This court is a continuation of the police court of the city as previously established, and is referred to in this chapter as the municipal court. 
(Code 1994, § 22-1; Ord. No. 1067, § 1, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Authority of special charter cities to establish municipal court and appoint municipal judge, RSMo 479.020; authority of municipalities to elect where violations of municipal ordinances may be heard, RSMo 479.040. 
Sec. 12-2. - Jurisdiction. 
    The jurisdiction of the municipal court shall extend to all cases involving alleged violations of the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 22-2; Ord. No. 1067, § 1(A), 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Violations of municipal ordinances, jurisdiction, RSMo 479.010. 
Sec. 12-3. - Superintending authority. 
    The municipal court shall be subject to the rules of the circuit court of which it is a part, and to the rules of the state supreme court. The municipal court shall be subject to the general administrative authority of the presiding judge of the circuit court and the judge and court personnel of the municipal court shall obey directives of the presiding judge of the circuit court. 
(Code 1994, § 22-3; Ord. No. 1067, § 1(F), 10-10-1978) 
Sec. 12-4. - Warrants. 
    All warrants issued by a municipal judge shall be directed to the chief of police, or any other police officer of the city, or to the sheriff of the county. The warrant shall be executed by the chief of police, police officer or sheriff any place within the limits of the county and not elsewhere unless the warrants are endorsed in the manner provided for warrants in criminal cases and, when so endorsed, shall be served in other counties as provided for in warrants in criminal cases. 
(Code 1994, § 22-4; Ord. No. 1067, § 4, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Issuance and execution of warrants, RSMo 479.100. 
Sec. 12-5. - Arrest without warrant. 
    The chief of police or other police officers of the city shall, without warrant, arrest any person who commits an offense in his presence but such officer shall, before the trial, file a written complaint with the judge hearing violations of municipal ordinances. 
(Code 1994, § 22-5; Ord. No. 1067, § 5, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Procedure for arrest without warrant, RSMo 479.110. 
Sec. 12-6. - Jury trial. 
    Any person charged with violation of a municipal ordinance shall be entitled to a trial by jury as in prosecutions for misdemeanors before an associate circuit judge. Whenever a defendant accused of a violation of a municipal ordinance demands trial by jury, the municipal court shall certify the case to the presiding judge of the circuit court for reassignment. 
(Code 1994, § 22-6; Ord. No. 1067, § 6, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 479.020(1), (5). 
Sec. 12-7. - Right of appeal. 
(a)	Where the judge is a non-lawyer, the defendant shall have a right to a trial de novo, even from a plea of guilty, before a circuit judge or an associate circuit judge. Such application for a trial de novo shall be filed within ten days after the judgment and shall be in the form as provided by supreme court rules. 
(b)	Where the judge is a lawyer, in all cases tried before the municipal court, except where there has been a plea of guilty or where the case has been tried with a jury, the defendant shall have a right of trial de novo, before a circuit judge or on assignment before an associate circuit judge. An application for a trial de novo shall be filed within ten days after judgment and shall be filed in such form and perfected in such manner as provided by supreme court rules. 
(Code 1994, § 22-7; Ord. No. 1067, § 12, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 479.200. 
Sec. 12-8. - Appeal from jury verdicts. 
    In all cases in which a jury trial has been demanded, a record of the proceedings shall be made and appeals may be had upon that record to the appropriate appellant court. 
(Code 1994, § 22-8; Ord. No. 1067, § 13, 10-10-1978) 
Sec. 12-9. - Breach of recognizance. 
    In the case of a breach of any recognizance entered into before a municipal judge or an associate circuit judge hearing a municipal ordinance violation case, the same shall be deemed forfeited and the judge shall cause the same to be prosecuted against the principal and surety, or either of them, in the name of the city as plaintiff. Such action shall be prosecuted before a circuit judge or associate circuit judge, and in the event of cases caused to be prosecuted by a municipal judge, such shall be on the transcript of the proceedings before the municipal judge. All monies recovered in such actions shall be paid over to the city treasury to the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 22-9; Ord. No. 1067, § 14, 10-10-1978) 
Sec. 12-10. - Court administrator. 
    The city clerk is designated as the court administrator of the municipal court. The duties of the court administrator shall be to: 
(1)	Collect such fines for violations of such offenses as may be described, and the court costs thereof. 
(2)	Take oaths and affirmations.
(3)	Accept signed complaints and allow the same to be signed and sworn to or affirmed before him. 
(4)	Sign and issue subpoenas requiring the attendance of witnesses and sign and issue subpoenas duces tecum. 
(5)	Accept the appearance, waiver of trial and plea of guilty and payment of fines and costs in traffic violation bureau cases or as directed by the municipal judge; generally to act as violation court administrator of the traffic violation bureau. 
(6)	Perform all other duties as provided for by ordinance, rules of practice and procedure adopted by the municipal judge and by the state's rules of practice and procedure in municipal and traffic courts and by statute. 
(7)	Maintain, properly certified by the city clerk, a complete copy of the ordinances of the city, which shall constitute prima facia evidence of such ordinance before the court and, further, to maintain a similar certified copy on file with the court administrator serving the circuit court of the county. 
(Code 1994, § 22-10; Ord. No. 1067, § 17, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Clerks of court, RSMo 483.010. 
Sec. 12-11. - Court costs. 
(a)	In addition to any fine that may be imposed by the judge there shall be assessed as costs in all cases the amount established by the city council for court costs; a surcharge for the cost of training of police officers; a surcharge for the peace officers' standards and training commission fund; a surcharge to fund operating expenses for qualified battered persons shelters; issuance of warrants, commitments, summonses, or other orders of the court; mileage for each mile or fraction thereof that the officer travels, round trip, for service of warrants, commitments, summonses or other orders of the court; actual costs assessed against the city by the county for apprehension or confinement of the defendant; and such other costs or surcharges as may, from time to time, be authorized by the city council. 
(b)	The court administrator shall collect the additional court costs provided for in this section and promptly disburse them no less often than monthly to the city. 
(c)	The city shall use the proceeds of these additional court costs only for the purpose for which they are collected, as authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1994, §§ 22-11, 22-15; Ord. No. 1067, § 18, 10-10-1978; Ord. No. 1347, § 1, 9-12-1994; Ord. No. 1355, 2-13-1995; Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 6-25-2001) 
State law reference- Court costs, RSMo 479.260. 
Sec. 12-12. - Costs assessed against prosecuting witness. 
    The costs of any action may be assessed against the prosecuting witness and judgment be rendered against him that he pay the same and stand committed until paid in any case where it appears to the satisfaction of the judge that the prosecution was commenced without probable cause and from malicious motives. 
(Code 1994, § 22-12; Ord. No. 1067, § 19, 10-10-1978) 
Sec. 12-13. - Installment payment of fine. 
    When a fine is assessed for violating an ordinance, it shall be within the discretion of the judge assessing the fine to provide for the payment of a fine on an installment basis under such terms and conditions as he may deem appropriate. 
(Code 1994, § 22-13; Ord. No. 1067, § 20, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Authority, RSMo 479.240. 
Sec. 12-14. - Duties of city's prosecuting attorney. 
    It shall be the duty of an attorney designated by the city to prosecute violations of the city's ordinances before the municipal judge or before any circuit judge hearing such cases. The salary or fees of the attorney and his necessary expenses incurred in such prosecutions shall be paid by the city. The compensation of such attorney shall not be contingent upon the result in any case. 
(Code 1994, § 22-14; Ord. No. 1067, § 7, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 479.120. 
Secs. 12-15-12-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUDGE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Selection, tenure, jurisdiction, qualifications, and course of instruction for municipal judges, RSMo 479.020. (Back)
Sec. 12-33. - Selection. 
    The judge of the municipal court shall be known as a municipal judge of the 17th judicial circuit court, and shall be appointed by the council to his position. 
(Code 1994, § 22-36; Ord. No. 1067, § 1(B), 10-10-1978; Ord. No. 1338, 6-13-1994) 
Sec. 12-34. - Term of office. 
    The municipal judge shall hold his office for a period of two years. If for any reason a municipal judge vacates his office, his successor shall complete that term of office, even if the same is for less than two years. 
(Code 1994, § 22-37; Ord. No. 1067, § 1(C), 10-10-1978) 
Sec. 12-35. - Qualifications. 
    The municipal judge shall possess the following qualifications before he may assume and remain in office: 
(1)	He must be a licensed attorney licensed by the state and qualified to practice law within this state; 
(2)	The municipal judge need not reside within the city;
(3)	The municipal judge must be a resident of the state;
(4)	The municipal judge must be between the ages of 21 and 70 years;
(5)	The municipal judge may serve as a municipal judge for any other municipality;
(6)	The municipal judge may not hold any other office within the city government; and
(7)	The municipal judge shall be considered holding a parttime position and as such may accept (within the requirements of the Code of Judicial Conduct, Missouri Supreme Court Rule 2) other employment. 
(Code 1994, § 22-38; Ord. No. 1067, § 1(E), 10-10-1978; Ord. No. 1338, 6-13-1994) 
Sec. 12-36. - Vacation of office. 
    The municipal judge shall vacate his office under the following circumstances: 
(1)	Upon removal from office by the State Commission on the Retirement, Removal and Discipline of Judges, as provided in Missouri Supreme Court Rule 12; or 
(2)	Upon attaining his 70th birthday.
(Code 1994, § 22-39; Ord. No. 1067, § 1(D), 10-10-1978; Ord. No. 1338, 6-13-1994) 
Sec. 12-37. - Powers and duties. 
(a)	The municipal judge shall be and is hereby authorized to:
(1)	Establish a traffic violations bureau as provided for in the Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic Courts and RSMo 479.050. 
(2)	Administer oaths and enforce due obedience to all orders, rules and judgments made by him, and may fine and imprison for contempt committed before him while holding court, in the same manner and to the same extent as a circuit judge. 
(3)	Commute the term of any sentence, stay the execution of any fine or sentence, suspend any fine or sentence and make such other orders as the municipal judge deems necessary relative to any matter that may be pending in the court. 
(4)	Make and adopt such rules of practice and procedure as are necessary to implement and carry out the provisions of this chapter, and to hear and decide matters pending before the court and to implement and carry out the provisions of the Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic Courts. Any and all rules made or adopted hereunder may be annulled or amended by an ordinance limited to such purpose; provided that such ordinance does not violate, or conflict with the provisions of the Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic Courts or state statutes. 
(b)	The municipal judge shall have such other powers, duties and privileges as are or may be prescribed by the laws of this state, this Code or other ordinances of this city. 
(Code 1994, § 22-40; Ord. No. 1067, § 2, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Duties and powers of municipal judges, RSMo 479.070. 
Sec. 12-38. - Docket and court records. 
    The municipal judge shall be a conservator of the peace. He shall keep a docket in which he shall enter every case commenced before him and the proceedings therein and he shall keep such other records as may be required. Such docket and records shall be records of the circuit court of the county. The municipal judge shall deliver the docket and records of the municipal court, and all books and papers pertaining to his office, to his successor in office or to the presiding judge of the circuit. 
(Code 1994, § 22-42; Ord. No. 1067, § 1(H), 10-10-1978) 
Sec. 12-39. - Traffic violations bureau. 
    Should the municipal judge determine that there shall be a traffic violations bureau, the city shall provide all expenses incident to the operation of the same. The city clerk is hereby designated as the traffic violations clerk for the bureau, if established. 
(Code 1994, § 22-43; Ord. No. 1067, § 3, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Municipal authority to establish traffic violations bureau, RSMo 479.050. 
Sec. 12-40. - Summoning of witnesses. 
    It shall be the duty of the judge to summon all persons whose testimony may be deemed essential as witnesses at trial, and to enforce their attendance by attachment, if necessary. The witness fees shall be the same as those fixed for witnesses in trials before associate circuit judges and shall be taxed as other costs in the case. When a trial shall be continued it shall not be necessary to summon any witnesses who may be present at the continuance; but the judge shall orally notify such witnesses as either party may require to attend before him on the day set for trial to testify in the case and enter the names of such witnesses on his docket, which oral notice shall be valid as a summons. 
(Code 1994, § 22-44; Ord. No. 1067, § 8, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 479.160. 
Sec. 12-41. - Transfer of complaint to associate circuit judge. 
    If in the progress of any trial before a municipal judge it shall appear to the judge that the accused ought to be put upon trial for an offense against the criminal laws of the state and not cognizable before him as municipal judge, he shall immediately stop all further proceedings before him as municipal judge and cause the complaint to be made before some associate judge within the county. 
(Code 1994, § 22-45; Ord. No. 1067, § 9, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 479.170. 
Sec. 12-42. - Imprisonment; location. 
    If, in the opinion of the municipal judge, the city has no suitable and safe place of confinement, the municipal judge may commit the defendant to the county jail, and it shall be the duty of the sheriff, if space for the prisoner is available in the county jail, upon receipt of a warrant of commitment from the judge, to receive and safely keep such prisoner until discharged by due process of law. The city shall pay the board of such prisoner at the same rate as may now or hereafter be allowed to the sheriff for the keeping of such prisoner in his custody. The same shall be taxed as a cost. 
(Code 1994, § 22-46; Ord. No. 1067, § 10, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 479.180. 
Sec. 12-43. - Parole and probation. 
(a)	Any judge hearing violations of municipal ordinances may, when in his judgment it may seem advisable, grant a parole or probation to any person who shall plead guilty or who shall be convicted after a trial before such judge. When a person is placed on probation he shall be given a certificate explicitly stating the conditions on which he is being released. 
(b)	In addition to such other authority as exists to order conditions of probation, the court may order conditions which the court believes will serve to compensate the victim of the crime, any dependent of the victim or society in general. Such conditions may include, but need not be limited to: 
(1)	Restitution to the victim or any dependent of the victim, in an amount to be determined by the judge; and 
(2)	The performance of a designated amount of free work for a public or charitable purpose as determined by the judge. 
(c)	A person may refuse probation conditioned on the performance of free work. If he does so, the court shall decide the extent or duration of sentence or other disposition to be imposed and render judgment accordingly. Any city, person, organization or agency, or employee of the city, organization or agency charged with the supervision of such free work or who benefits from its performance shall be immune from any suit by the person placed on parole or probation or any person deriving a cause of action from him if such cause of action arises from such supervision of performance, except for intentional torts or gross negligence. The services performed by the probationer or parolee shall not be deemed employment within the meaning of the provisions of RSMo ch. 288. 
(d)	The court may modify or enlarge the conditions of probation at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the probation term. 
(Code 1994, § 22-47; Ord. No. 1067, § 11, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Authority, RSMo 479.190. 
Sec. 12-44. - Disqualification of judge. 
(a)	A municipal judge shall be disqualified to hear any case in which he is in anywise interested, or if before the trial is commenced the defendant or the prosecutor files an affidavit that the defendant or the city, as the case may be, cannot have a fair and impartial trial by reason of the interest or prejudice of the judge. 
(b)	Neither the defendant nor the city shall be entitled to file more than one affidavit or disqualification in the same case. 
(Code 1994, § 22-48; Ord. No. 1067, § 15, 10-10-1978) 
State law reference- Authority, RSMo 479.220. 
Sec. 12-45. - Substitute judge. 
(a)	If a municipal judge is absent, sick or disqualified from acting, the mayor may designate some competent, eligible person to act as municipal judge until such absence or disqualification shall cease; provided, however, that should a vacancy occur in the office of municipal judge more than six months before the end of the judge's appointed term, the office may be filled by a competent, eligible person designated by the mayor. 
(b)	The compensation of any person designated to act as municipal judge under the provisions of this section shall be as set by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1994, § 22-49; Ord. No. 1067, § 16, 10-10-1978; Ord. No. 1338, 6-13-1994) 
State law reference- Authority, RSMo 479.230. 
Sec. 12-46. - Summary contempt. 
    A criminal contempt may be punished summarily if the judge certifies that he saw or heard the conduct constituting the contempt and that it was committed in the actual presence of the court, and in all instances of failure to obey a properly served subpoena or lawful order of the court. The order of contempt shall recite the facts and shall be signed by the judge and entered of record. 
(Code 1994, § 22-50; Ord. No. 1070, § 1, 11-14-1978) 
Sec. 12-47. - Contempt proceedings upon notice. 
    A criminal contempt, except as provided in section 12-46, shall be prosecuted on notice. The notice shall state the time and place of hearing, allowing a reasonable time for the preparation of the defense, and shall state the essential facts constituting the criminal contempt charged and describe it as such. Such procedure is to be utilized in matters also involving failure to obey a lawful order of the court, such as failure to pay imposed fines. The notice shall be given orally by the judge in open court in the presence of the defendant or, on application of the prosecutor or of an attorney appointed by the court for that purpose, by an order to show cause or an order of arrest. The defendant is entitled to admission to bail. If the contempt charged involves disrespect to or criticism of a judge, that judge is disqualified from presiding at the trial or hearing except with the defendant's consent. Upon a finding of guilt, the court shall enter an order reciting the essential facts constituting the criminal contempt and fixing the punishment. 
(Code 1994, § 22-51; Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 11-14-1978) 
Secs. 12-48-12-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-68. - Summons. 
    A summons instead of a warrant may issue on the filing of a complaint or information charging the commission of an offense if the judge or prosecutor has good reason to believe that the accused will appear in response thereto. In any case in which it is lawful for an officer to arrest a person without a warrant, he may serve such person with a summons instead of arresting the accused. The summons shall describe the offense charged and shall command the accused to appear at a stated time and place in answer to such charge. The summons may be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action. If the accused fails to appear as commanded by the summons, a warrant of arrest shall be issued. 
(Code 1994, § 22-71; Ord. No. 1069, § 7, 11-14-1978) 
Sec. 12-69. - Warrant; issuance; form. 
    Any warrant issued upon an information charging the commission of an offense may be issued under the hand of the judge of the court issuing the same, or of the clerk of the court, if the information is filed by the prosecutor. It shall contain the name of the accused or, if his name is unknown, any name or description by which the accused can be identified with reasonable certainty. It shall describe the offense charged in the information. If such warrant is issued under the hand of the judge, it need not be sealed, but if it is issued under the hand of the clerk of the court, the seal of the court, if such court has an official seal, shall be attached thereto. 
(Code 1994, § 22-72; Ord. No. 1069, § 8, 11-14-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 479.100. 
Sec. 12-70. - Bail, commitment. 
    Any person arrested upon a warrant based upon an information charging the commission of an offense shall be admitted to bail as provided in these rules. If the accused fails to furnish satisfactory bail in the required amount, he shall be committed to the county jail, the city jail, or other safe place, to be held until discharged by law. When an accused is committed because of failure to furnish satisfactory bail, the amount of bail required shall be endorsed on the warrant of commitment. 
(Code 1994, § 22-73; Ord. No. 1069, § 9, 11-14-1978) 
Sec. 12-71. - Warrant; arrested person brought before judge. 
    Persons arrested under a warrant for any offense shall, as soon as practicable, be brought before a judge or the court issuing the warrant or, if such judge is absent or his office vacant, then before the person authorized by law to preside in such court. The warrant upon which the arrest was made, with a proper return thereon signed by the officer making the arrest, shall be delivered to the court. 
(Code 1994, § 22-74; Ord. No. 1069, § 10, 11-14-1978) 
Sec. 12-72. - Admission to bail. 
    The judge of the court issuing the warrant or the clerk of such court shall, at the request of the accused, admit him to bail in such sum as may seem sufficient and proper with sufficient security for his appearance at a time and place to be stated in the bond. 
(Code 1994, § 22-75; Ord. No. 1069, § 11, 11-14-1978) 
Secs. 12-73-12-102. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INFORMATION AND COMPLAINTS 

Sec. 12-103. - Filing to be done in municipal court having jurisdiction. 
    The city prosecutor or other authorized official may file an information, or a complainant may make a complaint, charging the commission of an offense. Such information or complaint shall be filed in the municipal court having jurisdiction to try the offense charged. The prosecutor may issue a notice to the person charged, requesting his appearance before the prosecutor to determine whether or not an information should be filed based upon the complaint. 
(Code 1994, § 22-86; Ord. No. 1069, § 1, 11-14-1978) 
Sec. 12-104. - Warrant; arrest. 
    A complaint of the commission of an offense, verified by oath or affirmation, may be filed with the judge or court and the prosecutor is authorized to prosecute on such complaint with the filing of an information thereon. The judge of the court, or the clerk, if a complaint or information is filed by the prosecutor, shall immediately issue a warrant for the arrest of the accused directed to any officer authorized by law to execute it, if such accused has not been taken into custody on summary arrest. The prosecutor shall be promptly informed of any complaint filed whether or not a warrant has been issued thereon. After an investigation, if the prosecutor is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that an offense has been committed and that a case against the accused can be made, he shall file an information with the judge or court founded upon or accompanied by such complaint. All traffic cases shall be prosecuted by information in the form provided in the rules of the state supreme court. 
(Code 1994, § 22-87; Ord. No. 1069, § 2, 11-14-1978) 
State law reference- Authority, RSMo 479.090. 
Sec. 12-105. - Form and signature. 
    The information shall be a plain, concise and definite written statement of the essential facts constituting the offense charged. In traffic cases such information or complaint shall be substantially in the form provided in V.A.M.R., as to such cases. An information shall be signed by the prosecutor and a complaint by the complainant. Neither need contain a formal commencement, a formal conclusion or any other matter not necessary to such statement of essential facts. Allegations of one count may be incorporated by reference in another count. 
(Code 1994, § 22-88; Ord. No. 1069, § 3, 11-14-1978) 
Sec. 12-106. - Filing, signature, etc. 
    Information may be filed by the prosecutor or a complaint by the complainant with the court having jurisdiction of the offense charged or with the clerk thereof. An information shall be signed by the prosecutor and it shall be sufficient if he avers that the same is filed upon his official oath. A complaint shall be signed and verified by the oath of any person competent to testify as a witness in the case before any judge or court clerk who is authorized to administer an oath. 
(Code 1994, § 22-89; Ord. No. 1069, § 4, 11-14-1978) 
Sec. 12-107. - Joinder of counts, when permitted. 
    Counts may be joined in the same information for offenses arising out of the same general state of facts and circumstances. 
(Code 1994, § 22-90; Ord. No. 1069, § 5, 11-14-1978) 
Sec. 12-108. - Multiple defendants. 
    All persons charged with the joint commission of an offense may be charged separately or charged in one information. 
(Code 1994, § 22-91; Ord. No. 1069, § 6, 11-14-1978) 
Chapter 14 - ELECTIONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Election authorities and conduct of elections, RSMo 115.001 et seq.; qualifications of voters and registration, RSMo 115.132 et seq.; polling places and voting procedures, RSMo 115.407 et seq.; election offenses, RSMo 115.629 et seq.; local issues, RSMo 115.700; campaign finance disclosure law, RSMo 130.011 et seq.; elections of certain officers in special charter cities, RSMo 81.070, 81.075. (Back)
Sec. 14-1. - Candidates; filing for office. 
    Every person desiring to be a candidate for the office of mayor or council in the city must file a written notice of intent to be a candidate at the office of the city clerk. Such notice of intent may be filed beginning on the 13th Tuesday prior to the election and ending on the ninth Tuesday prior to the election. 
(Code 1994, § 26-1; Ord. No. 659, § 5, 7-6-1943) 
Sec. 14-2. - Precincts established. 
    The election authority hereby establishes the boundaries of the city's voting precincts as follows: 
(1)	Precinct 20. Precinct 20 shall include all qualified voters residing west of a line beginning at the north city limits on MO State Hwy. 7 extending south to 155th Street and east to Short Rd. and then extending south of a line on MO State Hwy. 7 to MO State Hwy. VV. The line extends east at MO State Hwy. VV to Lexington Rd. the runs south to Maple Ln. then west to MO State Hwy. 7. South on MO State Hwy. 7 to Timber St., west on Timber Street to Campbell Street. North on Campbell to Kellogg Street and west on Kellogg to the west city limits and all points to the north. 
(2)	Precinct 21. Precinct 21 shall include all qualified voters residing east of a line on MO State Hwy. 7 beginning at the north city limits and extending south to MO State Hwy. VV, then continuing east on MO State Hwy. VV to Lexington Rd. The line continues south on Lexington Rd. to Maple Ln. and goes west on Maple Ln. for one block to MO State Hwy. 7 and then south to Delaware St. The line continues east on Delaware St. to Lawndale, south on Lawndale to Linwood. South on Linwood to Country Club Drive and then continues east on Country Club Drive to the east city limits and all points to the north. 
(3)	Precinct 22. Precinct 22 shall include all qualified voters residing south of a line on Country Club Drive beginning at the east city limits running west to Linwood, north on Linwood to Lawndale, west on Lawndale to Delaware, and west on Delaware to MO State Hwy. 7. South on MO State Hwy. 7 to Timber St., west on Timber St. to Campbell St., north on Campbell St. to Kellogg. West on Kellogg to the west city limits and all points to the south and west. 
(Code 1994, § 26-2; Ord. No. 1294, §§ 1-3, 1-3-1992; Ord. No. 1502, §§ 1-3, 10-22-2001; Ord. No. 1706, §§ 1-3, 10-10-2011) 
Chapter 16 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management, RSMo 44.010 et seq.; emergency services, RSMo 190.001 et seq.; confidentiality of 911 reports, RSMo 610.150; ambulance services and emergency personnel, RSMo 190.094 et seq.; health and welfare, RSMo 191.005. (Back)
Sec. 16-1. - Emergency operations plan. 
    The city shall prepare an emergency operations plan to guide emergency preparedness and response in the city. 
Sec. 16-2. - Emergency operations coordinator. 
    The city's chief of police shall act as the emergency operations coordinator with the duty to enforce all provisions of the city's emergency operations plan, applicable state law, and such other duties as are assigned from time to time by the city council to him in his capacity as emergency operations coordinator. The emergency operations coordinator is subject to the supervision of the city administrator, to the extent permitted by state law. 
Sec. 16-3. - Mutual aid agreements authorized. 
    An agreement of mutual aid may be made a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 18-30; Ord. No. 1011, § 4(7), 10-8-1974) 
State law reference- Authority for mutual aid agreements, RSMo 44.090. 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Environmental control, RSMo 260.003 et seq.; municipal authority for abatement of public nuisances, RSMo 67.398; expenses of suppression of nuisances, how paid, RSMo 71.780; health and welfare, RSMo 191.005; Indoor Clean Air Act, RSMo 191.765 et seq.; Missouri Clean Water Law, RSMo 644.006 et seq.; lands, levees, drainage, sewers, and public water supply, RSMo 241.010 et seq.; conservation, resources, and development, RSMo 251.010 et seq.; water resources, RSMo 256.200 et seq.; water usage, RSMo 256.400 et seq.; soil conservation, RSMo 278.010 et seq.; watershed protection and flood prevention, RSMo 278.160 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1717, adopted November 26, 2012, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 18, art. II, §§ 18-18-18-24, pertained to floodplain management, and derived from Code 1994, adopted Sept. 28, 2009; Ord. No. 1491, adopted June 11, 2001; and Ord. No. 1594, adopted Feb. 13, 2006. 
Sec. 18-18. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, and purposes. 
(a)	Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of Missouri has in RSMo 89.020 delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations designed to protect the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri ordains as follows: 
(b)	Findings of fact. 
(1)	Flood losses resulting from periodic inundation. The special flood hazard areas of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri are subject to inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base; all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)	General causes of the flood losses. These flood losses are caused by (1) the cumulative effect of development in any delineated floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities; and (2) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods, hazardous to others, inadequately elevated, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(3)	Methods used to analyze flood hazards. The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) that is the basis of this article uses a standard engineering method of analyzing flood hazards which consist of a series of interrelated steps. 
a.	Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this article is representative of large floods which are characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this article. It is in the general order of a flood which could be expected to have a one percent chance of occurrence in any one year as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administrator's FIS, and illustrative materials for Cass County dated January 2, 2013, as amended, and any future revisions thereto. 
b.	Calculation of water surface profiles are based on a standard hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood. 
c.	Computation of a floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than one foot at any point. 
d.	Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no development is permitted that would cause any increase in flood height. 
e.	Delineation of flood fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the base flood. 
(c)	Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; to minimize those losses described in subsection (b)(1) of this section; to establish or maintain the community's eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 59.22(a)(3); and to meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d) by applying the provisions of this article to: 
(1)	Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Require uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction; and 
(3)	Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the intended development purposes due to the flood hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1717, 11-26-2012) 
Sec. 18-19. - General provisions. 
(a)	Lands to which article applies. This article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri identified as numbered and unnumbered A zones and AE zones, on the flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) for Cass County on map panel numbers 29037C0060F, 29037C0067F, 29037C0069F, 29037C0070F, 29037C0090F, and 29037C0100F, dated January 2, 2013, as amended, and any future revisions thereto. In all areas covered by this article, no development shall be permitted except through the issuance of a floodplain development permit, granted by the city council or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the city council or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community, and as specifically noted in section 18-21 
(b)	Floodplain administrator. The city building official is hereby designated as the floodplain administrator under this article. 
(c)	Compliance. No development located within the special flood hazard areas of this community shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(d)	Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
(e)	Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. 
(f)	Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply that areas outside the floodway and flood fringe or land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This article shall not create a liability on the part of the City of Pleasant Hill, any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(g)	Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1717, 11-26-2012) 
Sec. 18-20. - Administration. 
(a)	Floodplain development permit (required). A floodplain development permit shall be required for all proposed construction or other development, including the placement of manufactured homes, in the areas described in section 18-19(a). No person, firm, corporation, or unit of government shall initiate any development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate floodplain development permit for each structure or other development. 
(b)	Designation of floodplain administrator. The city building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(c)	Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator. Duties of the city building official shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	Review of all applications for floodplain development permits to assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the floodplain development permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
(2)	Review of all applications for floodplain development permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required by federal, state, or local law; 
(3)	Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(4)	Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications;
(5)	Notify adjacent communities and the Missouri State Emergency Management Agency (Mo SEMA) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(6)	Assure that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished and shall be maintained within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse. 
(7)	Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(8)	Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) that the new or substantially improved nonresidential structures have been floodproofed; 
(9)	When floodproofing techniques are utilized for a particular nonresidential structure, the city building official shall require certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(d)	Application for floodplain development permit. To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every floodplain development permit application shall: 
(1)	Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block and tract, house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed structure or work; 
(2)	Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain development permit;
(3)	Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended;
(4)	Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market value of the improvement;
(5)	Specify whether development is located in designated flood fringe or floodway;
(6)	Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed development;
(7)	Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the city building official;
(8)	Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction; and
(9)	Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority. 
(Ord. No. 1717, 11-26-2012) 
Sec. 18-21 - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)	General standards. 
(1)	No permit for floodplain development shall be granted for new construction, substantial improvements, and other improvements, including the placement of manufactured homes, within any numbered or unnumbered A zones and AE zones, unless the conditions of this section are satisfied. 
(2)	All areas identified as unnumbered A zones on the FIRM are subject to inundation of the 100-year flood; however, the base flood elevation is not provided. Development within unnumbered A zones is subject to all provisions of this article. If flood insurance study data is not available, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from federal, state, or other sources. 
(3)	Until a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within any numbered A zone or AE zone on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(4)	All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvements, prefabricated structures, placement of manufactured homes, and other developments shall require: 
a.	Design or adequate anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
b.	Construction with materials resistant to flood damage;
c.	Utilization of methods and practices that minimize flood damages;
d.	All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
e.	New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination; and 
f.	Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, located within special flood hazard areas are required to assure that: 
1.	All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
2.	All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; 
3.	Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and
4.	All proposals for development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, of five acres or 50 lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data. 
(5)	Storage, material, and equipment.
a.	The storage or processing of materials within the special flood hazard area that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
b.	Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning. 
(6)	Accessory structures. Structures used solely for parking and limited storage purposes, not attached to any other structure on the site, of limited investment value, and not larger than 400 square feet, may be constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed provided there is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; a variance has been granted from the standard floodplain management requirements of this article; and a floodplain development permit has been issued. 
(b)	Specific standards. 
(1)	In all areas identified as numbered and unnumbered A zones and AE zones, where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in subsection (a)(2) of this section, the following provisions are required: 
a.	Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above base flood elevation. 
[*In all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones, the FEMA, Region VII office recommends elevating to one foot above the base flood elevation to accommodate floodway conditions when the floodplain is fully developed.] 
b.	Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in section 18-20(c)(9). 
c.	Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements that fully enclosed areas below lowest floor used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.	A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; and 
2.	The bottom of all opening shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(c)	Manufactured homes. 
(1)	All manufactured homes to be placed within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones, on the community's FIRM shall be required to be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
(2)	Require manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within unnumbered or numbered A zones and AE zones, on the community's FIRM on sites: 
a.	Outside of manufactured home park or subdivision;
b.	In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
c.	In an expansion to and existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
d.	In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, 
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(3)	Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones, on the community's FIRM, that are not subject to the provisions of subsection c(2) of this section, be elevated so that either: 
a.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at one foot above the base flood level; or 
b.	The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
[*In all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones, the FEMA, Region VII office recommends elevating to one foot above the base flood elevation to accommodate floodway conditions when the floodplain is fully developed.] 
(d)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-19, A are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. 
(2)	The community shall prohibit any encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	If subsection (d)(2) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
(4)	In unnumbered A zones, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from federal, state, or other sources as set forth in subsection(a)(2) of this section. 
(e)	Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones on the community's FIRM either: 
(1)	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(2)	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use*; or
(3)	Meet the permitting, elevation, and the anchoring requirements for manufactured homes of this article. 
*A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 1717, 11-26-2012) 
Sec. 18-22. - Floodplain management variance procedures. 
(a)	Establishment of appeal board. The board of adjustment as established by the City of Pleasant Hill shall consist of the current mayor and city council members and shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the floodplain management requirements of this article. 
(b)	Responsibility of appeal board. Where an application for a floodplain development permit or request for a variance from the floodplain management regulations is denied by the city building official, the applicant may apply for such floodplain development permit or variance directly to the mayor and city council, as defined in subsection (a) of this section. The mayor and city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the city building official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)	Further appeals. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the Cass County Circuit Court as provided in RSMo 89.110. 
(d)	Floodplain management variance criteria. In passing upon such applications for variances, the board of adjustment shall consider all technical data and evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article, and the following criteria: 
(1)	The danger to life and property due to flood damage;
(2)	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(3)	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
(5)	The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(6)	The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flood damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(8)	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems; streets; and bridges. 
(e)	Conditions for approving floodplain management variances. 
(1)	Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (2) through (6) below have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(2)	Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or local inventory of historic places upon determination provided the proposed activity will not preclude the structure's continued historic designation. 
(3)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(4)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(5)	Variances shall only be issued upon (a) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (b) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (c) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(6)	A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this article. 
(f)	Conditions for approving variances for accessory structures. Any variance granted for an accessory structure shall be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in subsections (d) and (e) of this section. In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance issued for accessory structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed: 
(1)	Use of the accessory structures must be solely for parking and limited storage purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
(2)	For any new or substantially damaged accessory structures, the exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood elevation, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with section 18-21(a)(4)b. 
(3)	The accessory structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure in accordance with section 18-21(a)(4)a. All of the building's structural components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces. 
(4)	Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with section 18-21(a)(4)d. 
(5)	The accessory structures must meet all National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in accordance with section 18-21(b)(1)c. 
(6)	The accessory structures must comply with the floodplain management floodway encroachment provisions of section 18-21(d)(2). No variances may be issued for accessory structures within any designated floodway, if any increase in flood levels would result during the 100-year flood. 
(7)	Equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from any flood damage.
(8)	No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by any federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs of the accessory structures. 
(9)	A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this article. 
(10)	Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and approved by the community and registered professional engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for construction. 
(Ord. No. 1717, 11-26-2012) 
Sec. 18-23. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    100-year flood. See Base flood. 
    Accessory structure. See Appurtenant structure. 
    Actuarial rates. See Risk premium rates. 
    Administrator means the Federal Insurance Administrator. 
    Agency means the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
    Agricultural commodities means agricultural products and livestock. 
    Agricultural structure means any structure used exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities. 
    Appeal means a request for review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure that is on the same parcel of property as the principle structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See Structure. 
    Chief executive officer or chief elected official means the official of the community who is charged with the authority to implement and administer laws, ordinances, and regulations for that community. 
    Community means any state or area or political subdivision thereof which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, levees, levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Eligible community or participating community means a community for which the administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. Existing construction may also be referred to as existing structures. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland; and/or
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
    Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) means an official map of a community on which the administrator has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the designated regulatory floodway. 
    Flood elevation determination means a determination by the administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards. 
    Flood fringe means the area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. 
    Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the administrator, where the boundaries of the flood areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered or numbered) A zones. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood Insurance Study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see Flooding). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, that provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Floodway encroachment lines means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This term includes only docking facilities and facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(1)	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(2)	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable floodproofing design requirements of this article. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Map means the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM), flood insurance rate map (FIRM), or the flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
    Market value or fair market value means an estimate of what is fair, economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
    NFIP means the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Participating community also known as an eligible community, means a community in which the administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance. 
    Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including federal, state, and local governments and agencies. 
    Principally above ground means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(a)	Built on a single chassis;
(b)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(c)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light- duty truck; and
(d)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with federal, state, or local floodplain management regulations; or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Risk premium rates means those rates established by the administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with section 1307 of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted actuarial principles. Risk premium rates include provisions for operating costs and allowances. 
    Special flood hazard area. See Area of special flood hazard. 
    Special hazard area means an area having special flood hazards and shown on an FHBM, FIRM or FBFM as zones (unnumbered or numbered) A and AE. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvements were within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, the erection of temporary forms, nor installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    State coordinating agency means that agency of the state government, or other office designated by the governor of the state or by state statute at the request of the administrator to assist in the implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in that state. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure", for insurance purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The term includes repetitive loss buildings (see definition). For the purposes of this definition, repair is considered to occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences. 
The term does not apply to: 
(a)	Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; 
(b)	Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure; or 
(c)	Any improvement to a building.
    Substantial improvement means any combination of reconstruction, alteration, or improvement to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative percentage of improvement equals or exceeds 50 percent of the current market value of the building. For the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. This term includes structures, which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done. 
The term does not apply to: 
(a)	Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; 
(b)	Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure; or 
(c)	Any building that has been damaged from any source or is categorized as repetitive loss. 
** Recommend development of written and adopted policy and procedure. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief by the community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the community. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 1717, 11-26-2012) 
Sec. 18-24. - Certificate of adoption. 
This Floodplain Management Ordinance for the Community of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri. 
Adopted and approved by the Governing Body of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri. 
This 26th day of November, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 1717, 11-26-2012) 
Sec. 18-25. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Pleasant Hill or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 1717, art. 6, 11-26-2012) 
Sec. 18-26. - Amendments. 
    The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this article may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973; provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Pleasant Hill least 20 days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be provided to the Region VII Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The regulations of this article are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1717, art. 7, 11-26-2012) 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- City police and fire departments generally, RSMo 85.005 et seq.; fire protection generally, RSMo 320.010 et seq.; municipal fire protection generally, RSMo 71.370 et seq.; authority of municipalities to establish and enforce fire regulations, RSMo 320.250; firemen's retirement and relief systems, RSMo 87.005 et seq.; authority for ordinances requiring conspicuous posting of street addresses for fire protection and emergency services purposes, RSMo 67.318; fireworks regulation generally, RSMo 320.106 et seq.; Fireworks regulation generally, RSMo 320.106 et seq.; Missouri Blasting Safety Act, RSMo 319.300 et seq.; blasting safety board, RSMo 319.324; municipal regulation of blasting, RSMo 319.342. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The fire code provisions have been transferred to Part III in chapter 52, Buildings and Building Regulations, as article VIII. 
Secs. 20-19-20-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Fireworks regulation generally, RSMo 320.106 et seq.; municipal authority to regulate or prohibit fireworks, RSMo 320.121. (Back)
Sec. 20-44. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fireworks means any composition or device for producing a visible, audible, or both visible and audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation and that meets the definition of consumer, proximate, or display fireworks as set forth by 49 CFR 171 to end, United States Department of Transportation hazardous materials regulations, and American Pyrotechnics Association section 87-1 standards including, but not limited to, firecrackers, torpedoes, Roman candles, toy cannons, detonation canes, blank cartridges, skyrockets or other pyrotechnic displays, but shall not include or apply to ammunition for firearms nor to dynamite and devices for exploding the same used in any industry or for the same, and not used or kept for public display. 
(Code 1994, § 34-36; Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 6-9-1986) 
Sec. 20-45. - Exemptions. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit the use of fireworks for pyrotechnic displays given by any fair association, amusement park, the officials in charge of any civic or public organization or group of individuals, having first obtained a permit from the city for such display. 
(Code 1994, § 34-36; Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 6-9-1986) 
Sec. 20-46. - Permits. 
    From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and subject to all provisions hereof, permits to sell fireworks shall be issued to all applicants requesting the same by June 1 of each year. Permit fees shall be in the amount as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1665, 4-27-2009) 
Sec. 20-47. - Date and hours of sale restricted. 
    Fireworks can only be sold on July 1, 2, 3, and 4 of each year. Use of fireworks, shooting or discharge, within the city limits shall be allowed only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on July 1, 2, and 3 of each year, and from 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight on July 4 of each year. At no time shall bottle rockets be sold, possessed or discharged within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1665, 4-27-2009) 
Sec. 20-48. - Place of sale restricted. 
(a)	Any building or stand where fireworks are sold and/or stored must be in an area zoned for commercial use (C-1). 
(b)	The use or discharge of any fireworks is prohibited at the city lake.
(Ord. No. 1665, 4-27-2009) 
Sec. 20-49. - Place and manner of discharge restricted. 
(a)	It is unlawful to discharge fireworks within 100 feet of a structure where fireworks are stored, sold, or offered for sale. 
(b)	No person shall ignite or discharge any permissible articles of fireworks within or throw the same from a motor vehicle, nor shall any person place or throw any ignited article of fireworks into or at a motor vehicle or at or near any person or group of people. 
(c)	No person shall ignite or discharge fireworks within 300 feet of any gasoline pump, gasoline filling station or any nonpermanent structure where fireworks are stored, sold or offered for sale. 
(d)	The city council, by special proclamation, shall have the power to allow the shooting or discharge of fireworks at other times and specific locations, as the council may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1665, 4-27-2009) 
Sec. 20-50. - Display and packaging; required signs. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to expose fireworks to direct sunlight through glass to the merchandise displayed, except where the fireworks are in the original package. 
(b)	All fireworks which the public may examine shall be kept for sale in original packages, except where an attendant is on duty at all times where fireworks are offered for sale. 
(c)	Fireworks shall be kept in showcases out of the reach of the public when an attendant is not on duty. 
(d)	One or more signs reading, "FIREWORKS-NO SMOKING" shall be displayed at all places where fireworks are stored or sold in letters not less than four inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 1665, 4-27-2009) 
Sec. 20-51. - Fire extinguisher required. 
    Every vendor or licensee for the sale of fireworks is required to have an adequate fire extinguisher consisting of, at a minimum, a one to five lb. multipurpose fire extinguisher and one air pressurized water extinguisher, which shall be provided and kept in close proximity to the stock of fireworks in each building or stand where fireworks are sold and/or stored. 
(Ord. No. 1665, 4-27-2009) 
Sec. 20-52. - Sales to and by minors prohibited. 
(a)	It is unlawful to attempt to sell or to sell at retail any fireworks to children under the age of 14 years except when such child is in the presence of a parent or guardian. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years to sell fireworks or work in a facility where fireworks are stored, sold or offered for sale unless supervised by an adult. 
(Ord. No. 1665, 4-27-2009) 
Secs. 20-53-20-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BLASTING 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Missouri Blasting Safety Act, RSMo 319.300 et seq.; blasting safety board, RSMo 319.324; municipal regulation of blasting, RSMo 319.342. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-61. - Adoption of state law. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted by RSMo 319.342, the city adopts all locally applicable portions of the Missouri Blasting Safety Act, RSMo 319.300 et seq., other than penalty provisions, for the purpose of regulating blasting within the city. 
Sec. 20-62. - Enforcement. 
    In enforcing the regulations adopted herein, the city shall have all enforcement powers and all remedies as provided by state law and this Code, including, but not by way of limitation, where it reasonably appears there is an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of any person, the city may issue stop work orders before proceeding with all other available enforcement mechanisms and other remedies. 
Secs. 20-63-20-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 20-81. - Required. 
    No person shall do, or cause to be done, any blasting within the city limits without first obtaining a permit therefor from the building official, subject to all the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § II(A), 1-27-2003) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 319.306; authority for municipal permit requirements, RSMo 319.342. 
Sec. 20-82. - Time limit. 
    All permits issued pursuant to the requirements of this article shall be issued for a term not to exceed 14 days. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § II(B), 1-27-2003) 
Sec. 20-83. - Application requirements. 
(a)	Each application for a blasting permit under the provisions of this specification shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)	The permit application shall be submitted in a manner satisfactory to the building official, not less than two business days in advance of the proposed blasting, and shall contain: 
(1)	The name and address of the permit applicant.
(2)	If the applicant is a corporation, the state of incorporation.
(3)	A statement of whether the applicant, a subsidiary, affiliate or persons controlled by or under the common control with the applicant has ever held a blasting permit in any state or political subdivision which in the five-year period to the date of submission of the application has been suspended or revoked. 
(4)	A legal description of the property upon which the blasting is to be performed.
(5)	A description of the purpose for which the blasting is to be done.
(6)	A copy of the site blasting application shall be forwarded to the fire chief.
(7)	A statement of the land which the applicant has the legal right to enter and commence blasting, and a statement of those documents upon which the applicant bases its legal right to enter and commence on the area affected. 
(8)	Accurate maps of a scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet clearly showing:
a.	The land boundaries to be affected during the period of the permit.
b.	The location of the closest structures to the permit area in any direction.
c.	All easements of record, public and private, which cross the permit area.
(Ord. No. 1529, § II(D), 1-27-2003) 
Sec. 20-84. - Renewals. 
    Any valid permit issued pursuant to this article shall carry with it the right of 14-day renewal. The holders of the permit may apply for renewal and such renewal shall be issued upon payment of a renewal fee, as provided in the city fee schedule, provided that the applicant seeking renewal has met the requirements and conditions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § II(C), 1-27-2003) 
Sec. 20-85. - Notice to fire department. 
    As required by RSMo 319.342, the person using explosives also shall notify the appropriate fire protection official for the jurisdiction where blasting will occur, which may be a city fire department, fire protection district, or volunteer fire protection association. The notice required by this section shall state: 
(1)	The name, address and telephone number of the person using explosives;
(2)	The name of the individual responsible for supervision of blasting;
(3)	The date or approximate period over which blasting will be conducted;
(4)	The location of blasting by street address, route or other description; and
(5)	The nature of the project or reason for blasting.
If blasting will be conducted at an ongoing project, such as a longterm construction project, or at a permanent site, such as a surface mine, the person shall only be required to make one notice to the fire department in advance of the first use of explosives. 
Sec. 20-86. - Public liability insurance required. 
(a)	Before any permit, as required in this article, is issued for the use or storage of explosives or blasting agents, every applicant shall procure public liability insurance. 
(b)	The applicant shall file with the building department a certificate of insurance issued by the insurance carrier concerned as evidence that the public liability insurance requirements have been complied with and with the city named as an additional insured. 
(c)	Proof of insurance to cover all liability arising out of the blasting operation shall be in a minimum amount of $2,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § II(E), 1-27-2003) 
Chapter 22 - HUMAN RELATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Human rights, RSMo 213.010 et seq.; unlawful employment practices, RSMo 213.055; community affairs, RSMo 251.010 et seq.; planning and development generally, RSMo 251.150 et seq.; discriminatory practices, RSMo 314.100 et seq.; municipal housing, housing authorities law, RSMo 99.010 et seq.; discrimination in public accommodations, RSMo 213.065; discrimination in commercial real estate loans, RSMo 213.045; discrimination in selling or renting by real estate agencies, RSMo 213.050. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AFFIRMATIVE ACTION POLICY AND PROGRAM 

Sec. 22-19. - Purpose. 
    This article is for the purpose of declaring and reaffirming the intent of the city to ensure that no individual otherwise qualified in the pursuit of or actual employment by the city shall be discriminated against because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, age, marital status, national origin or political opinion or affiliation. These policies and procedures are adopted to ensure that the city is in compliance with the intent and purposes of title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended; and the administrative regulations promulgated to ensure compliance by all recipients of federal funds and providers of federal services. 
(Code 1994, § 42-26; Ord. No. 1106, § A, 11-11-1980) 
Sec. 22-20. - Responsibility for implementation. 
    Each elected and appointed official shall be responsible for ensuring that the principles and policies contained in this article and plan are implemented in their respective departments and/or divisions of city government and employment. 
(Code 1994, § 42-27; Ord. No. 1106, § B, 11-11-1980) 
Sec. 22-21. - Dissemination. 
    The equal employment opportunity policy and the major components of the affirmative action plan shall be disseminated to all city officials, employees, recruitment sources, contractors, suppliers and residents upon request. 
(Code 1994, § 42-28; Ord. No. 1106, § C, 11-11-1980) 
Sec. 22-22. - Scope. 
(a)	The affirmative action plan shall cover all areas of personnel administration including, but not limited to, recruitment, hiring, placement, promotion, rates of pay or compensation, benefits, demotion, training and apprenticeships, discipline and working conditions, layoffs, recalls, terminations and other conditions of employment. 
(b)	The city shall encourage its contractors and suppliers to develop and implement programs to ensure equal employment opportunity. 
(c)	All managers and supervisors will be held responsible and accountable for the implementation and administration of the policies of affirmative action. 
(Code 1994, § 42-29; Ord. No. 1106, § D, 11-11-1980) 
Sec. 22-23. - Adoption and implementation. 
    A formal affirmative action plan has been developed and adopted by the city council as if fully set forth in this section. The plan contains an analysis of the current work force delegation of authority for implementation and monitoring, establish criteria for evaluation and specific steps to be taken to implement the program. A copy of the plan is available in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 42-30; Ord. No. 1106, § E, 11-11-1980) 
Secs. 22-24-22-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES 

Sec. 22-50. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggrieved person means any person who is attempting to provide housing for himself and/or his family in the city. 
    Discriminate means distinctions in treatment because of race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, or handicap. 
(Code 1994, § 42-51; Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 5-12-1981) 
Sec. 22-51. - Policy declared. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city in the exercise of its police and regulatory powers for the protection of the health, safety, morals and welfare of persons residing in the city; and for the maintenance and promotion of commerce, industry and good government in the city, to secure to all persons living or desiring to live in the city a fair opportunity to purchase, lease, rent or occupy housing or other real estate regardless of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, ancestry or handicap. 
(Code 1994, § 42-52; Ord. No. 1118, § 1, 5-12-1981) 
Sec. 22-52. - Additional remedy. 
(a)	As an additional remedy to the filing of a complaint in municipal court, the city council may seek to have the alleged discrimination practices abated by an action for an injunction to be maintained in the appropriate circuit court of the state. 
(b)	As an additional remedy to the filing of a complaint in municipal court, the complainant may seek to have the alleged discriminatory practices abated by the filing of a civil action in the court of appropriate jurisdiction. Such civil action shall occur within 30 days of receipt of the determination rendered by the conciliation committee. 
(Code 1994, § 42-54; Ord. No. 1118, § 9, 5-12-1981) 
Sec. 22-53. - Prohibited discriminatory practices. 
    It shall be a discriminatory practice and a violation of this article for any person to: 
(1)	Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, ancestry, handicap or national origin; however, if other bona fide offers to rent or buy have been made, the owner, lessor or his agent may accept such offers without violating RSMo ch. 213. 
(2)	Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, sex, color, religion, ancestry, handicap or national origin. 
(3)	Make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, sex, color, religion, ancestry, handicap or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)	Represent to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, ancestry, handicap or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)	For profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, sex, color, religion, ancestry, handicap or national origin. 
(Code 1994, § 42-55; Ord. No. 1118, § 3, 5-12-1981) 
State law reference- Discrimination in selling or renting by real estate agencies, RSMo 213.050. 
Sec. 22-54. - Discrimination in financing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, savings and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of real estate loans for profit, to deny a loan to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount or conditions of such loan because of the race, sex, color, religion, ancestry, handicap or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such financing. 
(Code 1994, § 42-56; Ord. No. 1118, § 4, 5-12-1981) 
State law reference- Discrimination in commercial real estate loans, RSMo 213.045. 
Sec. 22-55. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article, particularly section 22-53, shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	A rental or leasing of a dwelling unit in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two families living independently of each other, if the owner or members of his family reside in such dwelling unit. 
(2)	A rental or leasing to less than five persons living in a dwelling unit by the owner or member of his family residing therein. 
(3)	Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner provided that such house is sold or rented: 
a.	Without the use of sales or rental facilities or services or real estate brokers, agents, salesmen or persons in the business of selling or renting dwellings; and 
b.	Without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement in violation of section 22-53(3) provided, however, that: 
1.	Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; and 
2.	Any such private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time. 
(4)	For the purposes of subsection (3) of this section, a person shall be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
a.	He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; 
b.	He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
c.	He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by or occupied by five or more families. 
(Code 1994, § 42-57; Ord. No. 1118, § 5, 5-12-1981) 
Chapter 24 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Military affairs and police generally, RSMo 40.005 et seq.; peace officers, RSMo 590.010 et seq.; arrest records, RSMo 610.100 et seq.; law enforcement agency records, RSMo 610.200; confidentiality of 911 reports, RSMo 610.150; appointment of men and women to city police forces, RSMo 71.200; erection and maintenance of city courthouses and jails, RSMo 71.300; establishment and maintenance of city jail in special charter cities with populations of less than 10,000, RSMo 81.090; city police and fire departments generally, RSMo 85.005 et seq.; police relief and pension systems, RSMo 86.010 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 24-19. - Appointment of officers. 
    Appointment of the chief of police and all police officers shall be at the discretion of the city administrator, with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 46-26; Ord. No. 1240, § 2, 2-13-1989) 
State law reference- Police officers must be residents of the state, RSMo 85.005. 
Sec. 24-20. - Duties. 
    Duties and conduct of officers and the chief of police shall at all times adhere to and be governed by rules adopted by the council from time to time. In addition to all other duties assigned to the police chief, the chief shall serve as the city's emergency operations coordinator. 
(Code 1994, § 46-27; Ord. No. 1240, § 3, 2-13-1989) 
Sec. 24-21. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)	The chief of police is the director of the police department. He shall have control and responsibility for the department and all actions of its employees. 
(b)	The chief of police shall be subject to the supervision of the city administrator.
(c)	The chief of police shall be responsible for the enforcement of all orders, rules and regulations pertaining to police department conduct and personnel. 
(d)	The chief of police may organize personnel by ranks and titles, subject to the city's personnel policy. 
(Code 1994, § 46-28; Ord. No. 1240, § 1, 2-13-1989) 
Chapter 26 - MANUFACTURED HOMES, MOBILE HOMES PARKS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND CAMPGROUNDS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1703, adopted June 13, 2011, amended chapter 26 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 26, §§ 26-19-26-29, 26-47-26-61, 26-81-26-86, 26-116-26-119, 26-137, 26-155-26-157, 26-175-26-176, and 26-184, pertained to manufactured and mobile homes, and derived from Code 1994, §§ 50-26-50-36, 50-46-50-60, 50-71-50-76, 50-86-50-89, and 50-101, adopted Sept. 28, 2009; Ord. No. 1157, §§ I-XI, adopted March 34, 1986; Ord. No. 1530, §§ 50-26-50-36, 50-46-50-48, 50-50-50-60, 50-71-50-76, 50-86-50-89, and 50-101, adopted Feb. 10, 2003. 
State Law reference- State manufactured home standards, RSMo 700.010; authority to regulate location, use, etc., of structures, RSMo 89.020. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOMES, MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAILERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Drive means a right-of-way which affords the principal means of vehicular access to or through a manufactured home or trailer park and which is owned and maintained by the owner or operator of the park. 
    Manufactured means a factory-built structure, with a minimum of 320 square feet equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to be readily movable as a unit or units on its or their own running gear, and designed to be used as a residential dwelling unit without permanent foundation. The term "without a permanent foundation" means that the support system is constructed with the intent that the mobile home may be moved from time to time at the owner's convenience. The home shall have manufacture date of June 15, 1976, or later and conform to the Federal Manufactured Home and Safety Standards established by HUD. 
    Manufactured home park and mobile home park mean a tract of land containing suitable drives, utilities and other supporting elements, and devoted to the sole purpose of accommodating manufactured homes or modular homes on a permanent basis. 
    Manufactured home, single-wide, means a structure, as defined in this section, and being of a width of less than 22 feet, measured between the permanent sidewalks thereof and the home shall have a manufacture date of June 15, 1976, or later and conform to the Federal Manufactured Home and Safety Standards established by HUD. 
    Manufactured home space means that area of land within a manufactured home park set aside for use as a site for one modular or manufactured home, including the open spaces around said home, as required in this article. 
    Manufactured or double-wide manufactured home means a structure, as defined in this section, and having been built in two sections approximately of equal length at a factory, which two sections are transported over the road separately with assembly into one structure of a width of not less than 22 feet occurring at the destination. Small room or porch additions shall not be defined as double wide. The home shall have a manufacture date of June 15, 1976, or later and conform to the Federal Manufactured Home and Safety Standards established by HUD. 
    Manufactured or modular home subdivision means an area of land containing not less than 50 lots, and the public streets necessary to serve such lots, the purpose of which is to convey in fee the individual lots for the location of said homes in a permanent fashion on permanent foundations. 
    Mobile home means a structure, as defined in this section, and being of a width of less than 22 feet, measured between the permanent sidewalls thereof and has a manufacturer date before June 15, 1976, and does not comply with the Federal Manufactured Home and Safety Standards established by HUD. 
    Modular home means a residential structure, assembled in total or in several sections at a factory, and transported over the road by truck to its designation. A modular home, as distinct from a manufactured or mobile home, shall have exterior building materials and appearance similar to the customary Single-family structure in the neighborhood, a minimum 5/12 roof pitch, a minimum eave overhang of 12 inches, composition shingles, and shall be permanently situated on a foundation, and not equipped with the necessary service connection and not made so as to be readily movable as a unit or units on its or their own running gear and not designed to be used as a dwelling unit or units without a permanent foundation. The structure shall also be constructed to minimum standards adopted by the local building codes of the city. 
    Street means a right-of-way which affords principal means of vehicular access to or through a modular home, manufactured home, mobile home or trailer park and which is held in fee by the public or a governmental unit thereof. 
    Trailer means a vehicle equipped with wheels and normally towed over the road behind an automobile or truck. 
    Trailer, advertising, means a trailer, as defined in this section, but carrying or having attached there to a sign, billboard or other media for advertising purposes, such advertising being the prime purpose and use of the trailer. 
    Trailer, camping, means a trailer, as defined in this section, equipped with an enclosure for sleeping while on vacation or other trips of short duration. Such camping trailers may also contain cooking, bath and sanitary equipment. 
    Trailer, hauling, means a trailer, as defined in this section, and designed and normally used for over-the-road transportation of belongings, equipment, merchandise, livestock and other objects, but not equipped for human habitation. 
    Trailer park means a tract of land containing sites for overnight or short term parking of camping trailers. 
    Vendor trailer means a trailer equipped for primary use as a portable location to vend or sell to the public either merchandise, food or beverages. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-20. - Parking, placing, etc., outside parks; temporary permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or abandon any manufactured or mobile home on any street, alley, highway or any public place or upon any premises or tract of land located within the corporate limits of the city and which is situated outside a licensed manufactured or mobile home park or subdivision without first having secured a temporary permit as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-21. - Management of parks. 
    Each manufactured or mobile home park shall be operated in a sanitary, orderly and efficient manner, and shall maintain a neat appearance at all times. No damaged or deteriorated manufactured or mobile homes shall be permitted to remain, and suitable and effective rules for regulating the outside storage of equipment, the removal of wheels and installation of skirtings, the collection of trash and garbage, and the attachment of appurtenances to the manufactured or mobile homes shall be continually enforced. All drives, playground area and equipment, lawn and trees, and any recreation or accessory buildings shall be maintained at a level at least equal to the average residential neighborhood in the city. All portions of the manufactured or mobile home park shall be open and accessible to fire, police and other emergency and protective vehicles and personnel, including city, county and state inspectors. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-22. - Manufactured homes and trailers as nonresidential structures. 
    One or more manufactured homes or trailers may be used as a temporary office or other nonresidential structures on the site of a construction project provided such structures are removed upon completion of the project. Mobile structures may be used as temporary classroom facilities in connection with public schools with equivalent curriculum. All structures in this section must file an application for temporary permit as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-23. - Manufactured home and modular home subdivisions, when permitted. 
(a)	A subdivision for the purpose of selling individual lots in fee for the purpose of manufactured home or modular home sites may be permitted under chapter 56 
(b)	Only double-wide or larger manufactured homes or customary single-family dwellings shall be permitted in such subdivisions. Such structures shall be located in compliance with the yard and lot area requirements of chapter 58, and shall be attached to a permanent concrete foundation or slab. Modular homes must be placed on a permanent foundation. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in compliance with chapter 58 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-24. - Nonconforming existing uses. 
    All manufactured home parks designated as manufactured home parks and having two or more spaces for rental of homes on March 24, 1986, shall be considered existing mobile home parks and shall be exempt from all provisions of this article, except that the electrical services within those manufactured home parks must comply with the provisions of this article and that no mobile homes (see definitions) will be allowed to move into these parks after the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-25. - Location conditions. 
    Manufactured home parks may be located in the city under the following conditions: 
(1)	A manufactured home park may be located in any part of the city; provided, however, that there is first obtained a special use permit for such location and a license therefore. 
(2)	Each boundary of any manufactured home park must be at least 200 feet from any permanent residential building located outside said park unless separated there from by a natural or artificial barrier (any artificial barrier must be at least five feet in height) or unless a majority of the property owners owning property within 200 feet consent in writing to the establishment of said park. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-26. - Application for licenses and permits. 
    All applications for licenses and permits for manufactured homes and parks under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)	Applications for temporary and permanent manufactured home park licenses as required by this article shall be filed at the office of the city clerk. The application shall be in writing on forms provided by the city. After inspection of the manufactured home park by the city clerk or his representative for conformance with the provisions of this article, and upon the payment of the temporary or annual license fee, as applicable, in the amount provided in the city fee schedule, the city clerk shall issue a license for one year. 
(2)	Upon application for renewal of a manufactured home park license and after re-inspection of said park by the city clerk or his representative for conformance with the provisions of this article, and upon the payment of the annual license fee, the city clerk shall issue a certificate renewing such license for another year. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-27. - Revocation of licenses. 
    If upon inspection of any manufactured home park the city clerk or his representative designated for this purpose finds that conditions exist which are in violation of any provisions of this article, the city clerk shall give notices, in writing, to the person to whom the license was issued. Unless such condition or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time, to be determined by the codes enforcement officer, he shall give notice, in writing, to the person to whom the license was issued that the license has been revoked. Upon receipt or the notice of revocation, such person shall cease operation of said park. All homes shall be removed within three months of the date of revocation of said park license. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-28. - Right to hearing on denial or revocation of licenses and permits. 
    Any person whose application for a license, occupancy permit or a temporary permit has been denied or any person whose license has been revoked may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council upon filing an application for a hearing before such body within ten days following the day upon which notice was received or such license or temporary permit was denied and the city council shall hold such hearing within 30 days after the filing of the application. The filing of such application shall not suspend any order in denying approval for such license or temporary permit but shall suspend any order of revocation of the license until the matter has been determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-29. - Penalty. 
(a)	Any person who shall neglect or refuse to comply with or shall violate or attempt to violate any of the provisions of this article, or any amendments or additions thereto, whether as owner, agent, officer, employee, tenant, occupant, lessee or any other person who shall permit or take part in, or assist in, such violation or attempted violation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, constituting a separate offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, during which such violation is committed, continued, permitted or attempted, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 
(b)	The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shill not preclude the city, or any other interested person from instituting injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding authorized by law to prevent, correct or abate such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Secs. 26-30-26-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR PARKS 

Sec. 26-47. - Compliance with division required. 
    Manufactured home parks shall conform to the minimum requirements set out in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-48. - Site. 
    Any manufactured home park shall he located on a site properly graded to ensure proper drainage and to prevent stagnant pools of water. A stormwater plan drafted in accordance with section 56-57 shall he submitted along with a site plan to the planning and zoning commission and the city council. No such park shall have a site smaller than will accommodate 20 homes, or comprising less than 31/3 acres. The density will not exceed six mobile homes per acre. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-49. - Skirts. 
    Each manufactured or mobile home shall be equipped with skirts on all sides, such skirts to he of a material harmonious to the manufactured or mobile home structure. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-50. - Outdoor lockers. 
    Each mobile home space shall be provided with a suitable outdoor locker of at least 50 cubic feet. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-51. - Open space. 
    Each manufactured or mobile home shall he located on its space so that no part of one structure, including canopies, awnings, carports and other protrusions, is closer than 20 feet to another home, or to the edge of the surface of a drive. No home shall be located closer than 30 feet from any permanent building within the park, or from any property line bounding the park. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-52. - Streets and drives. 
    All manufactured or mobile home spaces shall have adequate access to a driveway of not less than 27 feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway and shall not be by an alley. All dead-end driveways shall include adequate vehicular turning space or cul-de-sac. All private drives shall have Portland cement curbs, and he surfaced with at least six inches of compacted stone base with two inches of hot mix bituminous concrete as the surface course (sealed within one year after completion), or such other materials as may be approved by the codes enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-53. - Parking. 
    Off-driveway parking shall be provided within 60 feet of the manufactured or mobile home and shall be maintained at a minimum ratio of two car spaces for each home space. Such parking spaces shall be off the public street or private drive, and each shall be not less than nine feet by 20 feet in size, and shall be surfaced to at least the standard set out above for drives. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-54 - Lighting. 
    All driveways and walkways within the manufactured home park shall be lighted at night with electric lamps with a luminous flux of not less than 2,800 lm, spaced at intervals of not more than 100 feet; or equivalent illumination as may be supplied by other approved sources. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-55. - Parks and playgrounds. 
    Park and playground space shall be provided for the occupants of the manufactured or mobile home park, on the basis of 500 square feet for each space in the park. Such playground space shall be separate and aside from the open space provided on each home space and shall be equipped and maintained for the use of the residents of the park. The owner or operator shall be responsible for all maintenance, upkeep and improvement of such areas. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-56. - Water supply. 
    All water supply and distribution systems shall be approved by the codes enforcement officer prior to construction. The water supply shall be connected to the municipal water system and all plumbing shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the city's plumbing code. Individual water service connections shall be provided for direct use by manufactured or mobile homes and shall be so constructed that they will not be damaged by the parking of such homes, or as required by the codes enforcement officer. The owner of a manufactured or mobile home park may require individual water meters or a master meter for the entire water service, in which case the owner shall be responsible for payment of the water bill and sewage service charge. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-57. - Sewage disposal. 
    All liquid waste shall be disposed of through a sanitary sewer system and treatment facility, the plans of which shall be approved by the codes enforcement officer prior to construction. All plumbing at the manufactured home park shall comply with state and local plumbing laws and regulations. Each home space shall be provided with at least a four-inch sewer connection. The sewer connections shall be provided with suitable fittings So that a watertight connection can be made between the home drain and the sewer connection. Such individual home connections shall be so constructed that they can be closed when not linked to a home, and shall be trapped in such a manner as to maintain them in an odor-free condition. All sewer lines of the said park shall be connected to the public sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-58. - Refuse disposal. 
    All solid wastes shall be disposed of by accumulation in tight containers and removal at regular intervals by methods to be approved by the codes enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-59. - Electricity. 
    All electrical installations shall comply with the electrical code of the city. Electrical outlets shall be weatherproof. An electrical outlet supplying at least 115 volts shall be provided for each manufactured home space with a minimum of 100 ampere individual service. Power lines, including service lines to the homes, may be either above ground or under ground and shall be installed in compliance with the standards of the utility corporation involved. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-60. - Fuel. 
    Natural and liquefied petroleum gas for heating and cooking purposes may be used at individual manufactured home spaces; provided, however, that the installation is connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing and complies with the city's fire prevention code. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-61. - Fire protection. 
    Standards for fire protection, use of portable fire extinguishers and location of fire hydrants in manufactured home parks shall be as follows: 
(1)	Each such park shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the city and the city's fire prevention code. 
(2)	Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire chief shall be kept in the service building and in such other buildings or locations named by the fire chief, and shall be maintained at all times in a good operating condition. 
(3)	Standard fire hydrants shall be located within 400 feet of each home.
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Secs. 26-62-26-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL USE PERMITS FOR PARKS 

Sec. 26-81 - Required; prerequisites. 
    Construction of a manufactured home park within the city shall begin only after a special use permit has been granted by the city council, in compliance with chapter 58. No such permit shall be granted, however, until an application for a special use permit and a development plan for the proposed park have been prepared and submitted by the owner of the proposed manufactured park to the planning commission and found satisfactory to the city council with a recommendation for approval. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-82. - Application. 
    The application for a special use permit shall be in writing on forms provided by the city, and shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-83. - Development plan, contents. 
    The development plan required by section 26-81 shall be accurately drawn, at a scale acceptable to the city engineer, and shall show the following: 
(1)	Proposed street and drive pattern.
(2)	Proposed manufactured homes spaces and their approximate dimensions.
(3)	Any existing streets in or shutting the property.
(4)	Location and size of parking spaces.
(5)	Location and size of park and playground area.
(6)	Screening and landscaping.
(7)	Legal description of the tract.
(8)	Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and other facilities such as electrical wiring, water service pipes, gas service pipes and sewer service constructed or to be constructed within said park. 
(9)	Name of the developer and the firm preparing the plan.
(10)	North point, scale and date.
(11)	Such other information as may be requested by the city planning commission to enable it to determine if the proposed park will comply with all the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-84. - Publication of notice of application; hearing. 
    The city planning commission shall, upon submission of three copies of the development plan, an application for a special use permit and payment of all filing fees, publish notice and hold a hearing on the proposal in conformance with chapter 58. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-85. - Criteria to be used regarding decision on application; submission to city council for final action. 
(a)	The decision of the city planning commission to recommend approval or denial of the proposed manufactured home park shall be based upon the following criteria: 
(1)	The proposed project will be in harmony, in general, with the city's comprehensive plan. 
(2)	Compliance with minimum standards for said parks as set forth in this article.
(b)	Upon bearing and consideration of the project, the city planning commission shall, within reasonable time, submit its recommendation and an endorsed copy of the development plan to the city council for final action. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-86. - Expiration. 
    After 24 months from the date of approval of a special use permit by the city council, if the manufactured home park is not improved in accordance with the development plan, to the extent that utilities, surfaced drives and occupied homes spaces exist over at least 20 percent of the area of the approved park, the special use permit shall expire, and further development and additional occupancy of the park shall be prohibited. All homes shall be removed within six months of the date of expiration of a special use permit. The owner or his agent may apply for a new special use permit in the cause of expiration or cancellation under procedures set out in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Secs. 26-87-26-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INDIVIDUAL OCCUPANCY PERMITS 

Sec. 26-116. - Required; application. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any manufactured home upon the premises of a licensed manufactured home park without first having secured a manufactured or mobile home occupancy permit and paid the permit fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. The application shall be in writing on forms provided by the city and shall include the following: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant.
(2)	The location of the licensed park in which the home is to be placed and the location of the lot within such home park upon which the home is to be placed. 
(3)	The size and license number of the home.
(4)	The signature of the applicant.
(b)	The application for a home occupancy permit for an individual home as provided herein and required by subsection (a) of this section shall be filed at the office of the city clerk. The application shall be in writing on forms provided by the city. After inspection of the home by the codes enforcement officer or his designated representative, for conformance with the occupancy permit, the permit shall be valid so long as the home is not moved; provided, however, that no fee shall be charged for an occupancy permit for any home located in a manufactured home park on March 24, 1986. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-117. - Consideration and approval of application; issuance. 
    All applications for manufactured home occupancy permits for individual homes as herein provided shall be approved by the city clerk or his properly designated representative in accordance with the provisions of this article and subject to any other limitations that may be imposed by other ordinances of the city. Upon such approval by the city clerk or his representative, the office of the city clerk shall issue the manufactured home occupancy permit upon payment of the required fees. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-118. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to: 
(1)	The emergency or temporary stopping or parking of any manufactured or mobile home for 24 hours, subject to any other limitations that may be imposed by other ordinances of the city relative to parking. 
(2)	Unoccupied manufactured or mobile homes for demonstration and sales purposes only which are located within any district in which such is permitted by chapter 58 
(3)	After a public hearing and approval by the city council, the placement of a manufactured or mobile home upon premises or a tract of land located within the corporate limits of the city for purposes of temporary relief from a local disaster, such as fire, wind or flood damage; provided, however, that such home shall be removed from the premises within six months of its original placement. 
(4)	A manufactured home with a minimum width of 22 feet, a minimum roof pitch of 5/12, a minimum eave overhang of 12 inches, constructed with composition shingles, and situated on a permanent foundation on a lot which complies with all of the requirements of chapters 56 and 58. The proposed location of any such manufactured home outside a licensed manufactured home park shall first be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval as to architectural conformity of such manufactured home with the surrounding neighborhood, based upon the following: 
a.	That the physical condition of the structure is sound, well maintained and of neat appearance; and 
b.	The proposed site of the structure is not in a neighborhood which contains homes of size and value sufficiently higher such that the contrast in appearance will depress property values in the neighborhood. 
(5)	A modular home, placed on a permanent foundation, constructed to local building codes, and meeting all lot size minimums, setbacks and other requirements of the subdivision code. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-119. - Application for temporary permit; approval. 
(a)	The application for a temporary permit for an individual manufactured home as provided herein and required by section 26-20 shall be filed at the office of the city clerk. The application shall be in writing on forms provided by the city, and shall include the following: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant.
(2)	The location and legal description of the property or area on which the home is to be parked temporarily. 
(3)	The dates that the home will be temporarily parked.
(4)	The license number of the home.
(5)	Certification by the occupant, owner or tenant that all plumbing fixtures may be sealed by the city clerk or his designated representative. If the plumbing is sealed, the owner or occupant of such home shall not permit such seal to be broken except by the direction of the city clerk or his representative. 
(6)	The signature of the applicant.
(b)	All applications for temporary permits for individual manufactured homes and manufactured homes and trailers used as nonresidential structures as herein provided shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and approved by the city council. Upon such approval by the codes enforcement officer or his designated representative, the office of the city clerk shall issue the temporary permit upon payment of the required fee. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Secs. 26-120-26-136. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TRAILERS 

Sec. 26-137. - Where permitted. 
(1)	Camping trailers. Camping trailers may be parked in a campground or trailer park, provided such camp areas are in conformance with the zoning and other ordinances of the city. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the use of tents, pickup campers, and other such equipment from also utilizing an approved campground or camper park (see article III of this chapter). Camping trailers may also be stored, on the basis of one per family, in private garages, or in the side or rear yard of private homes, businesses or industrial areas, provided that no such trailer shall be used for residential purposes except in a licensed manufactured or mobile home park as provided in this article, and subject to any other limitations that may be imposed by other ordinances of the city. Camping trailers may also be placed in a licensed manufactured or mobile home park, provided an occupancy permit is obtained therefore and such trailer is in conformance with all provisions of this article pertaining to manufactured or mobile homes which are placed upon licensed manufactured or mobile home parks. 
(2)	Advertising trailers. Advertising trailers may be permitted only on property zoned C-l, C-2, C-3 and M-l, M-2. Hauling trailers, customarily towed behind passenger cars and not exceeding eight feet of box length, may also be kept or stored on the basis of one per family, in private garages or in the side or rear yard of private homes, subject to any other limitations that may be imposed by other ordinances of the city. 
(3)	Vendor Trailers. Vendor trailers shall only be permitted on a temporary basis for up to 90 days in areas zoned C-l, C-2, C-3, M-l Or M-2. A permit shall be issued only after a proposed site plan is submitted to and approved by the city council. The council shall review said proposed site plan with a special emphasis to be placed upon traffic patterns, public road access, visibility and off-street parking for the proposed use. If the council approves the permit the city clerk shall issue same. 
(4)	Extension of Permit. Upon application and for good cause shown, the city clerk may extend a permit properly issued under this section for a period not to exceed 30 days. Only one such extension may be implemented for each permit. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Secs. 26-138-26-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL CAMPGROUNDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-155. - Compliance with division required. 
    Recreational campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements set out in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-156. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this division, recreational vehicles and recreational campgrounds shall be defined as follows: Recreational vehicle means a vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities are: travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper and motor home. Recreational campgrounds means a plot of land upon which two or more recreational camping sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles, tents and recreational park trailers of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes. No residential uses shall be permitted. Recreational campgrounds shall be designed to serve the placement of recreational vehicles, tents and recreational park trailers. Tents shall not exceed 200 square feet in floor area and recreational park trailers shall not exceed 400 square feet in floor area. The standards set forth under this section are intended for those recreational campgrounds where lots within the park are for rental, and are to serve the short-term placement of recreational vehicles and tents. Recreational park trailers may be permanently installed and shall be tied down and skirted. Tent means a temporary structure, the covering of which is made of pliable material that achieves its support by mechanical means such as beams, columns, poles, arches, rope, and/or cables. The term "tent" might also include a temporary tensioned-membrane structure. Recreational park trailer means a unit that meets all of the manufacturing standards of ANSI A119.5 and is certified by the Recreational Park Trailer Industry Association, Inc. Trailer must be of sufficient width to require a special movement permit from the State of Missouri and not exceed 400 square feet in size. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-157. - Permits. 
    In conjunction with the rules and regulations as herein specified, the recreational campground developer shall submit properly prepared plans and specifications to the community development department. Such submission shall be in accordance with section 58-149. After public hearing and review by the planning commission, shall be reviewed and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Secs. 26-158-26-174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 26-175. - Plan requirements. 
    Persons, firms, or corporations proposing to open a recreational campground shall not proceed with any construction work on the proposed park until they have obtained a special use permit from the City of Pleasant Hill as outlined in section 26-140. 
(1)	Pre-Application Procedure. The recreational campground developer shall meet with the community development director, prior to formal application, to discuss his plans and shall prepare a suitable sketch and plans sufficient to give a general understanding of his proposal. The community development director shall inform the developer as to the general suitability of the plans and of any modifications required by these regulations, if deemed advisable. 
(2)	Preliminary plan. The developer shall then prepare and submit a preliminary plan, together with improvement plans and other supplementary material, as required. Where a recreational campground is proposed for construction in a series of stages, a preliminary plan for development of the entire tract of land shall be submitted along with the detailed plans and specifications for the initial stage, as well as any subsequent stages. Preliminary plans, as required, shall comply in form and content as follows, insofar as applicable and the standard set forth herein: 
(3)	Plan preparation requirements. All applications to the planning commission shall contain the following: 
a.	Name, mailing address, legal address and telephone number of applicant.
b.	Interest of the applicant in the proposed travel park.
c.	Location, address and legal description of the entire proposed travel park site.
d.	Existing zoning of subject property and all adjacent properties.
e.	Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed recreational campground showing: 
1.	The area and dimensions of the entire tract of land;
2.	The land uses occupying the adjacent properties;
3.	The number, size and location of the proposed vehicle sites and other parking areas;
4.	The location, right-of-way, and surfaced roadway width, roadway design data and walkways;
5.	The proposed interior vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns;
6.	The location of service buildings, sanitary stations and any other existing or proposed structures; 
7.	The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes;
8.	Plans and specifications of all the water supply, sewage disposal and refuse facilities;
9.	Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within the recreational campground; and 
10.	The location and details of area lighting, electric and gas systems as related to all applicable codes and sound engineering practices. 
11.	The location of all drainage easements.
12.	The location of prominent existing landscape features and proposed landscape features.
(4)	Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. The owner shall submit a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. Such plan shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall be as per the Environment Protection Agency's requirements and shall be accordance with section 56-70 of the subdivision regulations. The plan shall be approved by the community development department prior to commencement of site preparation and construction. 
(5)	Stormwater management plan. The owner shall prepare and submit for review and approval a stormwater management plan to the community development department. Such plan shall indicate the proposed stormwater handling system, proposed water retention and release schedule to eliminate the effects of uncontrolled water runoff on adjacent properties. Such plan shall conform with the stormwater regulations put forth in sections 56-56 and 56-57 of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Pleasant Hill. 
(6)	Commission action. The planning and zoning commission shall review the preliminary park plan as submitted and, within 90 days of submission, shall take formal action on the plan in writing; giving its recommendations to the mayor and city council. 
(7)	Nature of approval. Approval of a preliminary plan by the planning commission and zoning commission and the mayor and city council shall not constitute approval of the final plan or of roads or other improvements therein, but is rather an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation of the final plan. 
(8)	Final plan. Upon completion of any modifications required by the planning and zoning commission and the mayor and council, the developer may apply for approval of final plans. Final plans shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission and the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-176. - Design requirements. 
(a)	Lot area requirements. The planning and location of individual recreational camping lots shall be governed by the following minimum requirements: 
(1)	Lot area. Recreational vehicle lots and recreational park trailers shall have a minimum width of 30 feet and shall not be less than 1,500 square feet (0.034 acres) in total area. Such size is considered to accommodate parking for one recreational vehicle, one automobile parking space, an accessory structure and related outdoor facilities (grill, picnic tables, benches, etc.). Maximum density per acre, however, shall not exceed 18 units/gross acre. Tent sites shall not be less than 750 square feet in area. 
(2)	Setback requirements. Front setback for recreational vehicle units shall be 15 feet from the front and side lot line of any internal road or street. However, structures, such as bathhouses, administration offices, recreation centers and other ancillary facilities of a permanent nature shall be set back from adjacent or access streets 75 feet as measured from the centerline of such street. In no case shall a recreational vehicle be closer than 15 feet from another recreational vehicle. 
(b)	Perimeter requirements. 
(1)	When abutting residential districts, a setback buffer area shall be 50 feet as measured from the park property line or zoning boundary line, whichever may be applicable. When abutting any other zoning district, the setback shall be 25 feet as measured from the property line or zoning boundary line, as may be applicable. 
(2)	When abutting an existing dedicated public right-of-way, the setback shall be 75 feet as measured from the street centerline, or 25 feet from the existing right-of-way, whichever results in the greater setback. 
[(3)]	In no case shall a recreational vehicle be closer than 15 feet from another recreational vehicle. 
(c)	Roadway design standards. Recreational campground roads shall be designed for the safe and convenient movement of recreational vehicles minimizing disturbance of the natural environment. The internal street system shall be generally as outlined in article II, improvements and standards of design, of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Pleasant Hill and specifically as follows: 
(1)	Streets. Design as per the latest version of the American Public Works Association's Standard Specifications and Design Criteria. All requirements for a public street shall be applicable. Such street shall serve as collector internal to the development and provide access to park lots, administrative and ancillary facilities. Such collector streets shall be improved as outlined in the City of Pleasant Hill's Design and Construction Manual. 
(2)	Parking spaces. Car parking spaces, at a minimum size of ten by twenty feet, shall be provided in sufficient number to meet the needs of the occupants of the property and their guests, without interference with normal movement of traffic. Such facilities shall be provided at the rate of at least 11/2 parking spaces for each recreational vehicle lot, and shall be on the recreational vehicle lot or in designated parking areas; no on-street parking shall be permitted for safety reasons. Gravel may be used for off street parking surfaces. 
(3)	Excavation and grading. Streets shall be excavated and graded as indicated on the approved plans. This shall include excavation of the street to the lines, grades and limits indicated on the drawings or as may be revised by the commission and the municipality to meet conditions encountered during construction, the excavation for intersecting roadways, stream channels and culverts within the approved right-of-way limits; and shall also include the widening of cuts, flattening and rounding of slopes outside the right-of-way as called for on approved plans, removal of the top soil and excavating of ditches and the construction of fill. Inspection shall be performed and approval granted by the municipality prior to further work. 
(d)	Recreation. At least ten percent of the park area shall be reserved for active and passive recreation purposes with appropriate location, dimensions and topographic characteristics which lend themselves to recreational use. Such area shall exclude required buffer and setbacks. 
(e)	Ancillary services. The developer may include certain ancillary services such as laundromat, camp store, grocery store, office, bathhouse, caretaker's residence, etc., provided that such uses shall be strictly for the use and convenience of those persons utilizing the recreational campground and does not violate local zoning regulations. The developer must have provide permanent rest rooms and a community storm shelter meeting FEMA publication 361 criteria. 
(f)	Fire. 
(1)	General. For the safety and welfare of the occupants of the Recreational campgrounds, the following fire regulations shall be incorporated into the park. All fire safety plans shall be approved by the local designated fire chief of the municipality in which the park is located. 
(2)	Fire hydrants shall hereafter be required in any new recreational campground where the extension of central water lines, whether public or private, are proposed for the recreational campground development. 
a.	[Size and type.] Hydrant size and type of all hydrants installed shall be of a standard size and type as specified by the municipality and the designated fire chief of the municipality in which the recreational campground is proposed to be located. 
b.	Spacing. Hydrant spacing shall be adequate to serve all lots within the recreational campground. Hydrants shall be arranged not more than 400 feet apart from one another. When an existing hydrant is less than 400 feet from the park, the existing hydrant shall be deemed satisfactory and spacing can be determined and shown, taking the existing hydrant into consideration. 
c.	Location. Hydrants shall be located within dedicated easements. 
d.	Design. The proposed locations of fire hydrants shall be shown on the submitted plans. Any existing fire hydrants less than 1,000 feet from the proposed park shall be shown in the vicinity sketch with an exact distance in feet from the hydrant to the nearest lot line of the recreational campground. 
(g)	Utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground. The placement of utilities shall conform to the City's Codes and Ordinances and the utility company's standards. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Secs. 26-177-26-183. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MINIMUM OPERATING STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL CAMPGROUNDS 

Sec. 26-184. - Minimum standards. 
(a)	Recreational vehicles, recreational park trailers or tents shall not be used as a permanent place of abode, dwelling or business. 
(b)	Recreational vehicles, recreational park trailers or tents shall be limited to a maximum stay of two weeks. 
(c)	Recreational campgrounds may also include tent camping sites but shall not exceed 20 percent of the total number of sites in the park. 
(d)	All pets must be kept on no more than a six foot leash when outside.
(e)	Pets may not be left unattended outdoors at any time.
(f)	Waste, water, sewage or effluent from sinks, portable toilets or other plumbing fixtures must be deposited at a dump station or by direct connection to the public sewer through an RV service connection. 
(g)	Open fires will be allowed in the park for cooking only and must be contained in an approved fire ring or cooking device. 
(h)	Trash receptacles shall be provided in the park and shall be covered.
(i)	Centralized trash dumpsters shall also be provided and shall be screened as per section 50-61 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26.185. - Application for licenses and permits. 
    All applications for licenses and permits for recreational campgrounds under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)	Applications for temporary and permanent recreational campgrounds licenses as required by this article shall be filed at the office of the city clerk. The application shall be in writing on forms provided by the city. After inspection of the recreational campgrounds by the city clerk or his representative for conformance with the provisions of this article, and upon the payment of the temporary or annual license fee, as applicable, in the amount provided in the city fee schedule, the city clerk shall issue a license for one year. 
(2)	Upon application for renewal of a recreational campgrounds license and after re-inspection of said park by the city clerk or his representative for conformance with the provisions of this article, and upon the payment of the annual license fee, the city clerk shall issue a certificate renewing such license for another year. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-186. - Revocation of licenses. 
    If upon inspection of any recreational campgrounds the city clerk or his representative designated for this purpose finds that conditions exist which are in violation of any provisions of this article, the city clerk shall give notices, in writing, to the person to whom the license was issued. Unless such condition or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time, to be determined by the codes enforcement officer, he shall give notice, in writing, to the person to whom the license was issued that the license has been revoked. Upon receipt or the notice of revocation, such person shall cease operation of said recreational campgrounds. All homes shall be removed within three months of the date of revocation of said recreational campgrounds license. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-187. - Right to hearing on denial or revocation of licenses and permits. 
    Any person whose application for a license, occupancy permit or a temporary permit has been denied or any person whose license has been revoked may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council upon filing an application for a hearing before such body within ten days following the day upon which notice was received or such license or temporary permit was denied and the city council shall hold such hearing within 30 days after the filing of the application. The filing of such application shall not suspend any order in denying approval for such license or temporary permit but shall suspend any order of revocation of the license until the matter has been determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 26-188. - Penalty. 
(a)	Any person who shall neglect or refuse to comply with or shall violate or attempt to violate any of the provisions of this article, or any amendments or additions thereto, whether as owner, agent, officer, employee, tenant, occupant, lessee or any other person who shall permit or take part in, or assist in, such violation or attempted violation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, constituting a separate offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, during which such violation is committed, continued, permitted or attempted, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 
(b)	The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shill not preclude the city, or any other interested person from instituting injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding authorized by law to prevent, correct or abate such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1703, 6-13-2011) 
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Criminal procedure, RSMo 540.010; crimes and punishment, RSMo 556.011; criminal code, RSMo 556.011 et seq.; arrest records, RSMo 610.100 et seq.; law enforcement agency records, RSMo 610.200. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1-28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal nuisance ordinances, removal of nuisance, costs to be included in special tax bill, RSMo 67.398; inadequate and deficient housing as public nuisances, RSMo 441.500 et seq. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-19. - Prohibited. 
(a)	No person shall permit, cause, keep, maintain or commit any act constituting a nuisance, as defined by the laws of the state, this article or other ordinances of the city, or cause to be committed, kept or maintained any such nuisance within the city or within two miles of the limits thereof. 
(b)	No owner, occupant or person in charge of any house, building, lot or premises shall cause or allow any nuisance to be or remain in or upon any such house, building, lot or premises. 
(Code 1994, § 30-26; Ord. No. 1128, § 1, 11-10-1981) 
Sec. 28-20. - Certain acts, matters, etc., declared nuisances. 
    The following are hereby deemed and declared to be nuisances: 
(1)	Substances emitting noxious odors. All substances which emit or cause any foul, noxious or unhealthy odor or effluvia in the neighborhood where they exist. 
(2)	Carcasses of animals. All carcasses of animals remaining exposed one hour after death. 
(3)	Hides. All green or salted hides left or deposited in any open place. 
(4)	Slaughterhouses in offensive condition. All slaughterhouses or pens inside or outside of the city and within two miles of the city which are kept in such a condition as to be offensive, annoying or disagreeable to anyone. 
(5)	Establishments emitting noxious odors, vapors, etc. Establishments emitting or causing an offensive, disagreeable, noxious or toxic dust, vapor, fume, mist or odor. 
(6)	Liquid refuse. All slop, foul or dirty water, liquid or washings, excrement, all filth, refuse or offal, discharged through drains or spouts or otherwise thrown or deposited in or upon any street, sidewalk, lot, park, public square, public enclosure, pond or pool of water. 
(7)	Vegetables emitting noxious odor. All vegetables or other articles that emit or cause an offensive, noxious or disagreeable smell or odor. 
(8)	Matters causing injury, inconvenience or annoyance to public. All articles or things whatsoever caused, kept, maintained or permitted by any person, to the injury, inconvenience or annoyance of the public. 
(9)	Acts injuring, annoying or inconveniencing the public. All pursuits followed or engaged in, or acts done by any person to the injury, annoyance or inconvenience of the public. 
(10)	Advertising devices over streets. All hanging signs, ropes, netting or other advertising devices stretched over or across any street or sidewalk. 
(11)	Trash, junk, etc., on streets, lots, etc. All ashes, cinders, slops, filth, excrement, sawdust, stones, rocks, dirt, straw, soot, sticks, shavings, eggshells, oyster shells or cans, brush, logs, paper, trash, rubbish, manure, refuse, offal waste, water, chamber lye, fish, putrid meat, entrails, decayed fruit or vegetables, broken ware, rags, iron or other metal, old wearing apparel, all animal or vegetable matter, all leaves, yard waste, compost materials, or plant trimmings of any type, all dead animals or any other offensive or disagreeable substance or things thrown or deposited by anyone in or upon any street, sidewalk, park, public square, public enclosure, lot, vacant or occupied, or pond or pool of water. 
(12)	Junk, glass, machinery parts, and discarded material. Junk, any metal, glass, paper, rags, wood, machinery parts, cloth or other waste or discarded material of any nature or substance whatsoever, or scrap or salvage materials. 
(13)	Damaged or disabled vehicles. Damaged or disabled vehicle, any vehicle which is not registered or improperly registered with the state; has been inoperable for more than 72 hours or is in such a state of repair as to be inoperable, except those on the premises of a duly licensed automobile repair or sales business or in a duly licensed automobile junking yard or tow lot. Vehicles shall mean any machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies and wagons or any part thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 30-27; Ord. No. 1128, § 2, 11-10-1981; Ord. No. 1334, 5-23-1994; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 10-26-2009) 
State law reference- Dead animals as nuisances, RSMo 269.020; littering with animal carcasses, RSMo 577.076; authority to remove weeds and trash nuisances, RSMo 71.285; noxious weeds as public nuisance, RSMo 263.460; plant pests, RSMo 263.080; derelict vehicles as public nuisance, RSMo 82.291; junkyards near road as public nuisance, RSMo 226.650; municipal authority to prevent and punish smoke nuisances, RSMo 71.760 et seq.; dilapidated property causing blight or substantial safety threat as public nuisance, RSMo 447.620; smoke nuisances, RSMo 71.760. 
Sec. 28-21. - Decayed meat or vegetables, refuse, etc., on private premises. 
    No person shall suffer or allow any putrid or unwholesome meats or fish, decayed fruits or vegetables, refuse, offal, excrement, chamber lye or other filthy or offensive substance or thing to be or remain in or upon any house, building, lot or premises owned or occupied by him or under his charge or control. 
(Code 1994, § 30-28; Ord. No. 1128, § 5, 11-10-1981) 
Sec. 28-22. - Notice to abate. 
    Whenever the codes enforcement officer or such person as the council may designate shall have knowledge that a nuisance dangerous to the public health exists in or upon any house or premises within the city, or within two miles of the city, he shall notify in writing the person occupying or having possession of such place or premises to abate or remove such nuisance within a reasonable time to be specified in the notice. 
(Code 1994, § 30-30; Ord. No. 1128, § 6, 11-10-1981) 
Sec. 28-23. - Failure to comply with notice to abate or remove. 
    No person notified as provided in section 28-22 shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the same within such reasonable time as is specified in the notice. 
(Code 1994, § 30-31; Ord. No. 1128, § 7, 11-10-1981) 
Sec. 28-24. - Abatement, removal by city; costs constitute lien on property; collection of cost. 
(a)	Whenever the codes enforcement officer shall ascertain that a nuisance dangerous to public health exists in or upon any house, building, lot or premises in the city he may, in the case of failure, neglect or refusal to comply with the notice provided for in section 28-22, certify that such a nuisance exists and, in his opinion, is dangerous to public health. 
(b)	Upon such certification, the codes enforcement officer shall enter in or upon such house, building, lot or premises and remove and abate such nuisance, and shall charge the cost thereof to the owners or lessees in control. The cost of removing and abating any such nuisance, together with an administrative fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule, shall be assessed as a special tax assessment upon the property affected thereby and shall constitute a lien collectible in the same manner as other tax liens pursuant to state law. As soon as the cost of removal and abatement of any such nuisance shall be determined by the codes enforcement officer, he shall notify, by registered letter deposited in the United States mail, the owners, lessees or agents of the cost. 
(c)	If after 30 days from the mailing of such registered letter the cost is unpaid, the codes enforcement officer shall certify assessments and apportionment which shall contain the names of the owners and all other parties interested in the lots affected and charged therewith who were such upon the date when removal and abatement of the nuisance occurred. Such names shall be determined and taken from the assessment books used for the assessment and levy of general taxes by the city, but no defect or mistake in the books or in the description therein of the lots or in the name in such apportionment shall impair the validity of the liens on the lots or bills issued therefor. 
(d)	The city collector shall, immediately upon receipt of such apportionment, enter the assessments therein contained in appropriate books to be kept for that purpose showing the property assessed. 
(Code 1994, § 30-32; Ord. No. 1128, § 8, 11-10-1981) 
Sec. 28-25. - Authority and duty of police. 
    Police officers and all officers of the police force, when directed by the proper authority, are hereby authorized and required to go in the daytime in and upon any house, building, lot or premises, whether public or private, for the purpose of removing or abating any nuisance. 
(Code 1994, § 30-33; Ord. No. 1128, § 9, 11-10-1981) 
Sec. 28-26. - Abatement at time of trial; assessment or abatement cost as portion of court costs. 
    If, upon trial, it shall appear to the judge of the municipal court or appellate court that the nuisance complained of continues to exist, the judge of the municipal court or appellate court shall, in addition to any other penalty provided for in this article, make an order directing the chief of police or the sheriff of the county, as the case may be, to abate such nuisance forthwith, and immediately report the expense therefor to the judge of the municipal court or appellate court who shall, as a part of the costs of such prosecution, render judgment against the defendant for the amount of such expense, including the administrative fee provided for in this article, which shall be collected as other fines and costs. 
(Code 1994, § 30-34; Ord. No. 1128, § 10, 11-10-1981) 
Secs. 28-27-28-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FILL AREAS 

Sec. 28-41. - Fill material containing no organic matter to be leveled and covered. 
    Any fill material, including clean rocks, clean dirt or construction debris that does not contain organic matter, shall be leveled and covered with a minimum of four inches of clean soil within 30 days after it is placed in the fill area. 
(Code 1994, § 30-46; Ord. No. 1259, § 1, 2-12-1990) 
Sec. 28-42. - Required condition of site after leveling. 
    After leveling, the fill area must be able to be mowed in such a fashion that it will not become a danger to public health, safety or welfare. Any voids or cavities which are deemed dangerous by the codes enforcement officer shall be filled with an appropriate amount of clean soil within five days of receiving written notice thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 30-47; Ord. No. 1259, § 2, 2-12-1990) 
Sec. 28-43. - Extension of time. 
    Any owner of a fill area who desires an extension of time for good cause shown can apply to the codes enforcement officer in writing for the extension within the 30-day period allotted. The codes enforcement officer shall be authorized, in his discretion, to allow in writing an extension of time for the leveling and covering of the fill, not to exceed 30 days. Successive extensions shall be allowed in the codes enforcement officer's discretion only. 
(Code 1994, § 30-48; Ord. No. 1259, § 3, 2-12-1990) 
Sec. 28-44. - Clean fill required. 
    No fill shall be used which contains anything other than clean dirt, clean rocks or construction debris which is free of any organic material, including, but not limited to, wood, paper, insulation, shingles, sheathing material, etc. The codes enforcement officer shall have the sole right to determine whether any material deposited in a fill is inappropriate and shall have the right to require the owner of the fill to remove any inappropriate materials upon five days' written notice. 
(Code 1994, § 30-49; Ord. No. 1259, § 4, 2-12-1990) 
Secs. 28-45-28-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ABANDONED PROPERTY 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoning motor vehicles, RSMo 577.080; removal and disposition of abandoned, unattended, or wrecked motor vehicles, RSMo 304.155. (Back)
Sec. 28-60. - Nuisance declared. 
    Any owner or person in charge of a motor vehicle or other personal property, found to be in violation of this division by leaving or abandoning same upon streets or public places as provided in this division, is hereby declared to be guilty of creating a nuisance. 
(Code 1994, § 54-26; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § A, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 28-61. - Authority of police. 
(a)	The police department is hereby granted authority, in the exercise of its discretion, to tow or remove any vehicle or other personal property found upon any public street, roadway or thoroughfare or upon other public property of the city, where any motor vehicle or other personal property is deemed by the department to be illegally parked, abandoned and/or left so as to impede the flow of traffic or to cause a traffic hazard, is unidentified, stolen, disabled, or wrecked, or is impounded due to intoxication or other incapacity of the driver, including an improperly or unlicensed operator, or one in which the operator is apprehended on suspicion of a crime, or at the written request of the owner. 
(b)	An unidentified motor vehicle or other personal property as referred to in this section is hereby declared to be an abandoned motor vehicle or other personal property where ownership thereof cannot be ascertained. 
(c)	An abandoned motor vehicle or other personal property as referred to in this section is hereby declared to be such motor vehicle or personal property which remains upon the streets, roadways, thoroughfares or other public property of the city for a period longer than 72 hours, the owner of which cannot be located or who refuses to remove same. 
(Code 1994, § 54-27; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § B, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 28-62. - Notice to owner of removal of vehicle. 
    Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this division and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner, such officer shall, within five working days of removal, give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. If any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. 
(Code 1994, § 54-28; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § C, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.155. 
Sec. 28-63. - Contracts with private towing services. 
    The city, by and through its police department, is hereby authorized to contract with one or more private towing services with a place of business within the city to carry out the provisions of this division. Any towing service contracting with the city shall comply with the provisions of RSMo 304.154 through 304.158. 
(Code 1994, § 54-29; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § D, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 28-64. - Authority of police to retain vehicle or property in its custody. 
    The police department shall be authorized to retain a motor vehicle or personal property, as referred to and defined in section 28-61, in its custody and control until such time as properly redeemed by the owner thereof as provided in this division. 
(Code 1994, § 54-30; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § E, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 28-65. - Towing and storage charges for vehicles and other property. 
    Any motor vehicle or other personal property which now is or may hereafter come into the possession of the police department shall be subject to a charge equaling costs incurred by the city for each removal or towing from the public place in addition to a reasonable storage charge, as established by the city council, for each day, or fraction thereof, for such time as it remains in the possession and custody of the police department. 
(Code 1994, § 54-31; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § F, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 28-66. - Proof of ownership, redemption of impounded property. 
(a)	It shall be the express duty of any person claiming to be the owner of any impounded property referred to in this article to present a certificate of title or certificate of registration therefor to the chief of police and to furnish the department any and all additional proof as may be required to establish such ownership. 
(b)	If any person shall present to the chief of police valid proof of his ownership of such impounded property prior to the date of actual sale thereof, the property itself shall be delivered to the owner under the conditions provided in this division. 
(Code 1994, § 54-32; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § G, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 28-67. - Public sale of impounded vehicle and other property. 
(a)	Authorized. The chief of police or the city clerk may sell any and all motor vehicles and other personal property impounded by the police department pursuant to the provisions of this division, if same is unredeemed by the owner thereof within a period of 90 days following the date of such impoundment. 
(b)	Conduct of sale. The sale shall be to the highest bidder for cash or may be conducted at a public auction, the proceeds being first applied to all removal and storage charges accumulated against each separate vehicle or item of personal property, with the balance being deposited and credited to the general fund of the city, subject to the provisions in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)	Sales to salvage dealer. All motors or blocks of automobiles offered for sale hereunder must be sold as salvage only and to a duly licensed salvage dealer upon the express understanding and provision that the motor or blocks of the vehicles sold shall be considered and treated as salvage or junk only, and not subject to resale; the parts of the remainder of the vehicle may be sold by the salvage dealer as part replacements. Any salvage dealer found guilty of violating the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11, in addition to the costs of court. 
(Code 1994, § 54-33; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § H, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 28-68. - Report of impounded vehicle, property. 
    A true copy of all pertinent information concerning each motor vehicle or item of personal property impounded under the provisions of this article and held for a period of 90 days unredeemed by its rightful owner shall, on the next business day following, be forwarded to the city clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 54-34; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § I, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 28-69. - Publication of sale. 
    The city clerk shall publish notice of a sale under this article at least once in a newspaper published in the city or effect such publication at least 15 days prior to such sale. Such publication shall recite the manufacturer's name, model and motor or serial number of all motor vehicles to be sold and shall otherwise briefly describe other personal property intended for sale. 
(Code 1994, § 54-35; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § J, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 28-70. - City clerk to furnish list of properties to be sold. 
    Prior to an actual sale as provided in this division, the city clerk shall submit his list to the police department of property to be sold, including therein the elimination of any impounded motor vehicles or other personal property redeemed and returned to their rightful owners. 
(Code 1994, § 54-36; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § K, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 28-71. - City clerk to furnish list of properties sold. 
    Immediately following a sale under this article the city clerk shall furnish the police department a complete list of all properties sold, including the sale price, all charges as heretofore provided and the balance, if any, available to the owner or the city, as the case may eventually prove to be. 
(Code 1994, § 54-37; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § L, 4-13-1976) 
Secs. 28-72-28-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WEEDS 

Sec. 28-82. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Noxious plants means poison ivy, poison oak and poison sumac, at any height or state of maturity. 
    Owner means the real and actual owner of the fee title, and in case of joint tenancy, tenancy by the entireties or tenancy in common, each owner thereof, the life tenant, occupant, tenant, lessee, tenant at will, tenant at sufferance, adverse possessor and any other person, firm, partnership, corporation or association, or any agent, broker or representative thereof, asserting or having any right, title or interest in any lot, tract or parcel of land in the city. The land records filed in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county within which any such lot, tract or parcel of land shall be located and any other official record of such county or of the city may be used to determine such owner as of any given date. 
    Rank weeds means all vegetation which may emit unpleasant or noxious odors, or transmit pollen into the air at any state of maturity, and which exceeds 12 inches in height; also all vegetation regardless of height, including thickets, which conceals or invites filthy deposits or which harbors rodents, refuse or vermin. 
    Thickets means dense growths of wild shrubbery having stems or trunks less than 11/2 inches in diameter, and briar patches. 
(Code 1994, § 94-26; Ord. No. 1048, § 1, 8-9-1977) 
Sec. 28-83. - Nuisance declared; exception. 
    Rank weeds, thickets and noxious plants which are allowed to stand at any season of the year upon any lot, tract or parcel of land, or along the sidewalk, street or unpaved alley adjacent to such lot, tract or parcel of land, are hereby declared to constitute a nuisance; provided that this division shall not apply to land zoned or used for agricultural use which is more than 300 feet distant from any occupied residence. 
(Code 1994, § 94-27; Ord. No. 1048, § 2, 8-9-1977) 
Sec. 28-84. - Unlawful to permit growth; removal required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land, except as hereinbefore provided, to allow rank weeds, thickets or noxious plants to grow or stand upon such premises, and it shall be the duty of such owner to cut, remove or destroy any and all such rank weeds, thickets and noxious plants on such premises. 
(Code 1994, § 94-28; Ord. No. 1048, § 3, 8-9-1977) 
Sec. 28-85. - Abatement procedure. 
    Whenever the chief of police or codes enforcement officer shall determine that the height of weeds on any lot or tract of ground within the city is more than 12 inches, he shall give a hearing after ten days' notice thereof, either personally or by United States mail, to the owner or owners, or his or their agents, or by posting such notice on the premises; thereupon the chief of police or codes enforcement officer may declare the weeds, thickets and noxious plants to be a nuisance and order the same to be abated within five days. At the hearing, the alleged owner shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony, other evidence and arguments and to cross examine witnesses. All testimony shall be taken under oath. If the chief of police or codes enforcement officer, upon such hearing, shall determine that rank weeds, thickets and noxious plants or all constitute a nuisance detrimental to health on such property, he shall file with the city clerk in writing his findings of fact, conclusions of law, and his order that such nuisance shall be abated within five days, and shall cause such findings, conclusions and order to be served upon the owner in the same manner as provided for notice of such hearing. 
(Code 1994, § 94-29; Ord. No. 1048, § 4(a), 8-9-1977) 
Sec. 28-86. - Effect of failure to comply with notice to cut. 
    Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner to comply with the notice provided for in section 28-85, the chief of police or codes enforcement officer may cause a complaint to be filed against such owner for the violation of the provisions of this division upon which complaint, an information may be filed in the municipal court; and no such owner shall be exempt from prosecution for violation of such provision by reason of lawfully transferring his ownership, tenancy or interest in the premises upon which the nuisance exists, after the giving of the notice as provided in this division. 
(Code 1994, § 94-30; Ord. No. 1048, § 5, 8-9-1977) 
Sec. 28-87. - Special assessment for abatement by city. 
    In case the weeds, thickets and noxious plants are not cut down and removed within the five days provided for in the notice provided for in this division, the chief of police or codes enforcement officer shall have the weeds cut down and removed, and shall certify the costs to the city clerk, including an administrative fee as provided in section 28-24(b), who shall cause a special tax bill therefor against the property to be prepared and be collected with other taxes assessed against the property; and the tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be a first lien on the property until paid and shall be prima facie evidence of the recitals therein and of its validity and no mere clerical error or informality in the same or in the proceedings leading up to the issuance shall be a defense thereto. Each special tax bill shall be issued by the city clerk on or before June 1 of each year. Such tax bills, if not paid when due, shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum. 
(Code 1994, § 94-31; Ord. No. 1048, § 4(b), 8-9-1977) 
Sec. 28-88. - Notice to corporate officers, agents, etc., constitutes notice to corporation. 
    Any officer of a corporation or the person in charge of the local office of such corporation, which is the owner of any real property on which rank weeds, thickets or noxious plants stand or grow, who shall have been notified by notice as provided for in section 28-87, upon the failure, neglect or refusal of such corporation to comply with such notice, shall be guilty of violating the provisions of this article, and notice to the person in charge of the local office or any officer or registered agent, as shown by the articles of incorporation of such corporation or the latest amendment thereof on file in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county in which filed or in the file of the office of the secretary of state, shall constitute notice to such corporation. 
(Code 1994, § 94-32; Ord. No. 1048, § 6, 8-9-1977) 
Sec. 28-89. - Penalty; violations. 
    Each day on which rank weeds, thickets or noxious plants remain on any premises after the duty of the owner arises hereunder to cut, remove or destroy same, shall constitute a separate offense for which the owner thereof may be arrested, tried, convicted, and punished separately, without the necessity of further notices. 
(Code 1994, § 94-33; Ord. No. 1048, § 7, 8-9-1977) 
Secs. 28-90-28-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 28-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administer means the direct application of a drug or controlled substance, whether by injection, inhalation, ingestion, or any other means, to the body of a patient or research subject by a practitioner (or, in his presence, by his authorized agent) or the patient or research subject at the direction and in the presence of the practitioner. 
    Controlled substance means any drug or substance included in schedules I through V of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act found in RSMo ch. 195, including, but not limited to: 
(1)	Cocaine and its derivatives.
(2)	Opiates and opium derivatives such as heroin, codeine, pethidine and morphine.
(3)	Hallucinogenic substances including lysergic acid diethylamide, marijuana (Cannabis sativa L.), including seeds of mature plants, mescaline, psilocybin, and various types of methoxyamphetamines. 
(4)	Stimulants such as amphetamines and methamphetamines.
(5)	Barbiturates and other depressants such as amobarbital, secobarbital, pentobarbital, phenobarbital, methaqualone, phencyclidine and diazepam. 
    Deliver or delivery means the actual, constructive or attempted transfer from one person to another of a drug paraphernalia or of a controlled substance, or an imitation controlled substance whether or not there is an agency relationship, and includes a sale. 
    Dispense means to deliver a drug or controlled substance to an ultimate user or research subject by or pursuant to the lawful order of a practitioner including the prescribing, administering, packaging, labeling or compounding necessary to prepare the substance for such delivery. 
    Distribute means to deliver other than by administering or dispensing a drug or controlled substance. 
    Drug includes: 
(1)	Substances recognized as drugs in the official United States pharmacopoeia, official homeopathic pharmacopoeia of the United States or official national formulary or any supplement to any of them. 
(2)	Substances intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in man or animals. 
(3)	Substances intended for use as a component of any article specified in this definition. It does not include devices or their components, parts or accessories. 
    Drug paraphernalia. 
(1)	Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance in violation of RSMo ch. 195. It includes, but is not limited to: 
a.	Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived. 
b.	Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances or imitation controlled substances. 
c.	Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance, or an imitation controlled substance. 
d.	Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances or imitation controlled substances. 
e.	Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances or imitation controlled substances. 
f.	Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances or imitation controlled substances. 
g.	Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana. 
h.	Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances or imitation controlled substances. 
i.	Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used or intended for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances or imitation controlled substances. 
j.	Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances or imitation controlled substances. 
k.	Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or intended for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances or imitation controlled substances into the human body. 
l.	Objects used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
1.	Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls. 
2.	Water pipes.
3.	Carburetion tubes and devices.
4.	Smoking and carburetion masks.
5.	Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
6.	Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
7.	Chamber pipes.
8.	Carburetor pipes.
9.	Electric pipes.
10.	Air-driven pipes.
11.	Chillums.
12.	Bongs.
13.	Ice pipes or chillers.
(2)	In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
a.	Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use.
b.	Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance or imitation controlled substance. 
c.	The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this article.
d.	The proximity of the object to controlled substances or imitation controlled substances.
e.	The existence of any residue of controlled substances or imitation controlled substances on the object. 
f.	Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons who he knows, or reasonably should know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this article; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this article shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
g.	Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use.
h.	Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use.
i.	National and local advertising concerning its use.
j.	The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
k.	Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise. 
l.	The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
m.	Expert testimony concerning its use.
    Imitation controlled substance means a substance that is not a controlled substance, which by dosage unit appearance (including color, shape, size and markings), or by representations made, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the substance is a controlled substance. In determining whether the substance is an imitation controlled substance the court or authority concerned should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)	Whether the substance was approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration for over-the-counter (nonprescription or nonlegend) sales and was sold in the Federal Food and Drug Administration approved package, with the Federal Food and Drug Administration approved labeling information. 
(2)	Statements made by an owner or by anyone else in control of the substance concerning the nature of the substance, or its use or effect. 
(3)	Whether the substance is packaged in a manner normally used for illicit controlled substances. 
(4)	Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or anyone in control of the object, under state or federal law related to controlled substances or fraud. 
(5)	The proximity of the substances to controlled substances.
(6)	Whether the consideration tendered in exchange for the noncontrolled substance substantially exceeds the reasonable value of the substance considering the actual chemical composition of the substance and, where applicable, the price at which over-the-counter substances of like chemical composition sell. An imitation controlled substance does not include a noncontrolled substance that was initially introduced in commerce prior to the initial introduction into commerce of the controlled substance which it is alleged to imitate. Furthermore, an imitation controlled substance does not include a placebo or registered investigational drug either of which was manufactured, distributed, possessed or delivered in the ordinary course of professional practice or research. 
    License or licensed means persons required to obtain annual registration as issued by the state division of health as provided by RSMo 195.030. 
    Manufacture means the production, preparation, propagation, compounding, conversion or processing of drug paraphernalia or of a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance, either directly or indirectly by extraction from substances of natural origin or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis and includes any packaging or repackaging of the substance or labeling or relabeling of its container, except that this term does not include the preparation or compounding of a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance by an individual for his own use or the preparation, compounding, packaging or labeling of a narcotic or dangerous drug by a practitioner as an incident to his administering or dispensing of a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance in the course of his professional practice; or by a practitioner or by his authorized agent under his supervision for the purpose of or as an incident to research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale. 
    Marijuana. 
(1)	The term "marijuana" means all parts of all varieties of the plant cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. 
(2)	For purposes of this section, marijuana is also botanically known as: Cannabis sativa, Cannabis indica, commonly called Indian hemp, Mexican hemp, marijuana, muggles mooter, or any drug or preparation made from any species or variety of the botanical genus Cannabis or any compound derivative or preparation of the above-mentioned plant. 
(3)	It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil or cake or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. 
    Pharmacist means an individual currently licensed by the state board to practice the profession of pharmacy in this state. 
    Practitioner means a physician, dentist, podiatrist, as defined in RSMo ch. 330, or veterinarian, scientific investigator or other person licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to or administer a controlled substance in the course of professional practice or research in this state, or a pharmacy, hospital or other institution licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to or administer a controlled substance in the course of professional practice or research in this state. 
    Prescription means a written order, and in cases of emergency, a telephone order, issued by a practitioner in good faith in the course of his professional practice to a pharmacist for a drug for a particular patient, which specifies the date of its issue, the name and address of the patient (and, if such drug is prescribed for an animal, the species of such animal), the name and quantity of the drug prescribed, the directions for use of such drug and the signature of such practitioner. 
    Production includes the manufacture of drug paraphernalia or the manufacture, planting, cultivation, growing or harvesting of a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance. 
    Warehouseman means a person who, in the usual course of business, stores drugs for others lawfully entitled to possess them and who has no control over the disposition of such drugs, except for the purpose of such storage. 
    Wholesaler means a person who supplies drug paraphernalia or controlled substances or imitation controlled substances that he himself has not produced or prepared, on official written orders, but not on prescriptions. 
(Code 1994, § 54-61) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 195.010. 
Sec. 28-102. - Prohibited acts; exemptions. 
(a)	No person shall sell, give away, manufacture, use or possess for any purpose whatever any controlled substance, except as provided herein. 
(b)	Distribution by licensed practitioners is permitted under the following conditions:
(1)	Practitioners. A licensed practitioner shall be permitted to dispense or distribute controlled substances and drugs to a person in the course of his professional practice only; and such licensed practitioner shall not be permitted to possess controlled substances for any other purpose. 
(2)	Pharmacists. A licensed pharmacist shall be permitted to dispense or distribute controlled substances and drugs to persons under and in pursuance of written prescriptions issued by any licensed practitioner; and such licensed pharmacist shall not be permitted to possess controlled substances for any other purpose. 
(3)	Record of distribution. All instances of professional distribution of controlled substances and drugs as provided for herein shall be recorded in suitable form and filed and preserved in a manner so as to be readily accessible for inspection by any law enforcement officer of the city. 
(4)	Renewal prohibited. No prescription for controlled substances shall be renewed or refilled. 
(c)	Any person shall be permitted to possess controlled substances distributed or dispensed to him under the provisions of this section, but such possession and use must be in accordance with the prescription and prescribed treatment. 
(d)	A person who is a licensed manufacturer, warehouseman or wholesaler of controlled substances shall be permitted to possess controlled substances for the purposes of wholesale delivery, compounding, preparation and manufacture only; and the same shall only be resold to other persons permitted by this section to resell, or dispense or distribute controlled substances in the course of a licensed manufacturing or wholesale business; a licensed professional practice, or a licensed pharmaceutical business. A licensed manufacturer or wholesaler permitted to possess controlled substances in this subsection may also be a licensed pharmacist and may dispense or distribute narcotic drugs upon written prescription as provided herein, but shall not consume or permit to be consumed any controlled substances except upon written prescription as herein provided. 
(e)	All controlled substances in the possession of any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be seized by, confiscated by and forfeited to the chief of police, who shall make proper disposition thereof. 
(f)	This section shall not apply to the administering or distributing or dispensing of any medicinal preparation that contains in one fluid ounce, or if in solid or semisolid preparation in one avoirdupois ounce, not more than one grain of codeine or any of its salts; provided, that the preparation administered or distributed or dispensed shall contain some drug of medicinal qualities in addition to those possessed by the controlled substance alone. Such preparation shall be administered, distributed or dispensed in good faith and not for the purpose of evading this subsection. However, no person shall administer, dispense or sell, under the exemption of this section, any preparation included in this subsection, when he knows, or can by reasonable diligence ascertain, that such administering, dispensing or selling will provide the person to whom or for whose use such preparation is administered, dispensed or sold, within any 48 consecutive hours, with more than four grains of codeine or any of its salts. 
(g)	The provisions of this section restricting the possession and control of controlled substances shall not apply to common carriers or warehousemen engaged in lawfully transporting or storing such controlled substances, or to any employee of such common carriers or warehousemen within the scope of his employment, or to public officers of employees in the performance of official duties requiring possession or control of controlled substances, or to persons aiding such officers or employees in performance of such duties. 
(Code 1994, § 54-62; Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 1-13-1976) 
Sec. 28-103. - Drug paraphernalia-Possession. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 54-63) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 195.233. 
Sec. 28-104. - Same-Manufacture or delivery. 
    It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 54-64) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 195.235. 
Sec. 28-105. - Same-Delivery to minor. 
    Any person 18 years of age or over who violates section 28-104 by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age who is at least three years his junior is guilty of a special offense. 
(Code 1994, § 54-65) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 195.212. 
Sec. 28-106. - Delivery of imitation controlled substance to any person. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver any imitation controlled substance to another person. 
(Code 1994, § 54-66) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 195.241. 
Sec. 28-107. - Glue sniffing. 
(a)	As used in this section, the term "model glue" means any glue or cement of the type commonly used in the building of model airplanes, boats and automobiles, containing toluene, acetone or other solvent or chemical having the property of releasing toxic vapors. 
(b)	No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes from any model glue; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(c)	No person shall for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate any provision of this section intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer possession or receive possession of any model glue. 
(d)	Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section no person under 18 years of age shall possess or buy any model glue. 
(e)	Except as provided in subsections (e)(1) and (2) of this section no person shall sell or transfer possession of any model glue to another person under 18 years of age; provided, however: 
(1)	A person may sell or transfer possession of model glue to a person under 18 years of age for model building or other lawful use where such minor has in his possession and exhibits the written consent of his parent or guardian. 
(2)	A person making a sale or transfer of possession of model glue to a person under 18 years of age who exhibits the written consent of his parent or guardian, shall record the name, address, sex and age of the minor and the name and address of the consenting parent or guardian. All data required by this subsection shall be kept in a permanent type register available for inspection by the city health officer, chief of police and other appropriate official for a period of at least one year. 
(f)	All model glue as herein defined shall be kept in a place within the business establishment in such a manner that the same shall not be obtainable without the personal dispensing by the store owner or his agents, servants and employees. 
(g)	Any person other than a minor violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Persons not having obtained the age of 17 years violating any of the provisions of this section shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile laws and procedures of the state. 
(Code 1994, § 54-67) 
State law reference- Selling or transferring possession of toluol or any toxic glue prohibited, RSMo 578.265. 
Sec. 28-108. - Conspiracy. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to agree with any other person to engage in conduct which constitutes an offense under this article when the purpose of such agreement is to promote or facilitate the commission of the offense. 
(b)	A person shall be convicted of conspiracy to commit an offense only if an overt act in pursuance of such conspiracy is alleged and proved to have been done by him or by a person with whom he conspired. A person may not be convicted of conspiracy if, after conspiring to commit the offense, he prevented the accomplishment of the objectives of the conspiracy under circumstances manifesting a renunciation of his criminal purpose and has either advised those with whom he has conspired of his abandonment, or has informed the law enforcement authorities of the existence of the conspiracy and his participation in it. 
(c)	If a person conspires to commit a number of offenses, he is guilty of only one conspiracy so long as such multiple offenses are the object of the same agreement. 
(d)	A person may not be convicted or sentenced on the basis of the same course of conduct of both the actual commission of an offense and a conspiracy to commit that offense. 
(e)	For the purpose of any applicable statute of limitations, a conspiracy is a continuing course of conduct which terminates when the offenses which are its object are committed or the agreement that they be committed is abandoned by the defendant and by those with whom he conspired. 
(f)	In determining whether any person is guilty of conspiracy, a court or other authority may consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, whether the individual charged: 
(1)	Provided materials necessary for the commission of any offense under this article with the knowledge or intent that they be used in the commission of such offense. 
(2)	Rented or otherwise provided premises to any person with the knowledge or intent that such premises will be used in committing an offense under this article. 
(3)	Placed any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication, or posted, or distributed in any public place, any advertisement or solicitation with the knowledge that the purpose of the advertisement or solicitation is to promote activities which would constitute an offense under this article. 
(Code 1994, § 54-68) 
State law reference- Conspiracy, RSMo 564.016. 
Sec. 28-109. - Marijuana and hashish. 
    The possession, sale, distribution or transfer of marijuana in the amounts of 35 grams or less, or hashish in the amount of five grams or less is unlawful, except in the usual course of business or practice, or in the performance of their official duties by the following persons: 
(1)	Persons licensed under the provisions of RSMo chs. 330, 332, 334, 335, 338 and 340.
(2)	Persons who procure controlled substances:
a.	For handling by or under the supervision of persons employed by them, who are licensed under the provisions of RSMo chs. 330, 332, 334, 335, 338 and 340. 
b.	For the purpose of lawful research, teaching or testing and not for resale.
(3)	Hospitals and other institutions which procure controlled substances for lawful administration by persons described in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(4)	Officers or employees of appropriate enforcement agencies of federal, state or local governments, pursuant to their duties in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)	Manufacturers and wholesalers of controlled substances.
(6)	Carriers and warehousemen handling or distributing controlled substances or drugs.
(7)	Persons using controlled substances for medical purposes upon the written prescription or personal dispensation by a person licensed under the provisions of RSMo chs. 330, 332, 334, 335, 338 and 340. 
(Code 1994, § 54-69) 
Secs. 28-110-28-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS AND PUBLIC POLICY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-132. - Public indecency. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally in a public place, including, but not to be limited to, indoor and outdoor entertainment establishments, restaurants, theaters, bars, bookstores and places of public accommodation where one or more other persons are present to: 
(1)	Engage in sexual intercourse;
(2)	Engage in deviate sexual conduct;
(3)	Appear in a state of nudity; or
(4)	Fondle the genitals of himself or another person.
The term "nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple or areola, or any substantial portion of the female breast, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(Code 1994, § 54-91; Ord. No. 390, § 1, 10-6-1914; Ord. No. 1314, 1-25-1993) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 566.093; regulation of nudity in adult cabarets, RSMo 573.500 et seq. 
Sec. 28-133. - Window peeping. 
    No person shall look, peer or peep into or loiter around or within view of any window within a building occupied as a residence of another with the intent of watching or looking through such window to observe any person undressed, or in the act of dressing or undressing. 
(Code 1994, § 54-92) 
Sec. 28-134. - Palmistry. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, for pay, to tell or pretend to tell fortunes or reveal or attempt to reveal future events in the life of another or by means of occult or psychic powers, faculties or forces, clairvoyancy, psychometry, spirit-mediumship, prophecy, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, cards, talisman charms, potions, magnetism or magnetized articles or substances, oriental mysteries or magic of any kind or nature, to undertake or pretend to find or restore lost or stolen money or property, to undertake or pretend to locate oil wells, gold or silver or other ore or metal or natural product, to undertake or pretend to restore lost love, friendship or affection, to undertake or pretend to unite, or reunite or to find lovers, husbands, wives, lost relatives or friends. 
(b)	Any person, or anyone acting in behalf of such person, violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1994, § 54-93) 
Sec. 28-135. - Unlawful transactions with a child. 
(a)	A person commits the crime of unlawful transactions with a child if, being a pawnbroker, junk dealer, dealer in secondhand goods, or any employee of such person, he, with criminal negligence, buys or receives any personal property other than agricultural products from an unemancipated minor, unless the child's custodial parent or guardian has consented in writing to the transaction; or he knowingly permits a minor child to enter or remain in a place where illegal activity in controlled substances, as defined in RSMo ch. 195, is maintained or conducted; or he with criminal negligence sells blasting caps, bulk gun powder, or explosives to a child under the age of 17, or fireworks as defined in RSMo 320.110 to a child under the age of 14 years, unless the child's custodial parent or guardian has consented in writing to the transaction. Criminal negligence as to the age of the child is not an element to this crime. 
(b)	A person acts with criminal negligence or is criminally negligent when he fails to be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or a result will follow, and such failure constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. 
(Code 1994, § 54-94; Ord. No. 1126, §§ 1, 2, 11-10-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 568.070. 
Sec. 28-136. - Unlawful acts by minors. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for a minor to make false statements, or to furnish or present any fictitious or false registration card, identification card, or note or document, or to furnish, present or exhibit such document issued to a person other than the one presenting the same, for the purpose of gaining admission to prohibited places or for the purpose of procuring the sale, gift or delivery of prohibited articles. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for a minor to engage or utilize the services of any other person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure for such minor any article which the minor is forbidden by law to purchase. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any minor to hang onto any moving vehicle.
(Code 1994, § 54-95) 
State law reference- Misrepresenting age to purchase alcoholic beverages, RSMo 311.320; riding bicycles, sleds, and roller skates by attaching to another vehicle, RSMo 300.350. 
Sec. 28-137. - Endangering welfare of a child. 
(a)	A person commits the crime of endangering the welfare of a child if:
(1)	He with criminal negligence acts in a manner that creates a substantial risk to the life, body or health of a child less than 17 years old. 
(2)	He knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than 17 years old to engage in any conduct which causes or tends to cause the child to come within the provisions of RSMo 211.031(1)(2)(d), or RSMo 211.031(1)(3). 
(3)	Being a parent, guardian or other person legally charged with the care or custody of a child less than 17 years old, he recklessly fails or refuses to exercise reasonable diligence in the care or control of such child to prevent him from coming within the provisions of RSMo 211.031(1)(2)(d) or RSMo 211.031(1)(3). 
(b)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to mean the welfare of a child is endangered for the sole reason that he is being provided nonmedical remedial treatment recognized and permitted under the laws of this state. 
(Code 1994, § 54-96; Ord. No. 1127, §§ 2, 3, 11-10-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 568.050. 
Sec. 28-138. - Unlawful assembly. 
    A person commits the crime of unlawful assembly if he knowingly assembles with six or more other persons and agrees with such persons to violate any of the criminal laws of this state, the United States or of the ordinances of the city with force or violence. 
(Code 1994, § 54-97) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 574.040. 
Sec. 28-139. - Rioting. 
    A person commits the crime of rioting if he knowingly assembles with six or more other persons and agrees with such persons to violate any of the criminal laws of this state, the United States, or of the ordinances of the city with force or violence, and thereafter, while still so assembled, does violate any of such laws with force or violence. 
(Code 1994, § 54-98) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 574.050. 
Sec. 28-140. - Refusal to disperse. 
    A person commits the crime of refusal to disperse if, being present at the scene of an unlawful assembly, or at the scene of a riot, he knowingly fails or refuses to obey the lawful command of a law enforcement officer to depart from the scene of such unlawful assembly or riot. 
(Code 1994, § 54-99) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 574.060. 
Sec. 28-141. - Sound amplifying equipment prohibited. 
(a)	No person shall use, or cause to be used, sound amplifying equipment or other machine or device used for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound for the purpose of casting human voices, music, or other sounds upon the public streets of the city, except in compliance with a validly issued permit as provided in section 28-142 
(b)	Sound amplifying equipment as set out in subsection (a) of this section shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle or building in which they are installed. Warning devices on vehicles or buildings used only for traffic safety, police or security purposes shall not be included in the definition of sound amplifying equipment. 
(Code 1994, § 54-100) 
Sec. 28-142. - Permit. 
(a)	Persons or groups desiring to use any of the devices prohibited by section 28-141 for noncommercial purposes may make application for a permit therefor to the city clerk. 
(b)	The application for permit for use of such devices shall include:
(1)	The name and address of the applicant;
(2)	The time, date and place for use of the sound amplifying equipment;
(3)	The purpose for which such use is intended; and
(4)	The approximate maximum distance such equipment is possible of projecting the amplified sound. 
The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee in the amount specified and as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(c)	Applications for a permit under this section shall be provided by the city clerk for approval. Upon approval by the council, the city clerk shall issue the permit. If the application is denied by the city council, the clerk shall immediately notify the applicant by telephone and by regular mail of the denial. 
Sec. 28-143. - Urinating in public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to urinate in or upon any street, park, any public place open to the public or private place open to the public view other than in the restroom facilities provided for such activity. 
(Code 1994, § 54-101) 
Secs. 28-144-28-167. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PORNOGRAPHY 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Pornography and related offenses, RSMo 573.010 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 28-168. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Displays publicly means exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street, highway or public sidewalk, or from the property of others or from the person's store, or the exhibitor's store or property when items and material other than this material are offered for sale or rent to the public. 
    Explicit sexual material means any pictorial or three-dimensional material depicting human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse, sexual intercourse, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, sadomasochistic abuse, or emphasizing the depiction of post-pubertal human genitals; provided, however, that works of art or of anthropological significance shall not be deemed to be within the foregoing definition. 
    Furnish means to issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or otherwise provide. 
    Material means anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any statue or other figure, or any recording or transcription, or any mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction, or anything which is or may be used as a means of communication. The term "material" includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates and other latent representational objects. 
    Minor means any person under the age of 18 years. 
    Nudity means the showing of post-pubertal human genitals or pubic area, with less than a fully opaque covering. 
    Obscene means any material or performance if: 
(1)	Applying contemporary community standards, its predominant appeal is to a prurient interest in sex; 
(2)	Taken as a whole by the average person, applying contemporary community standards, it depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive way; and 
(3)	Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. Obscenity shall be judged with reference to its impact upon ordinary adults. 
    Performance means any play, motion picture film, videotape, dance or exhibition performed before an audience of one or more. 
    Pornographic for minors means any material or performance if the following apply: 
(1)	The average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that the material or performance, taken as a whole, has a tendency to cater or appeal to a prurient interest of minors. 
(2)	The material or performance depicts or describes nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse in a way which is patently offensive to the average person applying contemporary adult community standards with respect to what is suitable for minors. 
(3)	The material or performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for minors. 
    Promote means to manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer, transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same. 
    Sadomasochistic abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification. 
    Sexual conduct means actual or simulated, normal or perverted acts of human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse; sexual intercourse; or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the breast of a female in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
    Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(Code 1994, § 54-111; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 10-13-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 573.010. 
Sec. 28-169. - Promoting obscenity. 
    A person commits the crime of promoting pornography for minors or obscenity if, knowing its content or character, he: 
(1)	Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any obscene material for pecuniary gain. 
(2)	Produces, presents, directs or participates in any obscene performance for pecuniary gain. 
(3)	Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any material pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain. 
(4)	Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain. 
(Code 1994, § 54-112; Ord. No. 1125, § 2, 10-13-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 573.030. 
Sec. 28-170. - Furnishing pornographic materials to minors. 
    A person commits the crime of furnishing pornographic material to minors if, knowing its content and character, he furnishes any material pornographic for minors, knowing that the person to whom it is furnished is a minor or acting in reckless disregard of the likelihood that such person is a minor; or produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance which is pornographic for minors which is furnished to a minor knowing that any person viewing such performance is a minor or acting in reckless disregard of the likelihood that a minor is viewing the performance. 
(Code 1994, § 54-113) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 573.040. 
Sec. 28-171. - Evidence in obscenity and child pornography cases. 
(a)	In any prosecution under this division evidence shall be admissible to show:
(1)	What the predominant appeal of the material or performance would be for ordinary adults or minors. 
(2)	The literary, artistic, political or scientific value of the material or performance.
(3)	The degree of public acceptance in this state and in the local community.
(4)	The appeal to prurient interest in advertising or other promotion of the material or performance. 
(5)	The purpose of the author, creator, promoter, furnisher or publisher of the material or performance. 
(b)	Testimony of the author, creator, promoter, furnisher, publisher, or expert testimony, relating to factors entering into the determination of the issues of obscenity or child pornography, shall be admissible. 
(c)	In any prosecution for possession of child pornography or promoting child pornography in the first or second degree, the determination that the person who participated in the child pornography was younger than 18 years of age may be made as set forth in RSMo 568.100 or reasonable inferences drawn by a judge or jury after viewing the alleged pornographic material shall constitute sufficient evidence of the child's age to support a conviction. 
(d)	In any prosecution for promoting child pornography in the first or second degree, no showing is required that the performance or material involved appeals to prurient interest, that it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value, or that it is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the community as a whole. 
(Code 1994, § 54-114) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 573.050. 
Sec. 28-172. - Public display of explicit sexual material. 
    A person commits the crime of public display of explicit sexual material if he knowingly displays publicly explicit sexual material, or fails to take prompt action to remove such a display from property in his possession after learning of its existence. 
(Code 1994, § 54-115; Ord. No. 1125, 10-13-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 573.060. 
Sec. 28-173. - Exhibition or display for sale of certain materials to minors. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or display for sale in any place open to or used by persons 17 years old or younger any book, pamphlet or magazine containing on its cover (or open to public view) pictures, figures, drawings, lithographs, engravings, photographs or other representations of the pubic area of the human body without fully opaque covering thereof or the female breasts with less than fully opaque covering of the portions thereof below the top of the complete nipple area, including the areola. 
(b)	Any merchant found guilty under subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to having his business license suspended up to 30 days, and punishment as provided in section 1-11 
(Code 1994, § 54-116) 
Secs. 28-174-28-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROSTITUTION AND RELATED OFFENSES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Prostitution, RSMo 567.010 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 28-200. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Patronizing prostitution means a person: 
(1)	Pursuant to a prior understanding, giving something of value to another person or compensation for that person or a third person having engaged in sexual conduct with him or with another. 
(2)	Giving or agreeing to give something of value to another person on an understanding that in return therefor that person or a third person will engage in sexual conduct with him or with another. 
(3)	Soliciting or requesting another person to engage in sexual conduct with him or with another, or to secure a third person to engage in sexual conduct with him or with another, in return for something of value. 
    Prostitution means a person engaging or offering or agreeing to engage in sexual conduct with another person in return for something of value to be received by the person or by a third person. 
    Sexual conduct occurs when there is: 
(1)	Sexual intercourse, which means any penetration, however slight, of the female sex organ by the male sex organ, whether or not an emission results. 
(2)	Deviant sexual intercourse which means any sexual act involving the genitals of one person and the mouth, tongue or anus of another person. 
(3)	"Sexual contact" which means any touching, manual or otherwise, of the anus or genitals of one person by another, done for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire of either party. 
    Something of value means any money or property, or any token, object or article exchangeable for money or property. 
(Code 1994, § 54-126) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 567.010. 
Sec. 28-201. - Prostitution. 
    A person commits the crime of prostitution if he performs an act of prostitution. 
(Code 1994, § 54-127) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 567.020. 
Sec. 28-202. - Patronizing prostitution. 
    A person commits the crime of patronizing prostitution if he patronizes prostitution. 
(Code 1994, § 54-128) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 567.030. 
Sec. 28-203. - Not a defense to prosecution. 
    In any prosecution for prostitution or patronizing a prostitute, the sex of the two parties or prospective parties to the sexual conduct engaged in, contemplated or solicited is immaterial, and it is no defense that both parties were of the same sex; or the person received, agreed to receive or solicited something of value was a male and the person who gave or agreed or offered to give something of value was a female. 
(Code 1994, § 54-129) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 567.040. 
Sec. 28-204. - Prostitution houses deemed public nuisances. 
(a)	Any room, building or other structure regularly used for sexual contact for pay or any unlawful prostitution activity prohibited by this Code or state law is a public nuisance. 
(b)	The city attorney may, in addition to all criminal sanctions, prosecute a suit in equity to enjoin the nuisance. If the court finds that the owner of the room, building or structure knew or had reason to believe that the premises were being used regularly for sexual contact for pay or unlawful prostitution activity, the court may order that the premises shall not be occupied or used for such period as the court may determine, not to exceed one year. 
(c)	All persons, including owners, lessees, officers, agents, inmates or employees, aiding or facilitating such a nuisance may be made defendants in any suit to enjoin the nuisance, and they may be enjoined from engaging in any sexual contact for pay or unlawful prostitution activity anywhere within the jurisdiction of the court. 
(Code 1994, § 54-130) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 567.080. 
Secs. 28-205-28-231. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Robbery, arson, burglary, and related offenses, RSMo 569.010 et seq.; stealing and related offenses, RSMo 570.010 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 28-232. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appropriate means to take, obtain, use, transfer, conceal or retain possession of. 
    Deprive means to: 
(1)	Withhold property from the owner permanently.
(2)	Restore property only upon payment of reward or other compensation.
(3)	Use or dispose of property in a manner which makes recovery of the property by the owner unlikely. 
    Of another means property or services in which any natural person, corporation, partnership, association, governmental subdivision or instrumentality, other than the accused, has a possessory or proprietary interest therein, except that property shall not be deemed property of another who has only a security interest therein, even if legal title is in the creditor pursuant to a conditional sales contract or other security arrangements. 
    Property means anything of value, whether real or personal, tangible or intangible, in possession or in action, and shall include but not be limited to the evidence of a debt actually executed but not delivered or issued as a valid instrument. 
    Receiving means acquiring possession, control or title or lending on the security of the property. 
    Value means the market value of the property at the time and place of the crime or if such cannot be satisfactorily ascertained, the cost of replacement of the property within a reasonable time after the crime. 
(Code 1994, § 54-151; Ord. No. 1113, § 1, 2-24-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.010. 
Sec. 28-233. - Tampering. 
(a)	A person commits the crime of tampering if he:
(1)	Tampers with property of another for the purpose of causing substantial inconvenience to that person or to another. 
(2)	Unlawfully rides in or upon another's automobile, airplane, motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle. 
(3)	Tampers or makes connection with property of a utility.
(4)	Tampers with, or causes to be tampered with, any meter or other property of an electric, gas, steam or water utility, the effect of which tampering is either: 
a.	To prevent the proper measuring of electric, gas, steam, or water service; or
b.	To permit the diversion of any electric, gas, steam, or water service.
(b)	In any prosecution under subsection (a)(4) of this section, proof that a meter or any other property of a utility has been tampered with, and the person accused received the use or direct benefit of the electric, gas, steam, or water service, with one or more of the effects described in such subsection, shall be sufficient to support an inference which the trial court may submit to the trier of fact, from which the trier of fact may conclude that there has been a violation of such subsection by the persons who use or receive the direct benefit of the electric, gas, steam, or water service. 
(Code 1994, § 54-152; Ord. No. 1113, § 1, 2-24-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 569.080 and 569.090. 
Sec. 28-234. - Property damage. 
    A person commits the offense of property damage if he knowingly damages property of another, or he damages property for the purpose of defrauding an insurer. 
(Code 1994, § 54-153; Ord. No. 1114, § 1, 2-24-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 569.090. 
Sec. 28-235. - Trespass. 
    A person commits the offense of trespass if he enters unlawfully upon real property of another, without license or privilege. This is an offense of absolute liability. 
(Code 1994, § 54-154; Ord. No. 1115, § 1, 2-24-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 569.150. 
Sec. 28-236. - Stealing. 
(a)	Except as otherwise defined in this article, the terms used in this section are to be defined as those terms are defined in RSMo 556.051, 556.061 and 570.010. 
(b)	A person commits the offense of stealing if he appropriates property or services of another with the purpose to deprive the other thereof, either without the other's consent or by means of deceit or coercion. 
(c)	A person who appropriates lost property shall not be deemed to have stolen that property within the meaning of subsection (b) of this section unless such property is found under circumstances which gave the finder knowledge of or means of inquiry as to the true owner; the defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of lost property. 
(d)	A person does not commit an offense under subsection (b) of this section if, at the time of the appropriation, he: 
(1)	Acted in the honest belief that he had the right to do so; or
(2)	Acted in the honest belief that the owner, if present, would have consented to the appropriation. 
The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of claim of right. 
(Code 1994, § 54-155; Ord. No. 1083, §§ 1, 3-5, 6-12-1979) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.030. 
Sec. 28-237. - Failure to return leased property. 
    A person commits the crime of failure to return leased property if he willfully fails to return leased or rented personal property to the place within the time specified in an agreement in writing providing for the leasing or renting of such personal property, with the intent to deprive the owner thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 54-156) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 578.150. 
Sec. 28-238. - Receiving stolen property. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for a person to receive, retain or dispose of the property of another for the purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest therein, knowing that it has been stolen, or believing that it has been stolen, of a value not to exceed $150.00. 
(b)	Evidence of the following is admissible in any criminal prosecution under this section to prove the requisite knowledge or belief of the alleged receiver: 
(1)	That he was found in possession or control of other property stolen on separate occasions from two or more persons. 
(2)	That he received other stolen property in another transaction within the year preceding the transaction charges. 
(3)	That he acquired the stolen property for a consideration which he knew was far below its reasonable value. 
(Code 1994, § 54-157) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 570.080. 
Sec. 28-239. - Littering. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to commit the offense of littering by throwing or placing, or causing to be thrown or placed, any glass, glass bottles, wire, nails, tacks, hedge clippings, cans, garbage, trash, refuse or rubbish of any kind, nature or description on the right-of-way of any public road or state highway; or on or in any of the waters in this city or on the banks of any stream; or on any land or water owned, operated or leased by the state, any board, department, agency or commission thereof; or on any land or water owned, operated or leased by the federal government; or on any private real property owned by another without his consent. 
(Code 1994, § 54-158) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 577.070; illegal disposal of solid waste, RSMo 577.071. 
Sec. 28-240. - Unlawful entry. 
    A person commits the crime of unlawful entry if he enters or attempts to enter any building or inhabitable structure without lawful authority, or knowingly remains unlawfully in such building or inhabitable structure against the will of the lawful occupant after being requested to leave by the lawful occupant. 
(Code 1994, § 54-159) 
State law reference- Burglary in the second degree, RSMo 569.170; trespass in the second degree, RSMo 569.150. 
Sec. 28-241. - Possession of burglar's tools. 
    A person commits the crime of possession of burglar's tools if he possesses any tool, instrument or other article adapted, designed or commonly used for committing or facilitating offenses involving forcible entry into premises, with a purpose to use, or knowledge that some person has the purpose of using, the same in making an unlawful forcible entry into a building or inhabitable structure or a room thereof. Upon conviction under this section, all such tools become the property of the city police department. 
(Code 1994, § 54-160) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 569.180. 
Sec. 28-242. - Passing bad checks. 
(a)	A person commits the crime of passing a bad check if, with purpose to defraud, he issues or passes a check knowing that it will not be paid by the drawee (bank), or that there is no drawee (bank). 
(b)	If the issuer had no account with the drawee or if there was no such drawee at the time the check or order was issued, this fact shall be prima facie evidence of his purpose to defraud and of his knowledge that the check or order would not be paid. 
(c)	If the issuer has an account with the drawee, failure to pay the check or order within ten days after notice in writing that it has not been honored because of insufficient funds or credit with the drawee is prima facie evidence of his purpose to defraud and of his knowledge that the check or order would not be paid. 
(d)	Notice in writing means notice deposited as first class mail in the United States mail and addressed to the issuer at his address as it appears on the dishonored check or to his last known address. 
(Code 1994, § 54-161) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 570.120. 
Sec. 28-243. - Negligent burning or exploding. 
    A person commits the crime of negligent burning or exploding if he, with criminal negligence, causes damage to the property of another accomplished by fire or explosion. 
(Code 1994, § 54-162) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 569.065. 
Sec. 28-244. - Theft of utility service; tampering with utility equipment and service. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Customer means the person in whose name a utility service is provided. 
    Divert means to change the intended course or path of electricity, water, gas, telephone, cable television or other utility service without the authorization or consent of the utility. 
    Reconnection means the commencement of utility service other than by the utility company, to a customer or other person after service has been discontinued by the utility. 
    Tamper means to rearrange, damage, injure, destroy, alter, interfere with or otherwise prevent any property owned or used by the utility company from performing its normal or customary function. 
    Utility service means the provision of electricity, water, gas, telephone, cable television or other utility service. 
(b)	Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, authorize, solicit, aid, abet or attempt any of the following acts: 
(1)	Divert, or cause to be diverted, utility service by any means whatsoever.
(2)	Make, or cause to be made, any connection or reconnection with property owned or used by the utility to provide utility service without the authorization or consent of the utility. 
(3)	Prevent any utility meter, or other device used in determining the charge for utility service, from accurately performing its measuring function by tampering or by any other means. 
(4)	Tamper with any property owned or used by the utility company to provide utility service.
(5)	Use or receive the direct benefit of all, or a portion, of the utility service with knowledge of, or reason to believe that, the diversion, tampering, or unauthorized connection existed at the time of the use, or that the use or receipt, was without the authorization or consent of the utility. 
(6)	Advertise, manufacture, distribute, sell, use, rent or offer for sale, rental or use any device of any description, or any plan or kit, designed to obtain utility service, in violation of this section. 
(7)	Obtain utility service by means of false representations, or fraudulent or deceptive actions, designed to avoid the payment of any outstanding lawful charges for any utility service. 
(8)	Avoid the lawful charges, in whole or in part, for any utility service, by the use of any fraudulent or deceptive scheme, device, means or method. 
(c)	Presumption of violation. There is a rebuttable presumption that there is a violation of this section if, on the premises controlled by the customer or by the person using or receiving the direct benefit of utility service, there is either, or both of the following: 
(1)	Any instrument, apparatus or device primarily designed to be used to obtain utility service without paying the full lawful charge therefor. 
(2)	Any utility equipment that has been altered, tampered with or bypassed so as to cause no measurement or inaccurate measurement of utility service. 
(Code 1994, § 54-163) 
State law reference- Tampering in the first degree, RSMo 569.080; tampering in the second degree, RSMo 569.090; telephone service fraud, RSMo 570.190. 
Sec. 28-245. - Climbing on railroad engines or cars when in motion. 
    No person shall climb upon, hold onto or in any manner attach himself to any railroad locomotive engine or car while the same is in motion, or running within the limits of the city. This section shall not apply to any employee of the railroad company, nor to any passenger, nor to any other person who may be acting by permission or under the rules of the company then operating the railroad. 
(Code 1994, § 54-164; Ord. No. 426, § 1, 5-1-1917) 
Secs. 28-246-28-268. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Offenses against public order, RSMo 574.010 et seq. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-269. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acts knowingly means that a person acts: 
(1)	With respect to his conduct or attendant circumstances when he is aware of the nature of his conduct or that those circumstances exist; or 
(2)	With respect to a result of his conduct when he is aware that his conduct is practically certain to cause that result. 
    Acts purposely means that a person acts with purpose with respect to his conduct, or to a result thereof when it is his conscious object to engage in that conduct or to cause that result. 
    Acts recklessly means a person acts recklessly, or is reckless when he consciously disregards a substantial or unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or that a result will follow, and such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. 
    Acts with criminal negligence means that a person acts when he fails to be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist, or a result will follow, and such failure constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. 
    Loitering means remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
    Private property means any place which at the time is not open to the public. It includes property which is owned publicly or privately. 
    Property of another means any property in which the actor does not have a possessory interest. 
    Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right of resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
    Serious physical injury means physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes serious disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any part of the body. 
(Code 1994, § 54-186; Ord. No. 1110, § 3, 3-24-1981) 
Sec. 28-270. - Loitering. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Loitering shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
    Public place shall mean any place to which the general public has access and a right of resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
(b)	Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to: 
(1)	Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; 
(2)	Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto; 
(3)	Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or premises. 
(Code 1994, § 54-187; Ord. No. 1248, 6-26-1989) 
Sec. 28-271. - Peace disturbance. 
    A person commits the offense of peace disturbance if he unreasonably and knowingly disturbs or alarms another person by: 
(1)	Loud or unusual noise.
(2)	Offensive and indecent language which is likely to produce an immediate violent response from a reasonable recipient. 
(3)	Fighting.
(4)	Creating a noxious or offensive odor.
(5)	a.	Any noise or sound generated from a commercial establishment operating in a commercial district or in a noncommercial district pursuant to a special use permit shall be deemed a peace disturbance if said noise, at the boundary of any zoned residential property, exceeds the noise level of 65 decibels between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or exceeds the level of 70 decibels between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Said noise level to be measured by a handheld digital decibel meter. 
b.	Notwithstanding subsection (5)a. of this section, the council shall have the right to issue special permits allowing outdoor activities with noise levels exceeding the above limits, including, but not limited to, concerts, street parties, carnivals, etc., under such terms and conditions as the council deems fit, in its sole discretion. 
c.	Unless a special permit is granted under subsection (5)b. of this section, no outdoor band shall be allowed to play between the hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m., even if the decibel reading is below the above limits. 
(Code 1994, § 54-188; Ord. No. 1065, § B, 9-12-1978; Ord. No. 1682, § 1, 1-11-2010) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 574.010. 
Sec. 28-272. - Private peace disturbance. 
    A person commits the offense of private peace disturbance if he is on private property and unreasonably and purposely causes alarm to another person on the same premises by fighting. 
(Code 1994, § 54-189; Ord. No. 1065, § B, 9-12-1978; Ord. No. 1112, § 1, 2-24-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 574.020. 
Sec. 28-273. - Disorderly conduct. 
    A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance, or if his conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, he willfully, in a public place: 
(1)	Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by city police officers or any other authorized official of the city, when known to be such an official. 
(2)	Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer when known to be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety is imminently threatened. 
(Code 1994, § 54-190) 
Sec. 28-274. - Exemptions from sections 28-271 and 28-272. 
    Sections 28-271 and 28-272 shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking or other lawful means of expressing public opinion not in contravention of other laws. 
(Code 1994, § 54-191) 
Sec. 28-275. - Harassment. 
    A person commits the crime of harassment if, for the purpose of frightening or disturbing another person, he does any of the following: 
(1)	Communicates in writing or by telephone a threat to commit a felony.
(2)	Makes a telephone call or communicates in writing and uses coarse language offensive to one of average sensibility. 
(3)	Makes a telephone call anonymously.
(4)	Makes repeated phone calls.
(Code 1994, § 54-193; Ord. No. 1130, 1-12-1982) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 565.090. 
Sec. 28-276. - Drunkenness or drinking in certain places prohibited. 
    A person violates this section if the person enters any schoolhouse, church house or courthouse in which there is lawful assemblage of people: 
(1)	In an intoxicated and disorderly condition.
(2)	To drink any intoxicating liquors in the presence of such assembly.
(3)	To offer to drink any intoxicating liquors in the presence of such an assembly.
If in a courthouse the person need not be in the presence of an assemblage of persons. 
(Code 1994, § 54-194) 
State law reference- Limitations on authority of political subdivisions to arrest for public intoxication, RSMo 67.305. 
Secs. 28-277-28-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ASSAULT AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Domestic relations generally, RSMo 451.010 et seq.; abuse of adults and children, RSMo 455.003 et seq.; adult abuse, RSMo 455.005 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 28-301. - Assault. 
(a)	A person commits the crime of assault if he attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury to another person; or with criminal negligence he causes physical injury to another person by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous instrument; or he purposely places another person in apprehension of immediate physical injury; or he recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave risk of death or serious physical injury to another person; or he knowingly causes physical contact with another person knowing the other person will regard the contact as offensive or provocative. 
(b)	When conduct is charged to constitute an offense because it causes or threatens physical injury, the consent to that conduct or to the infliction of the injury is a defense only if: 
(1)	The physical injury consented to or threatened by the conduct is not serious physical injury; 
(2)	The conduct and the harm are reasonably foreseeable hazards of the victim's occupation or profession, or joint participation in a lawful athletic contest or competitive sport; or 
(3)	The consent established a defense of justification.
    The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of consent. 
(c)	Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 
(Code 1994, § 54-192; Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 2-24-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 565.070, 565.080. 
Sec. 28-302. - Assaults and domestic violence. 
(a)	Policy. It is the policy of the city to handle offenses involving acts of violence against persons in an expedient and decisive manner. It is the purpose of this policy to prevent additional violence in the incident, to discourage repeated acts of violence by the same offender, to assist victims in pursuing charges against violent offenders, and to reduce the risk to officers responding to incidents of acts of violence against a person. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abuse means any act which would constitute assault, battery, coercion, harassment, sexual assault or unlawful imprisonment. 
    Act of violence means any act which involves the infliction of physical harm, bodily injury or assault, the use of a weapon or dangerous instrument against a person, holding or transporting a person against that person's will and without legal justification; threats to cause injury, commit assault or use a weapon or dangerous instrument against any person; any act of abuse which is in violation of an order of protection; or any act which would reasonably cause a person in the position of the victim to fear the imminent infliction of physical harm, bodily injury or assault. An act of violence against a person also includes those acts which constitute the crimes of murder, manslaughter, assault, sexual offenses, robbery, arson, armed criminal action, weapons offenses, robbery, arson, armed criminal action, weapons offenses, arson and some instances of peace disturbance and property damage. 
    Domestic violence means the infliction of abuse, or an act of violence against a person, by one family or household member upon another. 
    Family/household member means persons who are: spouses, former spouses, persons related by blood or marriage, persons who are presently residing together or have resided together in the past, and persons who have a child in common regardless of whether they have been married or have resided together at any time. The term "family/household member" includes common-law marriages, same sex couples, different generations of the same family, siblings, and in-laws. 
    Multiple offenders. If when responding to a call involving an act of violence against a person the officer is informed that more than one party has committed an act of violence against a person the responding officer will determine which party is the primary physical abuser. The officer will then determine whether arrest of the primary physical abuser should occur, based upon the considerations set out above. In determining which person is the primary physical abuser, the officer may take into consideration the intent of the law to protect victims of violence from further violence, the comparative extent of injuries inflicted or threats of violence, the history of violence between the parties, the relationship of the parties, the relative size and strength of the parties, and whether or not any party has an order of protection or a restraining order against any other party. When making an arrest determination, the officer may disregard any injuries which it reasonably appears to the officer were inflicted in self-defense. Under no circumstances may an officer threaten to arrest both parties in an attempt to discourage a request for intervention from one of the parties. 
    Offense reports. Officers responding to a report of an act of violence against a person will complete an offense report for each incident in which an act of violence against a person has been alleged. The victim will be given information on how to obtain a copy of the report. If no arrest was made on the incident, the reporting officer will note in the report a complete description of the offending party, the victim's name, time, address, reason why no arrest was made and any other pertinent information. When injuries are visible on the victim, or there are obvious signs of a struggle, the reporting officer will attempt to document visual evidence with photographs, if possible. Computer files will be updated with information on each call involving an alleged act of violence against a person where officers are dispatched to the scene. All incidents which are incidents of domestic violence will be so identified by the code "DV." Copies of offense reports involving incidents for which arrests were made will be filed on a daily basis for inspection by recognized local shelters and/or, victim advocate groups. 
(c)	Regulations. 
(1)	Response. An officer will respond immediately to any report of an act of violence against a person when the caller reports, or the officer has reason to believe, that violence is imminent or in progress, previous acts of violence have occurred between the parties, or an order of protection is in effect. 
(2)	Response at scene. The responding officer will request to talk to the alleged victim, out of the hearing and view of the alleged offender. If access to the alleged victim is denied, the alleged offender will be informed that refusal to allow access to the victim can be considered an exigent circumstances justifying a warrantless entry into the premises. 
(3)	Arrest. An officer will effect an arrest when the officer has probable cause to believe that an act of violence against a person has occurred and that: 
a.	The victim has sustained physical injury;
b.	An order of protection is in effect;
c.	There are valid warrants, or computer warrants on file;
d.	Such arrest is necessary to prevent further acts of violence; or
e.	The call is the second call in 12 hours to the same address for which the responding officer has had probable cause to believe that an act of violence against a person has occurred. 
If the offender is not at the scene, an immediate investigative effort will be made by the officer to effect the required arrest. 
(4)	Warrantless arrest. An officer may arrest without a warrant any person the officer sees committing an act of violence against a person, or who the officer has probable cause to believe has committed such an act. 
(d)	Additional regulations and procedures applicable when an order of protection is in effect. 
(1)	Arrest. An officer will arrest any person who commits an act of abuse in violation of a full order of protection or who violates an ex parte order of protection of which the person has notice. Such violations are class D felonies under state law. In addition, an officer will arrest any person who is in any location in violation of an order of protection, or who has retained physical custody of children in violation of an order of protection. 
(2)	Notice of service. An officer will give any person against whom an ex parte order of protection has been issued notice of the order by handing a copy of the order to such person. Copies of the order to be used for the purpose are issued by the court to the person obtaining the order. Once the officer has handed the copy of the ex parte order to the person against whom it was issued, the officer will date, time, sign and write his department serial number on the back of the gold carbon copy of the order which is retained by the victim. If the victim does not have an extra copy of the order to give to the offender, the officer will orally inform the offender of the existence of the order and its contents and indicate that oral notice was given on the victim's copy of the order, in the same manner as set out above. 
(3)	Missouri Uniform Law Enforcement System (MULES). Information on each order of protection received from the associate circuit or circuit court will be entered on MULES no later than 24 hours after issuance of the order. 
(4)	Child custody. RSMo 45.085 requires officers to arrest any party who is in violation of any child custody order issued under the Adult Abuse Act, RSMo 455.005 et seq. An officer responding to an incident in which it is alleged that a violation of the custody provisions of an ex parte order of protection has occurred will, after notice of the ex parte order is given, direct the person holding the child or children to surrender the child or children to the person to whom custody was given. Failure or refusal to make such surrender is a violation of state law mandating arrest. 
(5)	Entry of dwelling. If an abuser has been ordered in an order of protection not to enter a specified dwelling for any reason, or, in the case of an ex parte order, failure or refusal to leave after notice, constitutes a violation of the order of protection. 
(e)	Procedures. 
(1)	Receipt and dispatch of calls. Any dispatch employee or officer receiving notification of an act of violence against a person will give highest priority to the safety of the victim, which may include, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.	Assuming the presence of violence from the conduct of the caller;
b.	Calling back when the behavior of the caller changes markedly during the call; or
c.	Dispatching officers to the scene without having obtained all the information normally obtained for dispatch. 
A dispatcher receiving a call involving an act of violence against a person will listen for background noises that assist in evaluating the threat level (screams, shots, threats, breaking glass or furniture). The dispatcher will check police records to determine whether or not: an order of protection is in effect; or there have been previous reports of violence involving the same offender and will advise the responding officers of the information obtained from this check. 
(2)	Entry into private dwelling. An officer may enter into a private dwelling upon consent of any person residing therein or by any person having authority to consent to such entry or when exigent circumstances exist. Factors which may be considered by the officer in determining whether exigent circumstances exist are: the responding officer has reason to believe that violence is imminent or in progress; the person reporting the incident has indicated that violence is imminent or in progress; the alleged offender will not allow access to the alleged victim for purposes of verifying whether or not violence is imminent or in progress; there are cries for help; there are obvious signs of a struggle or an eyewitness to a struggle and the victim is still on, or assumed to be on, the premises; or the officer has probable cause to believe the offender is on the premises and armed with a weapon or dangerous instrument. A responding officer may determine that exigent circumstances exist in other circumstances, based on the officer's reasonable evaluation of the situation. When refused entry to a residence, an officer may: 
a.	Enter the premises, if exigent circumstances, as set out above, exist.
b.	Contact the dispatcher, and ask the dispatcher to attempt to contact the caller for further information. 
c.	Contact a supervisor for further direction.
d.	Conduct a neighborhood canvas for further information regarding the incident or the circumstances of the parties. 
e.	Remain at the scene, remove to a public spot, and observe the premises.
In deciding whether or not to enter a premises through force, the responding officer will balance the degree of urgency involved with the time required to obtain a warrant. When an officer has entered a premises without consent, the officer must state in his written report the exigent circumstances which were deemed to exist justifying the forced entry. 
(3)	Probable cause. The determination of whether probable cause exists for arrest of a person for an act of violence against a person will be based on the same factors as would be used to determine the existence of probable cause in similar incidents. 
a.	In determining whether probable cause exists, officers will keep in mind that injuries, although present, may not be readily visible, and that victims of violence may not show the expected emotional response. 
b.	A victim's willingness to sign a complaint is a factor in determining probable cause. However, it is not necessary for the victim to sign a complaint if the officer has probable cause to believe the offense occurred. Regardless of the victim's desire to prosecute, if an arrest is made, the victim will be issued a subpoena. If there is doubt in the officer's mind, a supervisor will be consulted. 
c.	Lack of probable cause cannot be based upon considerations such as the potential financial consequences of the arrest to any party, verbal assurances that violence will cease, the fact that the parties are family or household members (see section 28-302), that the victim has failed to pursue prosecution in previous instances of violence, or that the victim may not appear in court to testify. 
(4)	Gathering evidence. Physical evidence in an act of violence against a person will be collected in the same manner as physical evidence in all other investigations. In addition: 
a.	Officers may obtain color photographs of victim's injuries when the injuries are visible. Photographs may be taken by an officer of the same sex as the victim when the injuries are situated on a part of the body that is not normally visible. 
b.	Photographing the scene of the incident to show any signs of a struggle is preferred, but if not possible, a written description of the scene will be included in the officer's report of the incident. 
c.	Witnesses to the incident will be interviewed as soon as possible. If witnesses provide information about prior acts of violence between the parties or by the same offender, document the prior acts to establish a pattern. 
d.	Children will be interviewed with care and understanding. Children will be observed for signs of trauma and abuse. 
(5)	Interviewing the victim. The responding officer will contact the victim of the incident, out of the hearing of the alleged offender, to determine the following information: 
a.	The nature of the incident.
b.	Whether the victim has any injuries.
c.	Whether an order of protection or a restraining order is in effect.
d.	Whether a weapon or a threat to use a weapon was involved in the incident.
e.	Whether there have been previous acts of violence between the parties.
f.	Whether the offender has ever committed an act of violence, or threatened to commit an act of violence, against any other person. 
Officers should remember that victims of violence may not respond in the expected manner, and may themselves appear agitated or not under control. The responding officer will interview the victim in such a manner as to minimize stress on the victim. The responding officer will inform the victim of the legal procedure following an arrest. The responding officer will inform a victim of domestic violence of the availability of orders of protection, free legal assistance and, where appropriate, of the availability of shelters for battered women and their children. 
(6)	Assisting the victim. 
a.	Officers will protect the victim from further abuse. They will separate the victim from the offender, administer first aid, and arrange for medical attention if the victim is hurt. 
b.	The victim may have sustained injuries which are not readily visible, either because they are too recent in time or are located in areas covered by clothing. Officers will question the victim to determine the possibility of injuries which are not readily visible. If medical care is necessary, the officer will arrange for transportation of the victim to a medical facility. 
c.	If the victim appears to be injured and refuses medical assistance, carefully document any observed injuries, as well as the refusal of medical treatment. 
d.	The officer at a scene involving domestic violence will inform the abused party of available judicial remedies for relief from adult abuse and of available shelters for victims of domestic violence. 
e.	A victim of domestic violence who wishes to seek shelter for battered women will be transported to the police building or to another place of safety to make arrangements for such shelter. 
f.	Officers will remain at the scene for a reasonable time to insure that there is no further threat of injury to the victim. Officers may remain at the scene for fifteen minutes to allow the victim to collect and remove essential items of personal property, such as personal records, birth certificates, checkbooks, credit cards, wallet or purse, and personal clothing. If additional standby time appears to be reasonably needed, the officer will contact the officer's supervisor for permission to remain on standby for additional fifteen minute increments. 
(7)	Child custody. When the offender and the victim have children together who are present at the scene where an act of violence against a person has been alleged, such children will be left with the person having an order of custody for the children from a court or, if no such order exists, the nonviolent parent, unless there is good cause for the officer to retain temporary protective custody of the child. In no event may an officer threaten to retain custody of a child for the sole purpose of discouraging a victim from pursuing an allegation of an act of violence against a person. 
(f)	Bond. 
(1)	Arrests for an act of violence against a person carry a bond of $250.00.
(2)	Arrests for an act of violence against a person carry a bond of $500.00 when any one of the following factors is present: 
a.	Injuries.
b.	Threats to use a weapon or dangerous instrument.
c.	Repeat calls.
d.	An order of protection is in effect.
(3)	Arrests for an act of violence against a person carry a bond of $1,000.00 when there are serious injuries, when a weapon or dangerous instrument has been used or when any two of the factors shown above are present. 
(4)	If an officer believes the circumstances warrant a higher bond, a municipal court judge will be contacted for authorization of a higher bond. 
(5)	Only the municipal court judge or associate circuit or circuit court judge are authorized to release a person arrested for an act of violence against a person on a signature bond. 
(Code 1994, § 46-29; Ord. No. 1255, § 1, 12-19-1989) 
Secs. 28-303-28-311. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.010 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 28-312. - Disturbing judicial proceeding. 
    A person commits the crime of disturbing a judicial proceeding if, with purpose to intimidate a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness, and thereby to influence a judicial proceeding, he disrupts or disturbs a judicial proceeding by participating in an assembly and calling aloud, shouting, or holding or displaying a placard or sign containing written or printed matter concerning the conduct of the judicial proceeding, or the character of the judge, attorney, juror, party or witness engaged in such proceeding, or calling for or demanding any specified action or determination by such judge, attorney, juror, party or witness in connection with such proceeding. 
(Code 1994, § 54-216) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.250. 
Sec. 28-313. - Escape, attempted escape from custody. 
    A person commits the crime of escape from custody or attempted escape from custody if, while being held in custody after arrest for any crime, he escapes or attempts to escape from custody. 
(Code 1994, § 54-217) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.210. 
Sec. 28-314. - Resisting, interfering with city officers and inspectors. 
    Any person who shall in any way or manner hinder, obstruct, molest, resist or otherwise interfere with any city officer or inspector in the discharge of his official duties shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1994, § 54-218; Ord. No. 1005, 8-14-1973) 
Sec. 28-315. - Resisting or interfering with arrest. 
    A person commits the crime of resisting or interfering with arrest if, knowing that a law enforcement officer is making an arrest, for the purpose of preventing the officer from effecting the arrest, he resists the arrest of himself by fleeing from such officer. 
(Code 1994, § 54-219; Ord. No. 1079, § 1(a), 6-12-1979) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.150. 
Sec. 28-316. - Interference with legal process. 
    A person commits the crime of interference with legal process if, knowing any person is authorized by law to serve process, for the purpose of preventing such person from effecting the service of any process, he interferes with or obstructs such person. The term "process" includes any writ, summons, subpoena, warrant other than an arrest warrant, or other process or order of a court. 
(Code 1994, § 54-220) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.160. 
Sec. 28-317. - False reports. 
(a)	A person commits the crime of making a false report, if he knowingly:
(1)	Gives false information to a law enforcement officer for the purpose of implicating another person in a crime. 
(2)	Gives false information to a law enforcement officer for the purpose of avoiding or evading apprehension by law enforcement authorities. 
(3)	Provides false information to any law enforcement officer for the purpose of misleading such officer in the performance of his duty. 
(4)	Makes a false report to a law enforcement officer that a crime has occurred or is about to occur. 
(5)	Makes a false report or causes a false report to be made to a law enforcement officer, security officer, fire department or other organization, official or volunteer, which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property that a fire or other incident calling for an emergency response has occurred. 
(b)	It is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the actor retracted the false statement or report before the law enforcement officer or any other person took substantial action in reliance thereon. 
(c)	The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction under subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 54-221) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.080. 
Sec. 28-318. - False impersonation. 
    A person commits the crime of false impersonation if he: 
(1)	Falsely represents himself to be a public servant with purpose to induce another to submit to his pretended official authority or to rely upon his pretended official acts, and performs an act in that pretended capacity, or causes another to act in reliance upon his pretended official authority. 
(2)	Falsely represents himself to be a person licensed to practice or engage in any profession for which a license is required by the laws of the state with purpose to induce another person to rely upon such representation, and performs an act in that pretended capacity, or causes another to act in reliance upon such representation. 
(Code 1994, § 54-222) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.120. 
Sec. 28-319. - Concealing an offense. 
    A person commits the crime of concealing an offense if he: 
(1)	Confers or agrees to confer pecuniary or other type of benefit on a person in consideration of that person's: 
a.	Concealing an offense;
b.	Refraining from starting or aiding in the prosecution of an offense;
c.	Withholding evidence of the offense; or
(2)	Accepts or agrees to accept a pecuniary or other type of benefit in consideration for: 
a.	Concealing an offense;
b.	Refraining from starting or aiding in the prosecution of an offense; or
c.	Withholding evidence of the offense.
(Code 1994, § 54-223) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.020. 
Sec. 28-320. - Hindering prosecution. 
    A person commits the crime of hindering prosecution if he, with the purpose of preventing the apprehension, prosecution, conviction, or punishment of a person who has committed a crime: 
(1)	Harbors or conceals the person.
(2)	Warns the person that he is soon to be discovered and apprehended (unless done in an effort to bring that person into compliance with the law). 
(3)	Provides money, transportation, weapons, disguises or other means to help the person avoid discovery or apprehension. 
(4)	Prevents or obstructs another by using force, deception or intimidation against him from doing something to aid the discovery or apprehension of the suspect. 
(Code 1994, § 54-224) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.030. 
Sec. 28-321. - Refusing to make employee available for service of process. 
    Any employer, or any agent who is in charge of a business establishment, commits the crime of refusing to make an employee available for service of process if he knowingly refuses to assist any officer authorized by law to serve process who calls at such business establishment during the working hours of an employee for the purpose of serving process on such employee, by failing or refusing to make such employee available for service of process. 
(Code 1994, § 54-225) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.170. 
Sec. 28-322. - Refusal to identify as witness. 
    A person commits the crime of refusal to identify as a witness if: 
(1)	He knows he has witnessed a portion or all of a crime; or
(2)	He knows he has witnessed an incident resulting in physical injury or substantial property damage; and 
(3)	Upon demand of a law enforcement officer engaged in the performance of his duties, he refuses to report or falsely reports his name and present address. 
(Code 1994, § 54-226) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.190. 
Sec. 28-323. - Tampering with witness. 
    A person commits the crime of tampering with a witness if for the purpose of inducing a witness or a prospective witness in an official proceeding to disobey a subpoena or other legal process, or to absent himself, or avoid subpoena or other legal process, or to withhold evidence, information or documents, or to testify falsely, he: 
(1)	Threatens or causes harm to any person or property.
(2)	Uses force, threats or deception.
(3)	Offers, confers or agrees to confer any benefit, direct or indirect, upon such witness.
(4)	Conveys any of the foregoing to another in furtherance of a conspiracy.
(Code 1994, § 54-227) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.270. 
Sec. 28-324. - Tampering with victim. 
    A person commits the crime of tampering with a victim if he purposely prevents or dissuades, or attempts to prevent or dissuade, any person who has been a victim of any crime, or who is acting on behalf of a victim, from: 
(1)	Making a report of the victimization (crime).
(2)	Causing a complaint, indictment, or information to be sought or to assist in the prosecution.
(3)	Arresting or seeking the arrest of any person in connection with the crime against the victim. 
(Code 1994, § 54-228) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 575.270. 
Sec. 28-325. - Obstructing government operations. 
    A person commits the crime of obstructing government operations if he purposely obstructs, impairs, hinders or prevents the performance of a governmental function by use or threat of violence, force or other physical interference or obstacle. 
(Code 1994, § 54-229) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 576.030. 
Secs. 28-326-28-335. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WEAPONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 571.010 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 28-336. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Blackjack means any instrument designed or adapted for the purpose of stunning or inflicting physical injury by striking a person, and which is readily capable of lethal use. 
    Concealable firearm means any firearm with a barrel less than 16 inches in length, measured from the face of the bolt or standing breech. 
    Deface means to alter or destroy the manufacturer's or importer's serial number or any other distinguishing number or identification mark. 
    Explosive weapon means any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb or similar device designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting death, serious physical injury, or substantial property damage; or any device designed or adapted for delivering or shooting such a weapon. For the purposes of this definition, the term "explosive" means any chemical compound mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion, including, but not limited to, dynamite and other high explosives, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating cords, igniter cords, and igniters or blasting agents. 
    Firearm means any weapon that is designed or adapted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive. 
    Firearm silencer means any instrument, attachment or appliance that is designed or adapted to muffle the noise made by the firing of any firearm. 
    Gas gun means any gas ejection device, weapon, cartridge, container or contrivance other than a gas bomb, that is designed or adapted for the purpose of ejecting any poison gas that will cause death or serious physical injury, but not any device that ejects a repellant or temporary incapacitating substance. 
    Intoxicated means substantially impaired mental or physical capacity resulting from introduction of any substance into the body. 
    Knife means any dagger, dirk, stiletto or bladed hand instrument that is readily capable of inflicting serious physical injury or death by cutting or stabbing a person. For purposes of this article, the term "knife" does not include any ordinary pocket knife with no blade more than four inches in length. 
    Knuckles means any instrument that consists of finger rings or guards made of a hard substance that is designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting serious physical injury or death by striking a person with a fist enclosed in the knuckles. 
    Machine gun means any firearm that is capable of firing more than one shot automatically, without manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger. 
    Projectile weapon means any bow, crossbow, pellet gun, slingshot or other weapon that is not a firearm, which is capable of expelling a projectile that could inflict serious physical injury or death by striking or piercing a person. 
    Rifle means any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed metallic cartridge to fire a projectile through a rifled bore by a single function of trigger. 
    Short barrel means a barrel length of less than 16 inches for a rifle and 18 inches for a shotgun, both measured from the face of the bolt or standing breech, or an overall rifle or shotgun length of less than 26 inches. 
    Shotgun means any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed shotgun shell to fire a number of shot or a single projectile through a smooth bore barrel by a single function of the trigger. 
    Spring gun means any fused, timed or nonmanually controlled trap or device designed or adapted to set off an explosion for the purpose of inflicting serious physical injury or death. 
    Switchblade knife means any knife which has a blade that folds or closes into the handle or sheath, and that opens automatically by pressure applied to a button or other device located on the handle or that opens or releases from the handle or sheath by the force of gravity or by the application of centrifugal force. 
(Code 1994, § 54-251) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 571.010. 
Sec. 28-337. - Possession, manufacture, transporting, repair or sale of certain weapons a crime; exception. 
(a)	A person commits a crime if he knowingly possesses, manufactures, transports, repairs or sells: 
(1)	An explosive weapon.
(2)	A machine gun.
(3)	A gas gun.
(4)	A short-barreled rifle or shotgun.
(5)	A firearm silencer.
(6)	A switchblade knife.
(7)	A bullet or projectile which explodes or detonates upon impact because of an independent explosive charge after having been shot from a firearm. 
(8)	Knuckles.
(b)	A person does not commit a crime under this section if his conduct:
(1)	Was incident to the performance of official duty by the armed forces, national guard, a governmental law enforcement agency or a penal institution. 
(2)	Was incident to engaging in a lawful commercial or business transaction with an organization enumerated in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(3)	Was incident to using an explosive weapon in a manner reasonably related to a lawful industrial or commercial enterprise. 
(4)	Was incident to displaying the weapon in a public museum or exhibition.
(5)	Was incident to dealing with the weapon solely as a curio, ornament, or keepsake, or to using it in a manner reasonably related to a lawful dramatic performance; but if the weapon is the type described in subsections (b)(1), (3), or (5) of this section it must be in such a nonfunctioning condition that it cannot readily be made operable. No short-barreled rifle, short-barreled shotgun or machine gun may be possessed, manufactured, transported, repaired or sold as a curio, ornament or keepsake unless such person is an importer, manufacturer, dealer or collector licensed by the secretary of the treasury pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 USC, or unless such firearm is an antique firearm as defined in RSMo 571.080 or unless such firearm has been designated a collector's item by the secretary of the treasury pursuant to 26 USC 5845(a). 
(Code 1994, § 54-252) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 571.020. 
Sec. 28-338. - Unlawful use of weapons; exception. 
(a)	A person commits the crime of unlawful use of weapons if he knowingly:
(1)	Carries concealed upon or about his person a knife, a firearm, a blackjack or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use. 
(2)	Sets a spring gun.
(3)	Uses or discharges a revolver or pistol of any description, shotgun or rifle which may be used for the explosion of cartridges or any other type of firearm, whether such instrument is called by any name set forth above or by any other name. 
(4)	Exhibits, in the presence of one or more persons, any weapon readily capable of lethal use in an angry or threatening manner. 
(5)	Possesses a firearm or projectile weapon while intoxicated.
(6)	Carries a firearm or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use into any church or place where people have assembled for worship, or into any school, or into any election precinct on any election day, or into any building owned or occupied by any agency of the federal government, state government, or political subdivision thereof, or into any public assemblage of persons meeting for any lawful purpose. 
(b)	Subsections (a)(1), (3), (4), and (6) of this section shall not apply to or affect any of the following: 
(1)	All state, county and municipal law enforcement officers possessing the duty and power of arrest for violation of the general criminal laws of the state or for violation of ordinances of counties or municipalities of the state, or any person summoned by such officers to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while actually engaged in assisting such officer. 
(2)	Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries, jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted of crime. 
(3)	Members of the armed forces or national guard while performing their official duty.
(4)	Those persons vested by article V, section 1 of the state constitution with the judicial power of the state. 
(5)	Any person whose bona fide duty is to execute process, civil or criminal.
(c)	This section shall not apply to licensed shooting galleries or in agriculturally zoned areas to private grounds or premises under circumstances when such instrument can be fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property, and also in such a manner as to prevent the projectile from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of such gallery grounds, or residence. 
(d)	Subsections (a)(1) and (5) of this section do not apply when the actor is transporting such weapons in a nonfunctioning state or in an unloaded state when ammunition is not readily accessible or when such weapons are not readily accessible. Subsection (a)(1) of this section does not apply when the actor is also in possession of an exposed firearm or projectile weapon for the lawful pursuit of game, or is in his dwelling unit or upon business premises over which the actor has possession, authority or control, or is traveling in a continuous journey peaceably through this state. 
(Code 1994, § 54-253; Ord. No. 1028, 8-10-1976; Ord. No. 1066, § A, 9-12-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 571.030. 
Sec. 28-339. - Defacing firearm. 
    A person commits the crime of defacing a firearm if he knowingly defaces any firearm. 
(Code 1994, § 54-254) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 571.045. 
Sec. 28-340. - Possession of defaced firearm. 
    A person commits the crime of possession of a defaced firearm if he knowingly possesses a firearm which is defaced. 
(Code 1994, § 54-255) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 571.050. 
Sec. 28-341. - Unlawful transfer of weapons. 
    A person commits the crime of unlawful transfer of weapons if he: 
(1)	Knowingly sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers a firearm or ammunition for a firearm to any person who, under the provisions of this section, is not lawfully entitled to possess such. 
(2)	Knowingly sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers a blackjack to a person less than 18 years of age without the consent of the child's custodial parent or guardian, or recklessly sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers any firearm to a person less than 18 years old without the consent of the child's custodial parent or guardian; provided, that this does not prohibit the delivery of such weapons to any peace officer or member of the armed forces or national guard while performing his official duty. 
(3)	Recklessly sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers a firearm or ammunition for a firearm to a person who is intoxicated. 
(Code 1994, § 54-256) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 571.060. 
Sec. 28-342. - Possession of concealable firearm unlawful for certain persons. 
    A person commits the crime of unlawful possession of a concealable firearm if he has any concealable firearm in his possession and: 
(1)	He has pled guilty to or has been convicted of a dangerous felony, as defined in RSMo 556.061, or of an attempt to commit a dangerous felony, or of a crime under the laws of any state of the United States which, if committed within this state, would be a dangerous felony, or confined therefor in this state or elsewhere during the five-year period immediately preceding the date of such possession. 
(2)	He is a fugitive from justice, is habitually in an intoxicated or drugged condition, or is currently adjudged mentally incompetent. 
(Code 1994, § 54-257; Ord. No. 76, 1-4-1881) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 571.070. 
Sec. 28-343. - Carrying a firearm. 
    No person shall openly carry any firearm readily capable of lethal use. This section shall not apply to law enforcement officers, members of the armed forces or National Guard, jailers or other such persons while performing their lawful duties. 
(Code 1994, § 54-258) 
Secs. 28-344-28-374. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TOBACCO PRODUCTS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for municipal regulation of sale of tobacco products that is more stringent than state regulation, RSMo 407.925; sales of tobacco product to minors prohibited, RSMo 407.924 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 28-375. - Distribution of tobacco products to minors prohibited. 
    No person shall sell or distribute any tobacco product or rolling papers to any minor, except that this section shall not apply to the distribution by family members on property that is not open to the public. 
(Code 1994, § 54-281; Ord. No. 1319, § 1, 6-28-1993) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 407.931. 
Sec. 28-376. - Sign to be displayed. 
    The owner of an establishment at which tobacco products or rolling papers are sold at retail or through vending machines shall cause to be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place at every display from which tobacco products are sold and on every vending machine where tobacco products are purchased a sign that shall: 
(1)	Contain in red lettering at least one-half-inch high on a white background the following: "It is a violation of state law for cigarettes or other tobacco products to be sold to any person under the age of 18"; and 
(2)	Include a depiction of a pack of cigarettes at least two inches high defaced by a red diagonal diameter of a surrounding red circle and the words: "under 18." 
(Code 1994, § 54-282; Ord. No. 1319, § 2, 6-28-1993) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 407.927. 
Sec. 28-377. - Evidence of age to be required. 
    A person selling tobacco products or rolling papers or distributing tobacco product samples shall require proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient may be under the age of 18 years. Reasonable reliance on proof of age or on the appearance of the purchaser or recipient shall be a defense to any action for a violation of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 54-283; Ord. No. 1319, § 3, 6-28-1993) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 407.929. 
Sec. 28-378. - Employee liability. 
    If a sale is made by an employee of the owner of an establishment in violation of this article, the employee shall be guilty of an offense established in section 28-375 of this article. If a vending machine is in violation of the sign required by section 28-376, the owner of the establishment shall be guilty of an offense under this article. If a sample is distributed by an employee of a company conducting the sampling, such employee shall be guilty of an offense under this article. 
(Code 1994, § 54-284; Ord. No. 1319, § 4, 6-28-1993) 
Sec. 28-379. - Penalty. 
(a)	Fine. Any person who violates this article shall be fined: 
(1)	For the first offense, $25.00;
(2)	For the second offense, $100.00; and
(3)	For a third and subsequent offense, $250.00.
(b)	One violation each day. No person shall be liable for more than one violation of this article on any single day. 
(Code 1994, § 54-285; Ord. No. 1319, §§ 5, 6, 6-28-1993) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 407.931. 
Secs. 28-380-28-401. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SMOKE-FREE AIR 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Missouri Clean Indoor Air Act, RSMo 191.765 et seq.; authority for municipalities to enact smoking regulations more stringent than state regulations, RSMo 191.777. (Back)
Sec. 28-402. - Offenses. 
    The following shall be offenses under the ordinances of this community and shall be punishable as provided in section 28-406. 
(1)	No person shall smoke in a public place or in a public meeting except in a designated smoking area. 
(2)	No proprietor or other person in charge of a public place or public meeting shall permit, cause, suffer or allow a person to smoke in those areas where smoking is prohibited. 
(Code 1994, § 54-301; Ord. No. 1320, § 1, 6-28-1993) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 191.767. 
Sec. 28-403. - Duties of person having control of public place. 
    The person having custody or control of a public meeting shall: 
(1)	Make reasonable efforts to prevent smoking in the public place or public meeting by posting appropriate signs indicating "no-smoking" or "smoking area" and arrange seating accordingly. These signs shall be placed at a height and location easily seen by a person entering the public place or public meeting and not obscured in any way; 
(2)	Arrange seating and utilize available ventilation systems and physical barriers to isolate designated smoking areas; 
(3)	Make a reasonable request of persons smoking to move to a designated smoking area;
(4)	Allow smoking in designated areas of theater lobbies only.
(Code 1994, § 54-302; Ord. No. 1320, § 2, 6-28-1993) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 191.771. 
Sec. 28-404. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bar or tavern means any licensed establishment which serves liquor on the premises for which not more than ten percent of the gross sales receipts of the business are supplied by food purchases, either for consumption on the premises or elsewhere. 
    Other person in charge means the agent of the proprietor authorized to give administrative directions to and general supervisions of the activities within the public place, work place or public meeting at any given time. 
    Proprietor means the party who ultimately controls, governs or directs the activities within the public place, work place or public meeting, regardless of whether he is the owner or lessor of such place or site. The term does not mean the owner of the property unless he ultimately controls, governs or directs the activities within the public place or public meeting. The term "proprietor" shall apply to a corporation as well as an individual. 
    Public meeting means a gathering in person of members of a governmental body, whether an open or closed session, as defined in RSMo ch. 610. 
    Public place is any enclosed indoor area used by the general public or serving as a place of work including, but not limited to: 
(1)	Any retail or commercial establishment;
(2)	Health care facilities, health clinics or ambulatory care facilities including, but not limited to, laboratories associated with health care treatment, hospitals, nursing homes, physicians' offices and dentists' offices; 
(3)	Any vehicle used for public transportation including, but not limited to, buses, taxicabs and limousines for hire; 
(4)	Restrooms;
(5)	Elevators;
(6)	Libraries, educational facilities, day care facilities, museums, auditoriums and art galleries; 
(7)	All public areas and waiting rooms of public transportation facilities including, but not limited to, bus and airport facilities; 
(8)	Any enclosed indoor place used for entertainment or recreation including, but not limited to, gymnasiums, theater lobbies, concert halls, arenas and swimming pools; 
(9)	Any other enclosed indoor areas used by the general public including, but not limited to, corridors and shopping malls. However, the following areas are not considered a public place: 
a.	An entire room or hall which is used for private social functions, provided that the seating arrangements are under the control of the sponsor of the function and not of the proprietor or other person in charge; 
b.	Limousines for hire and taxicabs, where the driver and all passengers agree to smoking in such vehicle; 
c.	Performers on the stage, provided that the smoking is part of the production;
d.	A place where more than 50 percent of the volume of trade or business carried on is that of the blending of tobaccos or sale of tobaccos, cigarettes, pipes, cigars or smoking sundries; 
e.	Any bar, any tavern, a restaurant that seats less than 50 people, any bowling alley or any billiard parlor, provided such establishment conspicuously posts at least two signs stating that "Nonsmoking Areas are Unavailable"; 
f.	Private residences; and
g.	Any enclosed indoor arena, stadium or other facility which may be used for sporting events and which has a seating capacity of more than 15,000 persons. 
    Restaurant means any building, structure or area used, maintained or advertised as or held out to the public to be an enclosure where meals for consideration of payment are made available to be consumed on the premises. 
    Smoking means possession of burning tobacco in the form of a cigarette, cigar, pipe or other smoking equipment. 
(Code 1994, §§ 54-303, 54-304; Ord. No. 1320, §§ 3, 4, 6-28-1993) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 191.765. 
Sec. 28-405. - Designated smoking area. 
    A smoking area may be designated by persons having custody or control of public places, except in places in which smoking is prohibited by the fire marshal or by other law, ordinance or regulation. No public place shall have more than 30 percent of its entire space designated as a smoking area. A proprietor or other person in charge of a restaurant shall designate an area of sufficient size to accommodate usual and customary demand for nonsmoking areas by customers or patrons. 
(Code 1994, § 54-305; Ord. No. 1320, § 5, 6-28-1993) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 191.767. 
Sec. 28-406. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates this article shall be fined an amount not more than $200.00. 
(Code 1994, § 54-306; Ord. No. 1320, § 6, 6-28-1993) 
Chapter 30 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal parks and recreation generally, RSMo 90.010 et seq.; regulation of parks and recreation by cities with populations of less than 30,000, RSMo 90.500 et seq.; watercraft regulations, RSMo 306.010 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Parks; hours of operation. 
    The city park located between Randolph and Campbell on Harper Street shall be open to the public from 7:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. daily. Any person not authorized by the city who enters or remains within the park boundaries outside of the designated hours shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation and subject to the penalties in section 1-11. 
(Code 1994, § 58-1; Ord. No. 1302, 6-4-1992) 
Secs. 30-2-30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL 

Sec. 30-21. - Fees. 
    The city shall charge fee for the use of the municipal swimming pool and facilities in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1994, § 58-56; Ord. No. 1277, § 1, 1-28-1991) 
Secs. 30-22-30-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WILSON CREEK RESERVOIR LAKE 

Sec. 30-46. - Caretaker. 
(a)	The selection and appointment of a caretaker for the city lake shall be done by the parks director, subject to the approval of the city administrator. The caretaker shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The council shall designate the months during the year that the caretaker shall be employed, and the caretaker's monthly compensation shall be set by the council. 
(b)	The caretaker shall acquaint himself with the rules and regulations governing the lake area and adjoining grounds and enforce the same together with any rules and regulations adopted by the park board. 
(c)	The caretaker shall at all times while on duty maintain law and order and not permit or allow excessive speed of motorboats on the lake nor speeding on the surrounding grounds. 
(d)	The caretaker shall at all times while on duty endeavor to be helpful and courteous to all persons availing themselves of the use of the lake and adjoining grounds. 
(e)	The caretaker's authority shall be confined solely to the lake and surrounding grounds.
(f)	The caretaker shall from time to time during his duty period police the lake area and surrounding grounds and keep the same free and clear of debris and litter. 
(g)	The caretaker shall on July 1 each year examine every boat of every type on the lake and any boat that does not display the proper city registration shall be impounded and not released to the owner thereof until such time as proper registration is made. Any boat not claimed within 30 days may be disposed of and removed from the lake. Any boat that has sunk or is considered derelict shall be subject to removal by the caretaker. 
(Code 1994, § 58-116; Ord. No. 1278, § 14, 2-11-1991; Ord. No. 1654, § 1(58-116), 4-14-2008) 
Sec. 30-47. - Use privileges. 
    Except as otherwise provided or regulated in this article, all persons shall be entitled to engage in all recreational activities on the city's Wilson Creek Reservoir Lake and grounds. Fees for use of the lake facilities shall be as provided in the city fee schedule and shall include, but not be limited to, shelter use fees, fishing license fees, dock permit fees, duck blind permit fees, inboard and outboard motorboat fees, and camping fees. 
(Code 1994, § 58-96; Ord. No. 1278, § 1, 2-11-1991; Ord. No. 1654, § 1(58-96), 4-14-2008) 
Sec. 30-48. - Fishing and boat licenses; motor registrations. 
    No persons shall fish in the city lake without having a current fishing license, stamped and endorsed by the city clerk. No person shall launch a boat on or operate a boat in the city lake without first obtaining a boat license and an outboard motor registration from the city clerk. Fees for fishing and boat licenses and motor registrations shall be provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1994, § 58-97; Ord. No. 1278, § 1(a), 2-11-1991; Ord. No. 1654, § 1(58-97), 4-14-2008) 
Sec. 30-49. - Guest privileges. 
    Any qualified persons or their families shall have guest privileges, not to exceed four guests per family per day. All guests must be accompanied by a qualified resident and shall at all times abide by the terms of this article and the state fishing and hunting laws. 
(Code 1994, § 58-98; Ord. No. 1278, § 1(b), 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 30-50. - Dock fees. 
    All persons owning and maintaining boat docks shall pay the city an annual permit fee as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1994, § 58-99; Ord. No. 1278, § 1(d), 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 30-51. - Dock spacing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or erect a boat dock less than 30 feet from any existing boat dock. 
(Code 1994, § 58-100; Ord. No. 1278, § 1(e), 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 30-52. - Duck blinds. 
    Duck blinds at the city lake are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	A drawing will be held on the fourth Friday of July at 5:00 p.m. in the city council chambers each year. All persons must be present to receive a blind, if drawn. 
(2)	The drawing is first opened to those individuals who live within the city limits. If there are not five individuals meeting this requirement, the remainder of the blinds will be opened and raffled to anyone with a city address. 
(3)	The cost for a blind, and the additional fee collected at the time of the drawing shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. This fee will be returned to the blind owner if the blind is removed on or before April 15 of the following year. 
(4)	The first person drawn in the selection process will get first choice of blind location and continue in a like manner thereafter until all blind locations have been allocated. 
(5)	Upon selection of a blind location, the person receiving said blind shall be given a card upon which the person can list up to six names of the persons who will be hunting out of the blind. A copy of the card shall be posted on the sign marking each blind area. The recipient of the blind is allowed to have additional guests hunting in the blind upon payment of the per day fee to the caretaker provided in the city fee schedule. 
(6)	Each blind spot shall have a posted sign marking the area for construction. The blind must be within 300 feet of the sign. 
(7)	Any boat being used on the lake must be licensed and receive a sticker from the city clerk or caretaker. A motor sticker must also be purchased if the boat is so equipped. 
(Code 1994, § 58-101; Ord. No. 1278, § 1(f), 2-11-1991; Ord. No. 1654, § 1(58-101), 4-14-2008) 
Sec. 30-53. - Bow hunting. 
    There shall be no bow hunting of any type allowed at the Wilson Creek Reservoir Lake and adjacent grounds owned by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 58-102; Ord. No. 1312, §§ 2, 3, 1-11-1993) 
Sec. 30-54. - Privileges, how obtained. 
    Before any person as designated in sections 30-47 through 30-50, shall engage in the recreational activity of fishing, boating or the shooting of waterfowl or other wildlife and game on the property of the city or on the lake, it shall be the duty of every such person entitled to such privileges to first procure a state or federal license, whichever the case may be, to engage in the particular sport desired. Such person before engaging in fishing or shooting of wildlife and game on the city lake and grounds shall first exhibit their state or federal license to the city clerk and have the same stamped or endorsed by the city clerk and shall pay the fee therefor as provided in the city fee schedule. The city clerk shall record in a special record book the name, address and the number of persons in the family of the person requesting privileges. Any person engaging in any sport or recreational activity on the lake and grounds which requires a state or federal license shall at all times while visiting the lake and grounds have on his person such license and shall upon the request of any person authorized to check the license, exhibit the same for identification. 
(Code 1994, § 58-104; Ord. No. 1278, § 2, 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 30-55. - Laws affecting fishing and other wildlife. 
    Fishing and hunting of wildlife and game is regulated and shall be governed by the laws of the state under the conservation commission. It shall be unlawful for any person fishing on the lake to use trotlines, limb lines, throw lines, jug, bottle or float lines, bank lines, fish traps, nets and seines. Any person using such methods for fishing shall be subject to being permanently barred from the lake and grounds. 
(Code 1994, § 58-105; Ord. No. 1278, § 3, 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 30-56. - Prohibitions of usage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person except those mentioned in sections 30-47 through 30-53 to avail themselves of the facilities of the lake and city grounds adjacent thereto for the purpose of picnicking, fishing, boating or hunting or for any recreational activity whatsoever. Any nonresident persons who avail themselves of picnicking, fishing, boating, hunting or any other form of recreational activity on the lake or property shall be considered trespassers. 
(Code 1994, § 58-106; Ord. No. 1278, § 4, 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 30-57. - Firearms; discharge prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any rifle or pistol on, over or in city lake or grounds at any time. 
(Code 1994, § 58-107; Ord. No. 1278, § 5, 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 30-58. - Picnicking. 
    It shall be the duty of any person who picnics on city property to clean up all refuse and litter after any picnic and to completely extinguish all fires or burning embers. 
(Code 1994, § 58-108; Ord. No. 1278, § 6, 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 30-59. - Defacing or destroying property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to mar, deface or destroy any city property or to cut down or mutilate any trees or bushes. 
(Code 1994, § 58-109; Ord. No. 1278, § 7, 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 30-60. - Swimming, wading. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe, wade or in any manner willfully immerse themselves in the lake. 
(Code 1994, § 58-110; Ord. No. 1278, § 8, 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 30-61. - Supervision of children. 
    Children under 15 years of age shall not avail themselves of the facilities of the lake or grounds unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Code 1994, § 58-111; Ord. No. 1278, § 9, 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 30-62. - Authorized users assume risk. 
    Any person authorized to use the lake and grounds shall do so at their own risk. 
(Code 1994, § 58-112; Ord. No. 1278, § 10, 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 30-63. - Motorized boats. 
    Inboard and outboard motor boats are permitted to be operated on Lake Pleasant Hill upon payment of the fee provided in the city fee schedule and under the following conditions: 
(1)	Motor boats of any kind or description shall not be operated on the lake in excess of five miles per hour. 
(2)	All boats of any type used or operated on the lake shall be required to be equipped with flotation air tanks or styrofoam under the seats. 
(3)	All persons operating or riding in any type of boat on the lake shall equip themselves, use and be fitted with suitable life jackets. 
(4)	All boats shall be registered and such number shall be prominently displayed on the boat. 
(5)	Not more than the number of persons for which a boat was designed shall ride in any type of boat on the lake. 
(6)	No person under the age of 15 years shall operate any type of boat, either with or without a motor, on the lake unless accompanied by an adult. All boats and motors used and operated on the lake shall conform to state boating regulations and safety rules. 
(7)	Before any person shall operate any motor boat on the lake, he shall first comply with all the rules and regulations of the city as set out and specified by the park board. Failure to comply with all rules, regulations and registrations shall subject the violator to the penalties provided in section 1-11 
(Code 1994, § 58-113; Ord. No. 1278, § 11, 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 30-64. - Camping. 
    Any person, group or organization desiring to avail themselves of overnight camping on the lake grounds shall first secure permission and pay the fee as provided in the city fee schedule. Five consecutive nights of camping shall be the maximum permitted. 
(Code 1994, § 58-114; Ord. No. 1278, § 12, 2-11-1991; Ord. No. 1363, 6-26-1995) 
Sec. 30-65. - Lake docks. 
    All lake docks shall be kept and maintained in a good state of repair. Docks which have deteriorated to the extent that they are dangerous shall be subject to removal upon the authority of the park board. All docks must be registered, and the registry numbers shall be prominently displayed and visible on the dock. 
(Code 1994, § 58-115; Ord. No. 1278, § 13, 2-11-1991) 
Sec. 30-66. - All-terrain vehicles; motorcycles; horseback riding. 
    No ATVs, other than city-operated vehicles, shall be operated upon the lake area or grounds. Motorcycles shall only be operated upon the roadways, an horseback riding shall be permitted on the roadways and designated trails only. 
(Code 1994, § 58-117; Ord. No. 1278, § 15, 2-11-1991; Ord. No. 1654, § 1(58-117), 4-14-2008) 
Sec. 30-67. - Vandalism. 
    The city shall not be responsible for any damage, destruction or acts of vandalism to any personal property on the lake or grounds and persons maintaining docks and/or boats assume all risks. 
(Code 1994, § 58-118; Ord. No. 1278, § 18, 2-11-1991) 
Chapter 32 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Merchant, manufacturer, itinerant vendor, and peddler licenses and taxes, RSMo 150.010 et seq.; religious and charitable associations generally, RSMo 352.010 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate peddlers, RSMo 94.360. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler means any individual, whether a resident of this city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, for the sale of, as well as: 
(1)	The selling, offering for sale or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery; 
(2)	For services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale; or 
(3)	Whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not;
provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop or any other place within this city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. The term "peddler" includes the term "canvasser," "solicitor," "transient or itinerant merchant or vendor" or "transient or itinerant photographer." 
(Code 1994, § 62-26) 
Sec. 32-20. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling in the usual course of business. 
(2)	Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public officers goods, wares and merchandise according to law. 
(3)	Bona fide residents of the state selling fruits, vegetables, dressed meats, fowl or farm products which were produced on land within the state, owned or controlled by such vendor. 
(4)	Solicitations, sales or distributions made by charitable, educational or religious organizations which have their principal place of activity within this city, if approved by the mayor. 
(Code 1994, § 62-27) 
Sec. 32-21. - Entrance to premises restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private premises when such premises are posted with a sign stating "no peddlers allowed" or "no solicitations allowed" or other words to such effect. 
(Code 1994, § 62-28) 
Sec. 32-22. - Refusing to leave. 
    Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises or his agent to leave the same and not return to such premises shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1994, § 62-29) 
Sec. 32-23. - Misrepresentation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality of his goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same. 
(Code 1994, § 62-30) 
Sec. 32-24. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling within the city between the hours of one-half hour before sunset and 9:00 a.m. the following morning, or at any time on Sundays, except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer. 
(Code 1994, § 62-31) 
Secs. 32-25-32-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 32-52. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler within this city without first obtaining a permit to do so. 
(Code 1994, § 62-41) 
Sec. 32-53. - Application. 
    Applicants for a permit under this division shall file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall give the following information: 
(1)	The name and a description of the applicant.
(2)	The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
(3)	A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold.
(4)	If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)	The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
(6)	The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed and the proposed method of delivery. 
(7)	A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches in size showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(8)	A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(9)	Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery. 
(10)	The last five municipalities wherein the applicant has worked before coming to this city. 
(11)	Such other relevant information as may be required by the investigation of the applicant.
(Code 1994, § 62-42) 
Sec. 32-54. - Presentation of driver's license. 
    At the time of filing his application for a permit required by this article, the applicant shall present his driver's license, if he has one, to the city clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 62-43) 
Sec. 32-55. - Application fee. 
    At the time of filing the application under this division, a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein. 
(Code 1994, § 62-44) 
Sec. 32-56. - False information. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading information in connection with his application for a permit required by this division. 
(Code 1994, § 62-45) 
Sec. 32-57. - Fingerprints. 
    At the time of making application for a permit required by this division, the applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the chief of police. 
(Code 1994, § 62-46) 
Sec. 32-58. - Bond. 
(a)	Every applicant, not a resident of the city, or who is a resident of the city and represents a firm whose principal place of business is located outside the state, shall file with the city clerk a surety bond in favor of the city in the amount of $1,000.00, with surety acceptable to and approved by the mayor, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all the applicable provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city and state law regulating and concerning the business of peddling and guaranteeing to any citizen of the city that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the peddler, and further guaranteeing to any citizen of the city doing business with such peddler that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of such peddler. Action on such bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use or benefit of the aggrieved person. 
(b)	If the applicant is an agent, employee, canvasser or solicitor of a corporation authorized to do business in this state or registered under the fictitious name act of the state, such corporation or fictitious name business may furnish one bond in the amount of $1,000.00 for any and all of its agents, employees, canvassers or solicitors. 
(Code 1994, § 62-47) 
Sec. 32-59. - Service of process. 
    Before any permit shall issue under this division, there shall also be filed with the city clerk an instrument in writing, signed by the applicant under oath, nominating and appointing the city clerk his true and lawful agent, with full power and authority to acknowledge service of and notice of process for and on the behalf of such applicant; and service of summons in any action brought upon the applicant's bond shall be deemed made when served on the city clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 62-48) 
Sec. 32-60. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a permit required by this division, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. The chief of police shall complete his investigation within one week of receiving the application. 
(Code 1994, § 62-49) 
Sec. 32-61. - Denial. 
    If as a result of investigation the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application under this division is disapproved and that no permit shall be issued. 
(Code 1994, § 62-50) 
Sec. 32-62. - Issuance. 
    If as a result of investigation the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and return the permit along with the application to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of the required fee, deliver the permit to the applicant. 
(Code 1994, § 62-51) 
Sec. 32-63. - Contents. 
    Each permit issued under this division shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of the permittee, the class of permit issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the permit number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such business. 
(Code 1994, § 62-52) 
Sec. 32-64. - Record. 
    The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued under this division. 
(Code 1994, § 62-53) 
Sec. 32-65. - Display. 
    Every peddler having a permit issued under the provisions of this division and doing business within the city shall display his permit upon the request of any person, and failure to do so shall be deemed an offense. 
(Code 1994, § 62-54) 
Sec. 32-66. - Duration. 
    Every permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be valid for the period of time stated therein, but in no event shall any such permit be issued for a period of time in excess of 12 months. 
(Code 1994, § 62-55) 
Sec. 32-67. - Revocation. 
    Any permit issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked by the city council for the violation by the permittee of any applicable provision of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(Code 1994, § 62-56) 
Chapter 34 - SECONDHAND GOODS (RESERVED) 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Junkyards, RSMo 226.650 et seq.; pawnbroker loans, RSMo 367.011 et seq. (Back)
Chapter 36 - SIGNS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1719, adopted Feb. 11, 2013, amended chapter 36 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 36, §§ 36-1-36-3, 36-23, 36-24, 36-51-36-55, and 36-81-36-86 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1563, § 70, adopted Jan. 10, 2005. 
State Law reference- Authority for municipal regulation of outdoor advertising, RSMo 71.288; restriction on municipal sign regulations, RSMo 67.317; billboards, RSMo 226.500 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to achieve balance among the following differing, and at times competing goals: 
(1)	To provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property, property values and public welfare by regulating and controlling the quality of materials, construction, installation and maintenance of signs in addition to the number, size, sign type and type of illumination of all on-site signs and off-site signs and sign structures located on private property. 
(2)	To ban all signs placed on utility poles, governmental signs, public rights-of-way and other public property. This is necessary to protect the safety of workmen who must scale utility poles, to eliminate traffic hazards, and to preserve the aesthetic appeal of the city by eliminating clutter and visual blight. 
(3)	To encourage effective use of signs as a means of communications for businesses, organizations and individuals in Pleasant Hill. 
(4)	To provide a means of way-finding in the community, thus reducing traffic confusion and congestion; 
(5)	To provide for adequate business identification advertising, and communications.
(6)	To prohibit signs of such excessive size and number that they obscure one another to the detriment of the economic and social well-being of the City of Pleasant Hill. 
(7)	To preserve property values by preventing unsightly and chaotic development that has a blighting influence upon the community. 
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Sec. 36-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall be deemed to have the meaning indicated below: 
    Approved combustible material means wood or materials not more combustible than wood and approved combustible plastics. 
    Approved combustible plastics means those plastics which, when tested in accordance with American Society for Testing Materials standard methods for test for flammability of plastics over 0.050-inch in thickness (D635-44), burn no faster than 21/2 inches per minute in sheets of 0.060-inch thickness. 
    Attention attracting device means any flasher, blinker, animation, banner, clock or other object designed or intended to attract the attention of the public to an establishment or to a sign. 
    Detached sign means any sign not attached to a building. 
    Illuminated signs. 
(1)	Semi-illuminated sign means any sign which is uniformly illuminated internally over its entire area, including the area of the sign, by use of electricity or other artificial light. 
(2)	Indirectly illuminated sign means any sign which is partially or completely illuminated at any time by an external light source which is so shielded as to not be visible at eye level. 
(3)	Fully illuminated sign means any sign which is illuminated by an external or internal light source which is visible. 
    Incidental sign means a sign which guides or directs pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or a sign in conjunction with a drive-thru window, which may be mounted on the ground on a building or in connection with a detached sign. 
    Inflatable advertising device means a promotional or informational device which holds its shape by use of compressed gases. These devices shall be classified as temporary signs. 
    Marquee sign means any sign attached flat against the marquee or permanent sidewalk canopy of a building and not extending above the roof line. 
    Monument sign means an identification sign which rises from the ground and generally has no clearance under it. 
    Off-premises sign means a sign, including billboards and poster panels, which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, activity or product sold, conducted or offered off the premises where such sign is located. 
    On-premises sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, activity or product sold, conducted or offered on the premises where such sign is located. 
    Portable sign means a sign that is not permanently affixed to one location and has the capability of being moved from one site to the next. 
    Projecting sign means any sign extending more than one foot from the face of the building to which it is attached or which extends more than one foot above the roof line. 
    Roof sign means a sign which extends above a roof or parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partially supported by said roof. 
    Sign means any words, letters, numerals, figures, devices, designs or trademarks by which information is made known to the public. 
    Sign area means the area of a sign set out in these regulations shall mean the area encompassed by the perimeter of the sign. The area of the sign shall be computed from the area enclosed by the perimeter upon which the letters, logo, etc., are placed, except that when individual letters, logo, etc., are mounted individually and directly upon a building surface without change in the color or appearance of the surface background, the area of the sign shall be deemed to be the rectangle or other geometric form that encompasses the letters, logo, etc. Lettering may be placed on two sides of a sign structure. 
    Snipe sign means any sign of a material such as cardboard, paper, pressed wood, plastic or metal which is attached to a fence, tree, utility pole or temporary structure or any sign which is not securely fastened to a building or firmly anchored to the ground. 
    Subdivision amenity sign means a sign directing traffic to amenities such as clubhouse or swimming pool within the subdivision. 
    Subdivision entrance marker means a detached sign identifying the subdivision located at one or more of the subdivision entrances. 
    Temporary sign means a sign of cloth or other combustible material, with or without a frame, which is usually attached to the outside of a building on a wall or store front for a limited period of time, such as a banner or a sign which is not permanently attached to the ground, building or other load-bearing structure, such as a portable sign, balloon or animation. 
    Under canopy sign means a display attached to the underside of a marquee or canopy and protruding over public or private sidewalks or right-of-way. 
    Wall sign means a sign attached to or erected against an exterior wall of a building or structure, which projects not more than 12 inches from a wall and presents only one face with advertising copy to the public and does not extend above the roof line. 
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Sec. 36-3. - Appeals. 
    Appeals to section of this chapter for interpretation of engineering or structural standards shall be to the zoning board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Secs. 36-4-36-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 36-23. - Sign types permitted; zone restrictions. 
    Permitted signs in each zoning district are as follows: 
(1)	District A. 
a.	One non-illuminated sign not larger than 32 square feet in area and not to exceed 20 feet in height pertaining to the sale, lease or identification of the premises upon which it is located or to the sale of products raised thereon. 
b.	Not more than two on-premises, non-illuminated or indirectly-illuminated subdivision entrance markers per street with a maximum sign area of 32 square feet and a maximum sign height of four feet. When a structure is used to support a sign, total area and height of the structure shall not exceed 48 square feet and six feet, respectively. The structure of a subdivision entrance marker forms the outside shape and includes any frame, border or base that forms an integral part of the display. 
c.	One non-illuminated subdivision amenity sign shall be allowed within the subdivision; it shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
d.	Churches and other institutional uses may display one non-illuminated, semi-illuminated or indirectly-illuminated detached sign showing names, activities and services therein. The sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and shall have a setback of ten feet from any property line. 
(2)	Districts R-S, R-1A, R-1, R-2 and R-2 PD. Signs as permitted in subsections (l)c and (l)d of this section. 
(3)	District R-3, R-3 PD and R-3A. 
a.	Signs as permitted in subsections (1)c and (1)d of this section.
b.	A multifamily development shall be permitted not more than one non- illuminated wall sign per building with a maximum sign area of 12 square feet. In addition, a multifamily development shall be permitted one illuminated or indirectly-illuminated detached sign for each entrance of the development. Such sign shall not exceed eight feet in height and 32 square feet in area. Said sign shall be maintained on private property no closer than ten feet to any property line. 
(4)	District C-P. 
a.	Each office building shall be permitted not more than two non-illuminated or semi-illuminated wall signs, provided such signs shall indicate only the name of the building or establishments housed therein. No such sign shall have an overall area exceeding five percent of the area of the wall upon which it is mounted. 
b.	In lieu of one of the above wall signs, each office building shall be permitted one detached sign, provided such sign shall indicate only the name of the building or establishments housed therein. Such sign shall not exceed eight feet in height and ten square feet in area and shall be set back ten feet from each side property line and five feet from the front property line. 
c.	Each establishment or firm housed within an office building is allowed one non-illuminated, semi-illuminated or indirectly-illuminated projecting, marquee or under canopy sign not exceeding three square feet in area. 
d.	Not more than two on-premises, non-illuminated or indirectly-illuminated subdivision entrance markers per street with a maximum sign area of 32 square feet and a maximum sign area height of four feet. When a structure is used to support a sign, total area and height of the structure shall not exceed 48 square feet and six feet, respectively. The structure of a subdivision entrance marker forms the outside shape and includes any frame, border or base that forms an integral part of the display. 
(5)	Districts C-0, C-1, C-2, M-l and M-2. Unless otherwise provided, signs in these districts may be non-illuminated, semi-illuminated or indirectly illuminated. 
a.	Each business or commercial establishment shall be permitted not more than four wall or marquee signs, provided the total area of signs on a facade shall not exceed 15 percent of the total area of that facade. 
b.	In lieu of one of the above wall or marquee signs, one projecting sign or under canopy sign shall be permitted. 
c.	In lieu of one of the above attached signs, one detached sign shall be permitted for each freestanding commercial building. It shall be set back not less than five feet from the front property line and shall be set back from side property lines a distance not less than 1/2 of the height of the sign. The maximum height of the detached sign shall be 20 feet. The gross area of detached signs shall not exceed 288 square feet. 
d.	In lieu of one detached sign, one non-illuminated, semi-illuminated or indirectly illuminated roof sign shall be permitted. A roof sign shall not exceed 15 feet above the roof and in no case shall the total height of the building and sign exceed the maximum allowable height for the zoning district. Roof signs shall not exceed the size limitations of detached signs. 
e.	A shopping center designed as one unified entity and consisting of one or several buildings, either attached or freestanding, shall be permitted one detached sign identifying the entire center. All other signs in the center shall consist of wall, projecting, under canopy or marquee signs. The maximum height of the shopping center detached sign shall be 20 feet. 
f.	Incidental signs are subject to the approval of the planning officer and shall not exceed nine square feet in area. 
g.	Off-premises signs shall be permitted only along 7 and 58 Highways:
1.	Off-premises signs shall be allowed in zones C-1 through M-2, inclusive, shall be allowed only on private property, and shall be set back from any building or property line a distance, measured from the front and back faces of the sign, equal to the height of the sign. 
2.	Off-premises signs shall be separated by at least 1,000 feet.
3.	All off-premises signs shall not exceed 32 square feet single-sided and 64 square feet double sided. 
4.	The maximum height of off-premises signs shall be ten feet.
5.	Double-sided signs may be placed in a V shape with a common front leg. The maximum angle between sign back shall not exceed 30 degrees. 
h.	Not more than two on-premises, non-illuminated or indirectly-illuminated subdivision entrance markers per street with a maximum sign area of 48 square feet and a maximum sign height of six feet. When a structure is used to support a sign, total area and height of the structure shall not exceed 72 square feet and nine feet, respectively. The structure of a subdivision entrance marker forms the outside shape and includes any frame, border or base that forms an integral part of the display. 
(6)	District H-1. Signs erected in the H-1 district must comply with the design guidelines set forth by the historic preservation commission and are subject to review as described in article III, division 3 of the zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Sec. 36-24. - Additional regulations. 
(a)	Maintenance. All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and in a proper state of preservation. The building inspector may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
(b)	Prohibited signs. 
(1)	Snipe signs are not permitted on the public right-of-way or on any utility poles or posts and may be removed by the building official. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for any person to display any real estate advertisements or signs which recite that real property is to be used for purposes or will be zoned for land uses in the future, when in fact such real estate is not presently zoned for such purposes. 
(3)	It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign or other advertising structure any obscene, indecent or immoral matter. 
(4)	Attention-attracting devices, electrical signs and illuminated signs, which are an annoyance to residential neighborhoods or may impair night vision or are a hazard to traffic or interfere with or conflict with traffic signals, whether inside or outside the building, are prohibited. 
(5)	It shall be unlawful to post or erect any sign on utility poles, governmental signs, public rights-of-way or any other public property except those placed by agencies of the federal, state or local government. 
(c)	Engineering design and materials. 
(1)	Wind pressure resistance. All signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind pressure of not less than 25 pounds per square foot. 
(2)	Except as specifically provided elsewhere, all permanent signs, sign structures and non-structural trim shall be constructed of approved combustible or non-combustible materials. 
(3)	No sign which obstructs sight lines at elevations between two feet and eight feet above the curb or pavement surface shall be located within the site distance triangle at any driveway or intersection. 
(4)	Obstruction of egress, openings, ventilation. A sign shall not be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, window, door or other opening, or so as to prevent free passage from one part of the roof to any other part thereof. A sign shall not be attached in any form, shape or manner to a fire escape or shall not be so placed as to interfere with an opening which is required for legal ventilation. 
(5)	Letters, figures, characters or representations in cutout or irregular form maintained in conjunction with, attached to or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure. 
(6)	Illuminated signs. Illuminated signs produced in quantity (other than signs custom-built for specific locations) shall be constructed in accordance with the Standards for Electric Signs (U.L. 48) of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and bear the label of the Underwriters' Laboratories, (c). 
(7)	Electrical signs. All electrical signs, either temporary or permanent, shall be connected to permanent electrical service installed according to the requirements of the National Electrical Code. All wiring for newly constructed detached signs shall be underground, unless this is determined to be prohibitive by the building official. 
(8)	The following type signs shall have a seal of a registered engineer or registered architect affixed to the plans: attention-attracting devices, detached signs, electrical, illuminated, marquee, portable, poster panel, projecting and roof. In addition, the following standards will apply: 
a.	Projecting signs.
1.	Projecting signs shall not project more than five feet, six inches beyond the face of the building. Projecting signs shall be a minimum of ten feet above the level of any sidewalk from the bottom of the sign. Any projecting sign within 25 feet of a street or alley intersection shall be a minimum of eight feet above the sidewalk from the bottom of the sign. 
2.	All projecting signs shall be rigid mounted, shall be supported by strong steel brackets attached to walls of buildings with through bolts, expansion bolts or other equally secure methods, and shall be braced and held firmly in place with soft iron or steel cables or chains of adequate strength. All such supports shall be attached to walls of buildings with expansion bolts or equivalent method. 
3.	Projecting signs which are permitted to extend above parapet walls may be attached to brackets fastened to roofs by means of through bolts but shall not be attached to any part of the wall above a point of bearing of the roof joists or rafters. 
b.	All roof signs.
1.	All roof signs shall be secured by or bear upon masonry bearing walls, columns, girders or roof joists. No roof sign shall be erected in a manner. which prevents or tends to prevent free passage from one part of the roof to any other part thereof. Spider webs and A-frame structural members shall be prohibited. 
2.	Roof signs located on flat roofs shall allow a minimum clear open space of six feet from the roof to the lowest point at the bottom of the face of the sign and there shall be a minimum space of five feet between adjacent vertical supports. 
c.	Wall signs shall be securely fastened to a masonry wall by means of anchors, bolts, expansion screws or similar connectors. A wall sign which is attached to a wall of wood may be anchored with wood blocks used in connection with screws and nails. 
d.	Under canopy signs of greater than four square feet shall be rigidly mounted and there shall be eight feet, six inches clearance between the base of any rigidly mounted under canopy sign and the sidewalk. There shall be a minimum clearance of seven feet, six inches between the base of any non-rigidly mounted under canopy sign and the sidewalk. 
e.	Detached signs shall be supported with a maximum of two poles, uprights or supports.
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Secs. 36-25-36-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 

Sec. 36-51. - When required. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move or convert any sign in the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a sign permit from the city. Permits shall not be required under the following conditions: 
(1)	Replacing or altering changeable copy on theater marquees, billboards and similar signs. 
(2)	Painting, repairing, cleaning or maintaining of a sign shall not be considered an erection or alteration which requires a permit unless a structural change is made or the alteration and painting is being done due to a change in ownership of the business or premises. 
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Sec. 36-52. - Exemptions. 
    A permit will not be required for the following listed signs. These exemptions, however, shall apply only to the requirement of the permit and shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility for its erection, maintenance and appearance: 
(1)	Construction project signs with a maximum size of 72 square feet.
(2)	Agricultural, residential, commercial and industrial acreage or commercial and industrial structure "for sale" or "for rent" signs. The maximum size shall be 32 square feet. 
(3)	Residential structure "for sale" or "for rent" signs with a maximum size of six square feet. It must be removed upon completion of the project or within ten days after sale or letting of the property. 
(4)	Political signs subject to the following restrictions:
a.	Maximum size six square feet in Districts R-1, R-2 and R-3.
b.	Maximum size 16 square feet in agricultural, commercial and industrial areas.
c.	Shall be not be placed on the public right-of-way and shall be placed outside of the sight triangle at intersections. 
(5)	Traffic or other municipal or informational signs, legal notice, railroad crossing signs, danger, warning and such temporary, emergency or non-advertising signs necessary for traffic control or as may be approved by the city council. 
(6)	Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other metal. 
(7)	Signs inside buildings, inside windows or painted on windows or on glass portions of doors of buildings. 
(8)	Temporary signs for special events for public, charitable, religious or fraternal organizations, subject to the following limitations: 
a.	Maximum size 32 square feet per face. 
b.	One per street frontage.
c.	To be located on property zoned for commercial use.
d.	To be placed no sooner than 30 days prior to the event and removed within five days following the event. 
(9)	Banners on public utility pole brackets placed by the City of Pleasant Hill, Pleasant Hill Chamber of Commerce, the Pleasant Hill Downtown Association or the Pleasant Hill Downtown Community Improvement District. 
(10)	Signs carried by a person.
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Sec. 36-53. - Application; permit fees. 
(a)	Application for permit. Application for a permit shall be made to the city upon a form provided and shall be accompanied by written approval of the property owner, site plans and specifications as may be required. 
(b)	Permit fees. Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder, shall pay a fee to the city based upon the fee schedule used for building permits. 
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Sec. 36-54. - Inspection. 
    As soon as a sign has been erected, the permittee shall notify the building inspector who shall inspect such sign and approve the same if it is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The building inspector may, from time to time as he deems, inspect all signs or other structures regulated by this chapter, for the purpose of ascertaining whether they are secure or whether they are in need of removal or repair. If the sign does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, the building inspector shall notify the applicant in. writing of such noncompliance and give the applicant ten days, or less if the building inspector determines a hazardous situation exists, to comply. 
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Sec. 36-55. - Revocation. 
    All rights and privileges acquired under the provision of this chapter or any amendments thereto are mere licenses revocable at any time. Installation shall be completed within six months after date of issuance of the sign permit. 
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Secs. 36-56-36-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PORTABLE AND TEMPORARY SIGNS 

Sec. 36-81. - Purposes for which allowed. 
    Temporary and portable signs may be permitted for special events, new ownership, grand openings for business or organizational use, and special events including sales. 
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Sec. 36-82. - Permits. 
(a)	Duration. Except as specifically otherwise provided elsewhere in this section, permits for temporary signs shall be valid for 30 days from date of issuance. 
(b)	Renewal. Permits for temporary signs may be renewed a maximum of one time per year for a maximum of 180 days from the original date of issue. 
(c)	Number permitted to be distributed. Except as specifically otherwise provided elsewhere in this article, only one temporary sign permit may be issued at anyone time for any business, industry or shopping center. The total number of days per year which a temporary sign may be displayed at any business, industry or shopping center shall be 60 days. 
(d)	Fee. A permit fee and a refundable deposit as provided in the city fee schedule is required for off-premises temporary signs. 
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Sec. 36-83. - Construction standards. 
    Construction of portable and temporary signs shall meet the same engineering design and materials standards as for permanent signs. All signs shall be adequately secured. 
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Sec. 36-84. - Size and location. 
(a)	Size. Except as specifically otherwise provided elsewhere in this section, size of portable and temporary signs shall not exceed the size of signs permitted for permanent signs of similar permitted construction and location within the same zoning district. 
(b)	Location. Portable and temporary signs shall be erected entirely on private property. 
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Sec. 36-85. - Off-premises temporary signs. 
    Off-premises temporary signs will be allowed in all zones except residential zoning districts. Written approval must be given to the city by the landowner where the sign is to be located and the sign cannot be larger than four feet by eight feet. Off-premises temporary signs must have directions to the business or an arrow pointing the way to their business. 
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Sec. 36-86. - Sales and special events. 
    Sales and special events to permit businesses that would like to advertise an upcoming special event or sale: 
(1)	May be a sign or banner but not to exceed four feet by eight feet.
(2)	May be in place no more than 14 days prior to the event or sale and must be removed the day following the event or sale. 
(3)	Must have written consent from the property owner where the sign or banner is to be placed. 
(Ord. No. 1719, § 1(Att.), 2-11-2013) 
Chapter 38 - SOLID WASTE 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Solid waste management, RSMo 260.200 et seq.; battery disposal, RSMo 260.260 et seq.; scrap tire disposal, RSMo 260.270 et seq.; disposal of plastic containers, RSMo 260.280; hazardous waste management, RSMo 260.350 et seq.; removal of weeds and trash by city, RSMo 71.285; municipal garbage and refuse collection and disposal, RSMo 71.680 et seq.; municipal ordinances for the regulation of garbage disposal authority, RSMo 71.690; littering, RSMo 577.070; illegal disposal of solid waste, RSMo 577.071. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved incinerator means an incinerator which complies with all current regulations of the responsible local, state and federal air pollution control agencies. 
    Bulky rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and/or noncombustible waste materials from dwelling units, commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural establishments which are either too large or too heavy to be safely and conveniently loaded in solid waste transportation vehicles by solid waste collectors, with the equipment available therefor. 
    Collection means removal of solid waste from the designated pickup location to the transportation vehicle. 
    Demolition and/or construction waste means waste materials from the construction or destruction of residential, industrial or commercial structures. 
    Director means the director of the solid waste management program of the city which shall be the public works director, or his appointee. 
    Disposable solid waste container means disposable plastic or paper sacks with a capacity of 20 to 35 gallons specifically designed for storage of solid waste. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a structure, and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or are intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Hazardous waste means any waste or combination of wastes, as determined by the state hazardous waste management commission by rules and regulations which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness, or pose a present or potential threat to the health of humans or other living organisms. 
    Multiple housing facility means a housing facility containing more than one dwelling unit under one roof. 
    Occupant means any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others, shall be in actual possession of any dwelling unit or of any other improved real property, either as owner or as a tenant. 
    Processing means incinerating, composting, baling, shredding, salvaging, compacting and other processes whereby solid waste characteristics are modified or solid waste quantity is reduced. 
    Solid waste means unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid or semisolid state, including but not limited to garbage, ashes, street refuse, rubbish, dead animals, animal and agricultural wastes, yard wastes, discarded appliances, special wastes, industrial wastes, and demolition and construction wastes. In addition: 
(1)	Commercial solid waste means solid waste resulting from the operation of any commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural establishment. 
(2)	Residential solid waste means solid waste resulting from the maintenance and operation of dwelling units. 
    Solid waste container means the receptacle used by any person to store solid waste during the interval between solid waste collections. 
    Solid waste disposal means the process of discarding or getting rid of unwanted material, in particular the final deposition of solid waste by man. 
    Solid waste management means the entire solid waste system of storage, collection, transportation, processing and disposal. 
    Storage means keeping, maintaining or storing of solid waste from the time of its production until the time of its collection. 
    Transportation means the transporting of solid waste from the place of collection or processing to a solid waste processing facility or solid waste disposal area. 
    Yard wastes means grass clippings, leaves, and tree trimmings. 
(Code 1994, § 74-1; Ord. No. 1235, § 1, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-2. - Director's authority regarding rules and regulations. 
    The director shall make, amend, revoke and enforce reasonable rules and regulations governing, but not limited to: 
(1)	Preparation, drainage and wrapping of garbage deposited in solid waste containers.
(2)	Specifications for solid waste containers, including the type, composition, equipment, size and shape thereof. 
(3)	Identification of solid waste containers and the covers thereof, and of equipment thereto appertaining, if any. 
(4)	Weight limitations on the combined weight of solid waste containers and the contents thereof, and weight and size limitations on bundles of solid waste too large for solid waste containers. 
(5)	Storage of solid waste in solid waste containers.
(6)	Sanitation, maintenance and replacement of solid waste containers.
(7)	Schedules of and routes for collection and transportation of solid waste.
(8)	Collection points of solid waste containers.
(9)	Collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste.
(10)	Processing facilities and fees for the use thereof.
(11)	Disposal facilities and fees for the use thereof.
(12)	Records of quantity and type of wastes received at processing and/or disposal facilities.
(13)	Handling of special wastes such as sludges, ashes, agriculture, construction, bulky items, tires, automobile, oils, greases, etc. 
A copy of any and all rules and regulations made and promulgated under the provisions hereof shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 74-2; Ord. No. 1235, § 7, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-3. - Inspections, issuance of notice. 
    In order to ensure compliance with the laws of this state, this chapter and the rules and regulations authorized herein, the director is authorized to inspect all phases of solid waste management within the city. No inspection shall be made in any residential unit unless authorized by the occupant or by law. In all instances where such inspections reveal a violation of this chapter, the rules and regulations authorized herein for the storage, collection, transportation, processing or disposal of solid waste or the laws of the state, the director shall issue a notice for each such violation stating therein the violation found, the time and date and the corrective measure to be taken, together with the time in which such correction shall be made. 
(Code 1994, § 74-3; Ord. No. 1235, § 6.7, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-4. - Appeal from actions of directors. 
    Any person who feels aggrieved by any notice of violation or order issued by the director may, within ten days of the act for which redress is sought, appeal to the circuit court of the county, setting forth a concise statement the act being appealed and the grounds for a reversal. 
(Code 1994, § 74-4; Ord. No. 1235, § 6.10, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-5. - Prohibited practices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container other than his own, without the written consent of the owner of such container and/or, with the intent of avoiding payment of the service charge hereinafter provided for solid waste collection and disposal. 
(2)	Fail to have solid waste collected as provided in this chapter.
(3)	Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection and transportation equipment, or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors shall be those of the city, or those of a solid waste collection agency operating under contract with the city. 
(4)	Burn solid waste unless an approved incinerator is provided, or unless a variance has been obtained from the appropriate air pollution control agency; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply to areas that are zoned agricultural for any burning activity that is not otherwise prohibited by federal, state or local law. 
(5)	Dispose of solid waste at any facility or location which is not approved by the city and the state department of natural resources. 
(6)	Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the city without a permit from the city, or operate under an expired permit, or operate after a permit has been suspended or revoked. 
(7)	Violate any section of this chapter or any other rule or regulation promulgated under the authority of section 38-2 
(Code 1994, § 74-5; Ord. No. 1235, § 8, 9-26-1988; Ord. No. 1235A, §§ 1, 2, 11-28-1988; Ord. No. 1303, §§ 1, 2, 7-27-1992; Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 38-6. - Loose trash, rubbish, construction debris. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow dirt, refuse, loose trash, rubbish or construction debris upon any street or alley within the city limits. 
(Code 1994, § 74-7; Ord. No. 1316, § 1, 4-26-1993) 
Secs. 38-7-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORAGE CONTAINERS 

Sec. 38-31. - Required; maintenance. 
(a)	The occupant or owner of every dwelling unit and of every institutional, commercial or business, industrial or agricultural establishment producing solid waste within the corporate limits of the city shall provide sufficient and adequate containers for the storage of all solid waste except bulky rubbish and demolition and construction waste to serve each such dwelling unit and/or establishment; and to maintain such solid waste containers at all times in good repair. 
(b)	The occupant or owner of every dwelling unit and of every institutional, commercial, industrial, agricultural or business establishment shall place all solid waste to be collected in proper solid waste containers, except as otherwise provided herein, and shall maintain such solid waste containers and the area surrounding them in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. 
(Code 1994, § 74-31; Ord. No. 1235, § 2.2, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-32. - Residential specifications. 
    Residential solid waste shall be stored in containers of not more than 35 gallons nor less than 20 gallons in nominal capacity. Containers shall be leakproof, waterproof and fitted with a flytight lid and shall be properly covered at all times except when depositing waste therein or removing the contents thereof. The containers shall have handles, bails or other suitable lifting devices or features. Containers shall be of a type originally manufactured to be used for residential solid waste, with tapered sides for easy emptying. They shall be lightweight and of sturdy construction. The weight of any individual container and contents shall not exceed 75 pounds. Galvanized metal containers, or rubber, fiberglass or plastic containers which do not become brittle in cold weather may be used. Disposable solid waste containers with suitable frames or containers as approved by the director may also be used for storage of residential solid waste. 
(Code 1994, § 74-32; Ord. No. 1235, § 2.3, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-33. - Commercial specifications. 
    Commercial solid waste shall be stored in solid waste containers approved by the director. The containers shall be waterproof, leakproof and shall be covered at all times except when depositing waste therein or removing the contents thereof, and shall meet all requirements as set forth by section 74-2. 
(Code 1994, § 74-33; Ord. No. 1235, § 2.4, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-34. - Storage site. 
    Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon the residential premises out of sight from the adjoining roadway. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon private property, unless the owner shall have been granted written permission from the city to use public property for such purposes. The storage site shall be well drained, and fully accessible to collection equipment, public health personnel and fire inspection personnel. 
(Code 1994, § 74-34; Ord. No. 1235, § 3.6, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-35. - Containers for yard wastes. 
    Yard wastes shall be stored in containers so constructed and maintained as to prevent the dispersal of wastes placed therein upon the premises served, upon adjacent premises or upon adjacent public rights-of-way. The weight of any individual container and contents shall not exceed 75 pounds. 
(Code 1994, § 74-35; Ord. No. 1235, § 2.5, 9-26-1988) 
Secs. 38-36-38-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION 

Sec. 38-59. - Yard wastes. 
    Yard wastes, as described in section 38-35, shall be placed at the curb for collection. Solid waste containers as required by this chapter for the storage of other residential solid waste shall also be placed at the curb for collection. Any solid waste containers, tree limbs, yard wastes or other solid waste permitted by this chapter to be placed at the curb for collection shall not be so placed until the regularly scheduled collection day. 
(Code 1994, § 74-56; Ord. No. 1235, § 3.2, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-60. - Bulky rubbish. 
    Bulky rubbish shall be collected at least once annually. The director shall establish the procedure for collecting bulky rubbish. 
(Code 1994, § 74-57; Ord. No. 1235, § 3.3, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-61. - Frequency of collection. 
    The following collection frequencies shall apply to collections of solid waste within the city: All residential solid waste, other than bulky rubbish, shall be collected at least once weekly. At least 96 hours shall intervene between collections. All commercial solid waste shall be collected at least once weekly, and shall be collected as such lesser intervals as may be fixed by the director or requested by the commercial establishment upon a determination that such lesser intervals are necessary for the preservation of the health and/or safety of the public. 
(Code 1994, § 74-58; Ord. No. 1235, § 3.5, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-62. - Collectors' authority. 
    Solid waste collectors, employed by a solid waste collection agency operating under contract within the city, are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this article or contract. Solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential buildings for the purpose of collecting residential solid waste. Commercial solid waste may be removed from within commercial establishments upon written request of the owner and approval by the director. 
(Code 1994, § 74-59; Ord. No. 1235, § 3.4, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-63. - Collectors' duties. 
    Solid waste collectors shall be responsible for the collection of solid waste from the designated pickup location to the transportation vehicle, provided the solid waste was stored in compliance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. Any spillage or blowing litter caused by, or resulting from the duties of the solid waste collector shall be collected and placed in the transportation vehicle by the solid waste collector. 
(Code 1994, § 74-60; Ord. No. 1235, § 3.7, 9-26-1988) 
Secs. 38-64-38-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRANSPORTATION 

Sec. 38-85. - Vehicles. 
    All transportation vehicles shall be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition, and shall be so constructed, maintained and operated as to prevent spillage of solid waste therefrom. All vehicles to be used for transportation of solid waste shall be constructed with watertight bodies and with covers which shall be an integral part of the vehicle or shall be a separate cover of suitable material with fasteners designed to secure all sides of the cover to the vehicle and shall be secured whenever the vehicle is transporting solid waste, or the entire bodies shall be enclosed, with only loading hoppers exposed. No solid waste shall be transported in the loading hoppers. 
(Code 1994, § 74-101; Ord. No. 1235, § 4.1, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-86. - Material from grading or excavation activities. 
    Permits shall not be required for the removal, hauling or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities; however, all such material shall be transported in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the material being transported shall spill upon the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1994, § 74-102; Ord. No. 1235, § 4.2, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-87. - Demolition and construction wastes. 
    Demolition and construction wastes shall be transported to a disposal area as provided in section 38-119. A permit shall not be required for the hauling of demolition and construction waste; however, all such material shall be transported in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles, so constructed and maintained that none of the material being transported shall spill upon the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1994, § 74-103; Ord. No. 1235, § 4.3, 9-26-1988) 
Secs. 38-88-38-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISPOSAL 

Sec. 38-117. - By collector or resident. 
    All solid waste must be disposed of by a licensed solid waste collector which shall be selected by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 74-126; Ord. No. 1235, § 3.1, 9-26-1988; Ord. No. 1684, § 1, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 1688, § 1, 5-24-2010) 
Sec. 38-118. - Approved facility or area required. 
    Solid wastes shall be deposited at a processing facility or disposal area approved by the city and complying with all requirements of the Missouri Solid Waste Management Law, RSMo 260.200-260.245, and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder. The city may designate the processing or disposal facility to be utilized by persons operating under article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 74-127; Ord. No. 1235, § 5.1, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-119. - Recycling center fees. 
    The city maintains a recycling center for the disposal of recyclable materials as provided by applicable regulations from time to time. Fees for recycling material deposits shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
Sec. 38-120. - Hazardous wastes. 
    Hazardous wastes that will require special handling shall be disposed of only in a manner authorized by state regulations. 
(Code 1994, § 74-128; Ord. No. 1235, § 5.2, 9-26-1988) 
Chapter 40 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State highway system, RSMo 227.010; establishment and vacation of roads, public roads generally, RSMo 228.010 et seq.; private roads, RSMo 228.342 et seq.; construction and regulation of public roads, RSMo 229.010 et seq.; permits to move buildings across roads, RSMo 229.230 et seq.; railroad, road, and street crossings, RSMo 229.380 et seq.; removal of plants from highways and roadways prohibited, RSMo 229.475 et seq.; maintenance of public roads, RSMo 231.010 et seq.; procedure for vacation of city streets, RSMo 71.240; streets in subdivisions outside corporate limits of city, RSMo 71.270; annual municipal appropriations for construction and repair of public roads, RSMo 71.340; sidewalk wheelchair ramps, RSMo 71.365; authority for ordinances requiring conspicuous posting of street addresses for fire protection and emergency services purposes, RSMo 67.318. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Skateboards, roller skates, etc. 
    All use of skateboards, roller skates and roller blades shall be prohibited upon the following sidewalks and public roadways: First Street from Commercial to Wyoming, Wyoming from Front to Paul, Paul from Wyoming to Lake, Depot Drive from Wyoming to Commercial, Lake Street from Cedar to Commercial, Cedar Street from Lake to Boardman, Boardman from Cedar to Paul, Commercial from First to Locust, and Locust from Lake to Commercial. 
(Code 1994, § 78-1; Ord. No. 1304, 7-27-1992) 
Sec. 40-2. - Maintenance of abutting rights-of-way and easements. 
    Each property owner in the city shall keep the sidewalks, tree wells in sidewalks, gutters and public rest areas together with any real property owned, occupied, possessed or managed by him, or under his supervision and control, clean and clear of mud, filth, debris, trash, litter and other substances, and weeds and grass and shall also keep any grass median strip between the sidewalk and street in front of or adjacent to any such property mowed and free from filth, debris, trash, litter and weeds. Said property owner or occupant shall be responsible for mowing of the right-of-way as required with the following exceptions: 
(1)	Where construction of the existing roadway has created a vertical rock exposure; or
(2)	Where the slope of the embankment (cut or fill) exceeds a 11/2 to 1 slope limit.
Secs. 40-3-40-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 40-22. - Bicycles on certain sidewalks prohibited. 
    All operation of bicycles upon the public sidewalks of the following described areas shall be prohibited: First Street from Commercial to Wyoming, Wyoming from Front to Paul, Paul from Wyoming to Lake, Depot Drive from Wyoming to Commercial, Lake Street from Cedar to Commercial, Cedar Street from Lake to Boardman, Boardman from Cedar to Paul, Commercial from First to Locust, and Locust from Lake to Commercial. 
(Code 1994, § 78-26; Ord. No. 1304, 7-27-1992) 
Sec. 40-23. - Snow removal. 
    Any owner or occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of land which fronts on any street on which a sidewalk is laid in this city who shall fail or neglect to clear the sidewalk in front of or along his property of snow when the same shall be a depth of one inch or more after 10:00 a.m., if the snow has fallen or drifted on the walk the previous night, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1994, § 78-27; Ord. No. 441, § 1, 2-4-1918) 
Sec. 40-24. - Debris removal. 
    All property owners shall also keep the sidewalks in front of and adjacent to any such real property free and clear of any accumulation of snow and ice which presents a hazard to pedestrians. If any such building abuts directly upon a public street, that portion of such public street so abutting the building shall be kept clean and clear of filth, dirt, debris, trash, litter and other substances. 
Sec. 40-25. - Personal responsibility of trustee or president of associations. 
    Where any such lot, tract or parcel or land is owned or controlled by any association, the trustee, president or any person in charge of the same shall be held personally responsible for any fine or penalty assessed under this article, or the city may recover the fine in a suit against the association or corporation in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1994, § 78-28; Ord. No. 441, § 2, 2-4-1918) 
Secs. 40-26-40-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CURBS AND GUTTERS 

Sec. 40-54. - Required for new residential and commercial construction. 
    All new residential and commercial construction within the city shall include street curbing and gutter constructed according to city specifications. 
(Code 1994, § 14-156; Ord. No. 1176, § 1, 1-12-1987) 
Sec. 40-55. - Plans for required work to accompany permit application. 
    Plans for curb and gutter construction shall be submitted along with the application for building permit. 
(Code 1994, § 14-157; Ord. No. 1176, § 2, 1-12-1987) 
Sec. 40-56. - Request for exemption from article's requirements. 
    Any applicant who feels that he should be exempted from the requirement of sections 40-54 and 40-55 can make a written request for an exemption to the public works director who, after receiving such request, shall make a written decision within seven days of the request. 
(Code 1994, § 14-158; Ord. No. 1176, § 3, 1-12-1987) 
Sec. 40-57. - Appeal of public works director's decision regarding exemption request. 
    Any applicant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the public works director shall have the right to appeal his decision to the city council by filing a written request for an appeal with the city clerk within seven days of the date of the public works director's decision. 
(Code 1994, § 14-159; Ord. No. 1176, § 4, 1-12-1987) 
State law reference- Authority for special assessments for curbs and gutters, RSMo 88.812. 
Secs. 40-58-40-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 40-88. - Permit required; fees. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation through, under, across, along, in or upon any public street, alley, highway, or thoroughfare within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of laying any water, gas, sewer, tile or conduit pipe without first securing from the city clerk a permit. The city clerk shall state on the permit the name and address of the person requesting such permit and the exact location of the proposed cut or excavation, and the date the excavation is to be made. The permit shall be signed by the party responsible and/or the party requesting the permit. 
(b)	Before any permit for any such excavation shall be issued the person shall pay a permit fee in the amount as provided in the city fee schedule. The permit fee shall be paid for every excavation made by any person and in no event shall be transferrable from one excavation to another. There shall be no refund of the fee, and the amount shall be deposited to the credit of the road fund. Upon receipt of the fee, the public works inspector shall give to the party making application for the permit the original receipt and keep on file a duplicate. 
(Code 1994, § 78-51; Ord. No. 930, 6-17-1965) 
Sec. 40-89. - Barricades, lights. 
    At all times when any excavation is under construction and until completion thereof, the person responsible for such excavation shall at all times maintain suitable barricades, traffic warning signs and night lights or warning devices for the protection of all pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1994, § 78-52; Ord. No. 930, 6-17-1965) 
Sec. 40-90. - Inspections. 
    No excavation shall be filled until water, gas or sewer lines have been inspected and approved by the public works inspector. Upon inspection and approval of any connection, the public works inspector shall make written certification of approval in triplicate that the water, gas or sewer line has been satisfactorily completed. The certification of approval shall state the name and address of the person responsible for the connection and its location and the date of its approval. One copy of the certification of approval shall be filed with the city clerk, one copy shall be furnished to the person responsible for the connection and the public works inspector shall keep one copy for his files. Should the public works inspector determine that any connection is faulty or in violation of the city building code or any ordinance, he shall notify the person responsible for the connection, allowing three days to comply with the requirements. Failure on the part of any person to comply with the requirements of the public works inspector shall result in either prosecution or the city itself may correct the defects at the cost and expense of the person or party responsible. If the public works inspector approves the connection, he shall then authorize the street department to fill the excavation with crushed-run rock and replace the top surface to its original state with like material. 
(Code 1994, § 78-53; Ord. No. 930, 6-17-1965) 
Secs. 40-91-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EXHIBITIONS AND PARADES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 40-109-40-124. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREET USE PERMIT 

Sec. 40-125. - Required; fees. 
    No street fair, exhibition, festival, concert, parade, show or public demonstration in the nature of a parade, shall be given or held in or upon any street, highway, parkway or other public area unless a permit shall have first been obtained from the city clerk. No permit shall be issued without the prior approval of the city administrator. Applications for permits under this section shall be accompanied by a permit fee and police escort fees in the amounts provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1994, § 78-86; Ord. No. 1298, § 1, 3-5-1992) 
Sec. 40-126. - Exemptions from requirement. 
    Section 40-125 shall not apply to funeral processions. In these cases the police department shall be notified in advance to ensure public safety and police escort fees in the amount established by the city council, shall apply. 
(Code 1994, § 78-87; Ord. No. 1298, § 2, 3-5-1992) 
Sec. 40-127. - Application. 
(a)	A person seeking issuance of a permit as required by this division shall file an application with the city clerk on forms provided by such officer not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the fair, exhibition, show or parade. The application shall set forth the following information: 
(1)	The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such activity.
(2)	The nature of the activity to be conducted.
(3)	If the parade or exhibition is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
(4)	The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade or exhibition chairperson or managing officer and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
(5)	The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point, if a parade; if a fair or exhibition, the location of the place the fair or exhibition is to be held. 
(6)	The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade, fair or exhibition; the type of animals and description of the vehicles and equipment to be used. 
(7)	The hours when such parade or exhibition will start and terminate.
(8)	A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the streets proposed to be traversed; if a fair or exhibition, the proposed area to be occupied thereby. 
(9)	Location by street of any assembly areas for such parades.
(10)	The time when units of the parade will begin to assemble at any assembly area.
(11)	The time at which the participants in the exhibition will begin to assemble at any assembly area. 
(12)	If the parade or exhibition is designed to be held by, on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall show a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade or exhibition authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(13)	Any further information which the city clerk shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(b)	With the approval of the city administrator, the city clerk, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider an application hereunder which is filed less than 30 days before the date such event is proposed to be held. 
(Code 1994, § 78-88; Ord. No. 1298, § 3, 3-5-1992) 
Sec. 40-128. - Standards for issuance. 
    The city clerk shall issue a permit as provided for under this division when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)	The conduct of the parade, fair or exhibition will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route or contiguous to the location of the fair or exhibition. 
(2)	The conduct of the parade, fair or exhibition will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement or the area of holding the fair or exhibition and the areas contiguous thereto to prevent normal police protection of the city. 
(3)	The conduct of such parade or exhibition will not require the conversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that occupied by the proposed parade, fair or exhibition. 
(4)	The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with the proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5)	Conduct of such parade, fair or exhibition will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6)	The conduct of a parade, fair or exhibition is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a disturbance. 
(7)	The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(8)	The parade, fair or exhibition is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising a product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. The event must be of some general interest and benefit to the community. 
(9)	Temporary electrical wiring for the event, if required, is done in accordance with the Uniform Electrical Code and is acceptable to the codes enforcement officer. Temporary water hookups are to be likewise acceptable to the codes enforcement officer as well as the city water department. 
(10)	Event sponsors agree to secure liability insurance and to provide a certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured. The amount of such insurance shall be $1,000,000.00 combined single limit unless a lower amount is expressly approved by the city. 
(11)	Tents and other temporary structures meet with the approval of the codes enforcement officer. Barricades and signs are to be erected as needed by the event sponsor. No spikes, nails or other devices may be driven into streets or sidewalks. 
(12)	Adequate portable restroom facilities shall be provided for public use.
(13)	The event sponsor is responsible for costs associated with the event, including costs for electricity, water, temporary restrooms, barricades, insurance and other expenses. The sponsor shall also be liable to reimburse the city for any services it provides including costs associated with city personnel. If, however, no profit is to be made or fees charged to participants, or if the event is in the view of the city of direct benefit to the community, the city may consider providing some service without requiring reimbursement. 
(Code 1994, § 78-89; Ord. No. 1298, § 4, 3-5-1992) 
Sec. 40-129. - Action on application; notice thereof. 
    The city shall act upon the application for a parade, fair or exhibition permit within three days after filing thereof. The applicant shall be notified of the decision within five days after filing thereof. If the application is disapproved, notice of such shall be mailed to the applicant within five days after filing of the application, stating the reasons for denial. 
(Code 1994, § 78-90; Ord. No. 1298, § 5, 3-5-1992) 
Sec. 40-130. - Appeal procedure. 
    Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade, fair or exhibition permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within five days after notice of denial is given by filing a written appeal with the city clerk for transmittal to the city council. The council shall act upon any appeal within 30 days after its receipt. 
(Code 1994, § 78-91; Ord. No. 1298, § 6, 3-5-1992) 
Sec. 40-131. - Alternative permit. 
    Subject to the approval of the city administrator, the city clerk, in denying an application for a parade, fair or exhibition permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of a parade or exhibition on a date, at a time, on or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall within five days after notice of the action of the city clerk file a written notice of acceptance with the clerk's office. An alternate parade, fair or exhibition permit shall conform to the requirements and shall have the same effect as any other parade, fair or exhibition permit issued under this division. 
(Code 1994, § 78-92; Ord. No. 1298, § 7, 3-5-1992) 
Sec. 40-132. - Revocation; stopping parade, etc. 
    The city administrator shall have the authority to revoke a parade, fair or exhibition permit issued under this division upon application of the same standards for issuance as set forth in this division at any time prior to the commencement of the parade, fair or exhibition. He shall further have the authority to stop, disperse or otherwise halt the conduct of any parade, fair or exhibition which is at the time presenting a serious threat to the health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 78-93; Ord. No. 1298, § 8, 3-5-1992) 
Sec. 40-133 - Neighborhood activity or block party street closure request. 
(a)	Upon application to the city clerk and upon approval by the city administrator or his designee, an applicant may apply for a neighborhood block party permit which allows an applicant to barricade a specified portion of a street, using city-approved barricades, denying access to through traffic (except emergency vehicles and residents who reside within the barricaded area) to conduct a neighborhood block party. Applicant is responsible for requesting barricades from the department of public works during regular business hours by contacting city hall and must return any barricades used on the next business day after the closure. Culs-de-sac or dead-end streets are eligible for blockade and through streets shall be evaluated on a case by case basis using the same standards for issuance as set forth in section 40-128. Application shall be received no less than 14 days before the event. Failure to submit a timely application may be grounds for denial of a permit at the discretion of the city administrator or his designee. No fee shall be charged for a neighborhood block party permit. 
(b)	The applicant must be either a neighborhood resident or the neighborhood homes association group. The application shall be made on a form provided by the city clerk at city hall and contact information for the application must list one person as the responsible party for the event and all contact information of that individual shall be supplied and available to the police department at time of application. The applicant must provide evidence on the application form that all of the residents who live in the blocked off area have been notified in writing of the proposed neighborhood block party and have been invited or are in agreement with the block party. 
(c)	Neighborhood block parties shall be conducted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., or sunset, whichever is earlier, except for an event scheduled on July 4, which will be allowed under the same time restrictions as set forth in section 20-47 
(d)	The applicant is responsible for immediate post-event cleanup on the streets, sidewalks and public ways. Failure to do so shall be considered a violation of this section and shall be subject to punishment as set forth in section 1-11 
(Ord. No. 1698, 11-8-2010) 
Chapter 42 - TAXATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Taxation and revenue generally, RSMo 135.010 et seq.; municipal taxing authority generally, RSMo 71.610 et seq.; taxation in special charter cities, RSMo 94.340 et seq.; authority to impose business licenses taxes as granted by municipal charters, RSMo 71.610; tax credit records, RSMo 610.225; assessment and levy of property taxes, RSMo 137.010 et seq.; payment and collection of current taxes, RSMo 139.031 et seq.; collection of delinquent taxes generally, RSMo 140.010 et seq.; sales and use taxes, RSMo 144.010 et seq.; merchant, manufacturer, itinerant vendor, and peddler licenses and taxes, RSMo 150.010 et seq.; special assessments for public works, RSMo 88.010 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CONSTRUCTION EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 42-19. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)	This article is for the purpose of raising revenue, the proceeds of which shall be used for streets and related improvements throughout the city, including but not limited to the design, construction, reconstruction, repair and maintenance of streets, roads and bridges and related improvements in the city and the acquisition of all necessary rights-of-way therefor, which tax is to be imposed on the basis of the additional vehicle trips generated by any development activity during the afternoon time period (p.m. peak hour) when traffic volume on the adjacent streets is highest. 
(b)	It is the intent of this article to establish an administrative review and appeal procedure to ensure that the excise tax is assessed and collected in accordance with this article and all applicable laws. 
(c)	It is the intent of this article to authorize the creation of administrative guidelines to further carry out the purposes and intent of this article. 
(d)	It is the intent of this article to impose an excise tax surcharge, for the purpose of raising revenue, upon all building contractors for new development that requires a building permit and results in additional vehicle trips. It is not the intent of the city to impose a fee or other exaction pursuant to the general police powers of the city or to regulate construction, growth, or development within the city. 
(e)	It is the intent that the excise tax imposed upon building contractors through this article is a surcharge that is in addition to the annual business excise tax paid by building contractors as provided in this article. 
(Code 1994, § 82-102; Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 3-11-2002) 
Sec. 42-20. - Authority. 
    In the creation of the excise tax, the city is exercising its authority including, but not limited to, the authority granted in its Charter, under RSMo 94.360, and under any other state law. 
(Code 1994, § 82-103; Ord. No. 1513, § 3, 3-11-2002) 
Sec. 42-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Area of building means the total floor area of a building measured by square feet. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
    Building contractor means a person that builds a building. 
    Building permit means the permit required for new construction and additions pursuant to this Code. 
    Developer means a person who engages in development. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved land, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations. 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms constituting all or part of a building and that are arranged, designed, or used exclusively as a single housekeeping unit for one family, and that may include cooking, living, sanitation, and sleeping facilities. 
    Excise tax means the tax imposed upon a building contractor pursuant to this article. 
    Excise tax administrator means the director of finance or his designee. 
    Nonresidential means created or used for any purpose other than residential uses or purposes. 
    p.m. peak hour means the hour between 4:00 and 6:00 p.m. during the weekdays, Monday through and including Friday, at which the average traffic volume is highest. 
    Public body means agencies of the federal or state government, or political subdivisions of the state. 
    Residential means primarily created or used for a dwelling for one or more persons. 
    School district means a public school district of the state. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice of building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner for either residential or nonresidential purposes. 
    Vehicle trip means a single or one-direction vehicle movement with either the origin or the destination (exiting or entering) at the subject building. For trip generation purposes, the total trip ends for a building over a given period of time are the total of all trips entering plus all the trips exiting a site during a designated time period. 
(Code 1994, § 82-104; Ord. No. 1513, § 4, 3-11-2002) 
Sec. 42-22. - Applicability. 
(a)	This article shall be applicable to development requiring a building permit and resulting in additional vehicle trips. Additional vehicle trips shall be calculated during the afternoon time period (p.m. peak hour) when traffic volume on adjacent streets is highest. As used in this section, additional vehicle trips shall mean vehicle trips that add to the total traffic volume on the street network as a result of the new development. 
(b)	Credits. Any credit granted under this article shall reduce the total excise tax owed by a building contractor. 
(1)	Upon submission of a proper application, a building contractor shall be granted a full credit in the amount of the excise tax imposed pursuant to this article by the excise tax administrator for: 
a.	Development by, or by a building contractor on behalf of, a public body for its governmental use that requires a building permit and results in additional vehicle trips; 
b.	Development by, or by a building contractor on behalf of, a school district of the state that requires a building permit and results in additional vehicle trips; 
c.	Rebuilding of an involuntarily damaged or destroyed building, provided that such rebuilding does not result in additional vehicle trips; 
d.	Development of a structure if:
1.	The structure, its contents and the owner of the structure are not subject to any federal, state or local taxes, including federal, state and local sales, income, personal property, real property, use, earnings, excise taxes; 
2.	The structure requires a building permit; and
3.	The structure results in additional vehicle trips.
The burden of proof shall be on the building contractor claiming this credit to demonstrate to the excise tax administrator, by clear and convincing evidence, that the structure, its contents and the owner of the structure are exempt from all federal, state and local taxes as described in this subsection; 
e.	Utilization of a currently underutilized existing building. As used in this subsection, the term "underutilized" means not fully occupied or being used to full capacity; 
f.	Change of existing uses within an existing building.
(2)	Upon submission of a proper application for a credit, a building contractor shall be granted a partial credit from the excise tax imposed pursuant to this article by the excise tax administrator for redevelopment of property; provided that a complete application for a building permit to construct a building to replace the existing building is filed within six months following demolition of the existing building, or within a longer period of time as approved by the excise tax administrator or the city administrator. As used in this subsection, the term "redevelopment" means the demolition of one or more buildings and the subsequent construction of one or more new buildings on the property. The credit shall be granted only for the number of trips that were generated by the previous building during the p.m. peak hour time period. 
(c)	In the event that the building is transferred to a person that would not be eligible for a credit hereunder, within a period of one year from the date of the issuance of the building permit, the transferee shall be required to pay the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1994, § 82-105; Ord. No. 1513, § 5, 3-11-2002) 
Sec. 42-23. - Assessment and collection of the excise tax. 
(a)	Upon submission of a building permit application, the excise tax administrator shall determine the applicability of this article to the development for which the building permit is submitted. If this article: 
(1)	Is not applicable, the excise tax administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of its inapplicability, and the city shall process the building permit application in accordance with all applicable city ordinances and regulations. 
(2)	Is applicable, the excise tax administrator shall calculate and assess the excise tax in accordance with this article. The applicable excise tax shall be calculated pursuant to the formula provided in this article. 
Assessment shall be completed within 15 days of submission of a building permit, unless the applicant is notified otherwise in writing by the excise tax administrator. 
(b)	The excise tax, subject to subsection (e) of this section, shall be paid to the excise tax administrator prior to issuance of a building permit by the building official; provided the excise tax administrator shall allow the applicant to delay the payment of the excise tax for nonresidential uses until prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, if the applicant submits a written request to do so to the excise tax administrator. In such instance, but subject to subsection (e) of this section, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the building official until the excise tax has been paid. 
(c)	The imposition of the excise tax, pursuant to this article, does not alter, negate, supersede or otherwise affect any of the requirements of the city, including the city zoning and subdivision regulations, and county, state and federal legislation or regulations that may be applicable to a development that may impose street network improvements. 
(d)	The funds collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited in the excise tax fund of the city and separately accounted for and used for the purposes specified in section 42-19(a). 
(e)	The building official shall have the authority, upon written request of the applicant, to delay collection of the excise tax for those structures that are shell buildings that are constructed for the purpose of speculative office development, until tenant finish building permits are issued for tenant occupancy. 
(f)	It shall be unlawful to occupy a building subject to the provisions of this article, unless the excise tax for that building has been paid. 
(Code 1994, § 82-106; Ord. No. 1513, § 6, 3-11-2002) 
Sec. 42-24. - Calculation of the excise tax. 
    The city shall calculate the excise tax as follows: 
(1)	Tax imposed. The city council shall by resolution establish the excise tax imposed upon a building contractor that shall be calculated by multiplying the trip generation rate by the excise tax rate. 
(2)	Trip generation rate. The trip generation rate is a measurement of the number of trips to and from a building for which a building permit application is submitted. 
a.	The excise tax administrator shall determine the trip generation rate for residential property by multiplying the number of dwelling units by the trip generation rate specified for the specific type of land use category. 
b.	The excise tax administrator shall determine the trip generation rate for nonresidential property by dividing the total floor area of the building, measured in square feet, by 1,000, and then multiplying that number by the trip generation rate specified for the specific type of land use category. 
(3)	Excise tax rate. The excise tax rate is a measurement of the rate of tax to be paid by building contractors according to land use classifications. 
(Code 1994, § 82-107; Ord. No. 1513, § 7, 3-11-2002) 
Sec. 42-25. - Administration of the article. 
(a)	The excise tax administrator shall perform all duties imposed by this article unless otherwise provided. 
(b)	The city administrator shall have the authority to create administrative guidelines that are necessary to effectuate and carry out the intent and purposes of this article. No administrative guidelines shall take effect until adopted by resolution by the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 82-108; Ord. No. 1513, § 8, 3-11-2002) 
Sec. 42-26. - Appeals. 
(a)	Appeal to the city administrator. 
(1)	A building contractor or developer, hereinafter "appellant," may appeal the assessment of an excise tax to the city administrator by filing a notice of appeal with the city administrator within 30 days following the assessment of the excise tax by the excise tax administrator. If an appellant fails to appeal the assessment of the excise tax within 30 days as set forth in this subsection, the assessment of the excise tax shall be final and no appeal shall be heard. If the appellant pays the excise tax without protest, the appellant waives the right to appeal the assessment of the excise tax. 
(2)	If the excise tax is due and payable and an appellant desires to process a building permit application or any certificate of occupancy during the appeal process, the building contractor is required to pay the excise tax under protest. If the excise tax is paid under protest by the building contractor, an appeal from a final decision of the excise tax administrator shall not delay processing of the building permit and shall not delay any other permit, license or approval issued by the city. 
(3)	An appellant may appeal to the city administrator the following decisions:
a.	The land use classification of the development;
b.	The number of trips generated by the proposed development;
c.	Any credit determination pursuant to section 42-22(b). 
(4)	Within ten days of receipt of the notice of appeal, or by such date as shall be agreed upon in writing between the appellant and the city, the appellant shall submit to the city administrator copies of all studies, calculations and other documentation appropriate to the determination of the excise tax. If a specified basis for the appeal is to challenge the excise tax administrator's determination of the number of trips generated by the proposed development, the appellant may be required to submit to the city administrator a traffic study prepared by a certified traffic engineer or traffic engineering firm, paid for by the appellant, which sets forth the appellant's proposed trip generation calculations for the development. If the basis for the appeal is a credit determination pursuant to section 42-22(b), the appellant must submit to the city administrator proof that it is eligible for a credit and the extent of the credit. 
(5)	The notice of appeal filed with the city administrator shall specify the grounds for the review. The city administrator shall consider the appeal. The appellant maintains the burden of proof to demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that: 
a.	The land use classification of the development is incorrect;
b.	The number of trips generated by the development, as calculated by the excise tax administrator, does not reflect the actual number of trips created by the development; or 
c.	The credit determination under section 42-22(b) is incorrect. 
(6)	Within 30 days after filing of the notice of appeal, the city administrator shall render a final decision in writing to the appellant regarding assessment, calculation and collection of the excise tax. 
(b)	Appeal to the city council. 
(1)	An appeal under this subsection may be heard only if the appellant has received a final decision from the city administrator pursuant to subsection (a)(6) of this section. 
(2)	If the excise tax is due and payable under the terms of section 42-23, and an appellant desires to process a building permit application or any certificate of occupancy after appeal is taken from the final decision of the city administrator, the building contractor is required to pay the excise tax under protest. If the excise tax is paid under protest by the building contractor, an appeal from a final decision of the city administrator shall not delay processing of the building permit and shall not delay any other permit, license or approval issued by the city. 
(3)	An appellant may appeal the final decision of the city administrator by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within 15 days following issuance of the final written decision of the city administrator as specified in subsection (a)(6) of this section. If an appellant fails to appeal the final decision of the city administrator within 15 days as set forth in this subsection, the assessment of the excise tax shall be final and no appeal shall be heard. 
(4)	An appellant may appeal the following decisions of the city administrator to the city council: 
a.	The land use classification of the development;
b.	The number of trips generated by the proposed development; or
c.	Any credit determination pursuant to section 42-22(b). 
(5)	Within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal, or by such date as shall be agreed upon in writing between the appellant and the city, the appellant shall submit to the city council copies of all studies, calculations and other documentation appropriate to the determination of the excise tax. If a specified basis for the appeal is to challenge the city administrator's determination of the number of trips generated by the proposed development, the appellant may be required to submit to the city council a traffic study prepared by a certified traffic engineer or traffic engineering firm, paid for by the appellant, which sets forth the appellant's proposed trip generation calculations for the development. If the basis for the appeal is a credit determination pursuant to section 42-22(b), the appellant must submit to the city council proof that it is eligible for a credit and the extent of the credit. 
(6)	The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for the appeal, and no argument shall be heard by the city council that is not set forth in the notice of appeal. The notice of appeal shall be forwarded to the city council along with a recommendation from city staff and the city council shall conduct a hearing on the appeal. The appellant shall receive notice of the hearing by certified mail at least 15 days prior to the hearing. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that: 
a.	The land use classification of the development is incorrect;
b.	The number of trips generated by the development, as calculated by the excise tax administrator, does not reflect the actual number of trips created by the development; or 
c.	The credit determination under section 42-22(b) is incorrect. 
(7)	Within 30 days after the city council's final decision, the party that submitted the notice of appeal shall receive written notice of the decision. 
(c)	Calculation of days. The number of days specified in this section shall include weekend days and holidays. The last day of the period shall be included in the computation, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, and if it is, the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday. A half-holiday shall be considered as other days and not as a holiday. The term "legal holiday" includes any day designated as a holiday by the Congress of the United States, Missouri Legislature or the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 82-109; Ord. No. 1513, § 9, 3-11-2002) 
Sec. 42-27. - Annual review. 
(a)	The city administrator, annually, in conjunction with the city's annual budget process, shall prepare a report on the subject of the excise tax, which report shall include: 
(1)	Recommendations on amendments, if appropriate, to this article;
(2)	Proposed changes to the excise tax calculation methodology, including the trip generation estimates and the land use categories, if appropriate; 
(3)	Analysis of costs and revenues resulting from the excise tax imposed pursuant to this article; 
(4)	The status of the implementation and administration of this article;
(5)	A summary of the appeals taken from the imposition of the excise tax imposed pursuant to this article. 
(b)	The city administrator, in preparing the annual report, shall, at a minimum, obtain and review the following information: 
(1)	A summary of the revenue collected through the excise tax and disbursed during the preceding year; 
(2)	A summary of the applications for building permits subject to the excise tax approved during the preceding year; and 
(3)	A summary of all street projects funded with excise tax proceeds and initiated, advanced or completed during the preceding year. 
(c)	The city administrator shall present the annual report to the city council.
(d)	Based on the annual report, the recommendations of the city administrator, and other factors as the council deems relevant and appropriate, the council may amend this article. 
(Code 1994, § 82-110; Ord. No. 1513, § 10, 3-11-2002) 
Secs. 42-28-42-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALES TAXES 

Sec. 42-58. - Imposed. 
    A one cent sales tax as provided for in RSMo 94.700-94.755 is imposed on the sale at retail of all tangible personal property or taxable services at retail within the city limits; provided such property and services are subject to taxation by the state under the provisions of RSMo 144.010-144.526. 
(Code 1994, § 82-26; Ord. No. 1200, § 2, 2-9-1987) 
Sec. 42-59. - Street improvements. 
(a)	Pursuant to the authority granted by and subject to the provisions of RSMo 94.500-94.550, a tax for city street improvement purposes is hereby imposed upon all sellers for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling tangible personal property or rendering taxable services at retail to the extent and in the manner provided in RSMo 144.010-144.525, and the rules and regulations of the director of revenue issued pursuant thereto. The rate of the tax shall be one-half cent on the receipts from the sale at retail of all tangible personal property or taxable services at retail within the city, if such property and taxable services are subject to taxation by the state under the provisions of RSMo 144.010-144.526. The tax shall be collected pursuant to the provisions of RSMo 94.500-94.550. 
(b)	The proceeds derived from the sales tax imposed under this section shall be used solely for the resurfacing or rebuilding of city streets and repair of city bridges. 
(Code 1994, § 82-27; Ord. No. 1045, §§ 1, 4, 7-12-1977) 
Sec. 42-60. - Capital improvements. 
    A city sales tax for capital improvements at the rate of one-half of one percent on the receipts from all retail sales within the city is hereby imposed upon all sellers within the city for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling tangible personal property or rendering taxable services at retail to the extent and in the manner provided by RSMo 144.010 to 144.525, inclusive, and the rules and regulations of the director of revenue of the state issued pursuant thereto. Pursuant to RSMo 144.032, such sales tax shall also be imposed on all sales of metered water services, electricity, electrical current and natural, artificial and propane gas, wood, coal and home heating oil for domestic use only. Such tax shall not be effective until there has been compliance with the terms and provisions of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 82-28; Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 6-12-1995) 
Sec. 42-61. - Stormwater control. 
    A city sales tax to provide funding for stormwater control and local parks, at the rate of one-half of one percent on the receipts from all retail within the city (the "sales tax"), is hereby imposed upon all sellers within the city for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling tangible personal property or rendering taxable services at retail to the extent and in the manner provided by RSMo 144.010 to 144.525, inclusive, and the rules and regulations of the director of revenue of the state issued pursuant thereto. Pursuant to RSMo 144.032, such sales tax shall also be imposed on all sales of metered water services, electricity, electrical current and natural, artificial and propane gas, wood, coal and home heating oil for domestic use only. 
(Ord. No. 1566, 1-10-2005; Ord. No. 1593, 2-13-2006) 
Chapter 44 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Telephone and telegraph companies, RSMo 392.245; limitations on political subdivisions in managing public right-of-way, RSMo 67.1842; video service providers, RSMo 67.2681; enforcement and collection of municipal taxes imposed on telecommunications companies, RSMo 71.675. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 44-1-44-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNICATIONS COMMITTEE 

Sec. 44-19. - Composition. 
    The communications committee shall be composed with such members, for such terms, and upon such qualifications and conditions, as may be established from time to time by the city council. 
Sec. 44-20. - Purposes. 
    CATV programming shall be as follows: 
(1)	Programming. The communications committee shall, under the direction of the mayor and city council, be responsible for planning, producing and acquiring programs for distribution. The committee shall offer advice in planning the acquisition of CATV equipment, and operation of various equipment. 
(2)	Goals and objectives. 
a.	To disseminate information to city residents by way of the city's channel on the cable television system operating in the city. Information includes news about city events, public information of interest and importance to residents of the city, in accordance with policies adopted by the governing body; 
b.	To announce and publicize information from various city departments and council committees;
c.	To provide immediate communication with residents in event of emergency; and
d.	To produce and present timely informational television programs and newsreels.
(Code 1994, § 2-81; Ord. No. 1346, § 1, 9-12-1994) 
Sec. 44-21. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    To carry out its functions, the committee shall have, but not be limited to, the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)	Recommend programs and programming policies to the city council.
(2)	Report to the city council as requested.
(Code 1994, § 2-82; Ord. No. 1346, § 1, 9-12-1994) 
Sec. 44-22. - Information dissemination. 
(a)	Information messages (CATV). 
(1)	Information to be used on the channel will be submitted on the appropriate form available from the city clerk's office. 
(2)	The city clerk will review information card for completeness.
(b)	Guidelines for information (CATV and newsletter) and compliance with city policy. 
(1)	City departments. All city departments will be encouraged to submit releases. Suggested topics include: 
a.	Upcoming elections (dates, items on ballot, names of various candidates).
b.	Voter registration information.
c.	Trash collection information.
d.	Parks and recreation activities and hours of various operations.
e.	City ordinances (information on those affecting citizens that need to be brought to attention. 
f.	Agendas of upcoming council meetings, public hearings, planning commission meetings, board of zoning appeals. 
g.	Frequent reminders of emergency telephone numbers (fire, police, ambulance).
h.	Fire safety information.
(2)	Civic groups, schools, etc. Subject to city policy, civic groups, schools, and individuals outside municipal government will be encouraged to submit releases. Suggested topics include: 
a.	Church activities for the entire community (not routine activities for the church membership alone). 
b.	Boy Scout, Girl Scout, service clubs, etc., activities and projects, other than routine intrinsic activities. 
c.	Merchants' associations activities, within the city (art fairs, etc).
d.	Homes' associations (tree trimming schedules, annual meeting announcements).
(3)	Editing of information. Any information submitted may be condensed, edited, and/or corrected by those individuals handling the information. 
(4)	Timeliness of information. Items will be kept timely by changes in the wording of messages to correct for the dates involved. Items will be released as timely as possible. The date that an item is released will be at the discretion of the committee or committee chairperson. 
(5)	Prohibitions. 
a.	No partisan political content will be included in any messages.
b.	No gambling activities will be publicized (raffles, lotteries).
c.	No wording with reference to intoxicating beverages will be used (the work social hour etc., may be substituted). 
d.	No information from other communities or cities will be used without specific direction to do so from the governing body. 
e.	Program content shall be compatible with community standards.
(6)	Videotaped and live productions. 
a.	Program subject matter will generally be guided by the suggested topics and approved policies as outlined in this section. 
b.	A periodic outline of programs to be taped shall be approved by the mayor.
c.	When a program is being broadcast live, participants in the meeting will be told before the broadcast begins. 
(7)	Political candidate appearances. 
a.	Nonpolitical programs. Appearance of political candidates on regular (nonpolitical) CATV programs. 
1.	Such programs should be sponsored and produced, if possible, by a nonpartisan community organization, or set up under their guidelines for such programs. 
2.	The municipal channel (the communications committee) will remain completely neutral and not advocate any one position or candidate in any programming or message presented. 
b.	Political programs. Appearance of political candidates on special (political) CATV programs (Meet the Candidates, etc.). 
1.	All candidates for an office, with or without political party affiliation, are invited to appear. 
2.	All candidates for office, with or without an opponent, in an up-coming election are invited to appear. 
3.	Only candidates whose names appear on the official ballot in any ward in the city are to be participants. 
4.	All candidates for a given office shall be invited to appear. No candidate will be refused opportunity to appear because of the failure of an opponent to appear. If an opponent chooses not to appear, a registered letter with signed return receipt shall be mailed to that opponent, including a copy of these guidelines. This communication shall state that it seems that it is that opponent's choice not to appear and that a final opportunity for appearance is being offered. 
5.	Equal time is allowed each candidate appearing, with identical studio lighting, background, staging, etc. 
6.	The program format may be a debate or a series of individual solo appearances, the order of appearance of the segments will be reversed. 
7.	Appearances are at no cost to the candidates.
8.	These guidelines shall also apply to any issues that may appear on the city ballot to any election. 
9.	These guidelines shall be announced during the opening of any program upon which candidates or issues are presented. 
10.	Any resolution duly adopted by the city council must be presented verbatim, being properly identified as such a resolution, regardless of political content; if it is aired. 
(Code 1994, § 2-83; Ord. No. 1346, § 1, 9-12-1994) 
Secs. 44-23-44-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- By Ord. No. 1600, dated April 27, 2006, the city imposed a telecommunications/telephone tax pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Telecommunications Business License Tax Simplification Act (the "Act"), RSMo 92.074 et seq. The passage of Ord. No. 1600 effectively repealed section 12 (license tax) of the city's telephone franchise embodied in Ord. No. 1261, dated February 26, 1990. Ord. No. 1600 further provided that in the event the Act was found to be unconstitutional, Ord. No. 1600 would be automatically repealed and the city's prior ordinance regarding telecommunications/telephone tax would be automatically reinstated. On August 8, 2006, in four companion cases, City of Springfield v. Sprint Spectrum, L.P., 203 S.W.3d 177 (Mo. Banc 2006); City of Wellston v. SBC Communications, Inc., 203 S.W.3d 189 (Mo. Banc 2006); City of University City v. AT&T Wireless Services, Inc., 203 S.W.3d 197 (Mo. Banc 2006); and City of St. Louis v. Sprint Spectrum, L.P., 203 S.W.3d 199 (Mo. Banc 2006), the Missouri Supreme Court declared the Act unconstitutional, whereupon Ord. No. 1600 was automatically repealed and section 12 of Ord. No. 1261 was automatically reinstated. The city's telcommunications/telephone tax is now provided in Ord. No. 1261, § 12, included in article IV of Appendix A to this Code. 
State Law reference- Municipal telecommunications business license tax simplification, RSMo 92.074 et seq. (Back)
Chapter 46 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Model traffic ordinance, RSMo 300.010 et seq.; registration and licensing of motor vehicles generally, RSMo 301.002 et seq.; all terrain vehicles, RSMo 301.700 et seq.; motor vehicle financial responsibility law, RSMo 303.010 et seq.; traffic regulations, RSMo 304.001 et seq.; vehicle equipment regulations, RSMo 307.010 et seq.; administrative adjudication of parking and other nonmoving municipal code violations, RSMo 479.011; authority of municipalities to establish traffic violation bureau, RSMo 479.050. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accident means a collision between a vehicle and another vehicle, railroad train, person or stationary object, or the overturn or upset of a vehicle which results in property damage, personal injury or death, or an entry into or emerging from a moving vehicle by a person which results in personal injury or death to such person. 
    All-terrain vehicle means any motorized vehicle manufactured and used exclusively for off-highway use which is 50 inches or less in width, with an unladen dry weight of 600 pounds or less, traveling on three, four or more low pressure tires, with a seat designed to be straddled by the operator, and handlebars for steering control. 
    Alley or alleyway means any street with a roadway of less than 20 feet in width. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means a vehicle publicly owned and operated as an ambulance, or a vehicle publicly owned and operated by the state highway patrol, police or fire department, sheriff or constable or deputy sheriff, traffic officer or any privately owned vehicle operated as an ambulance when responding to emergency calls. 
    Bicycle means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, including, but not limited to bicycles, tricycles, unicycles, scooters, and wagons. 
    Bus means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for transportation of persons; and, every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
    Bus zone means a portion of a roadway adjacent to the curb which has been marked by appropriate signs or painted markings, and shall have the primary purpose of standing by buses while loading and unloading passengers. 
    Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway when within any 600 feet along the highway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks, or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the highway. 
    Central business (or traffic) district means all streets and portions of streets within the area described by city ordinance as such. 
    Chauffeur means an operator who operates a motor vehicle in the transportation of persons or property and who receives compensation for such service in wages, salary, commission or fare, or who as owner or employee operates a motor vehicle carrying passengers or property for hire; or who regularly operates a commercial motor vehicle of another person in the course of or as an incident to his employment, but whose principal occupation is not the operation of such motor vehicle. 
    Child booster seat means a seating system which meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 CFR 571.213, as amended, that is designed to elevate a child to properly sit in a federally approved safety belt system. 
    Child passenger restraint system means a seating system which meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 CFR 571.213, as amended, and which is either permanently affixed to a motor vehicle or is affixed to such vehicle by a safety belt or a universal attachment system. 
    City traffic engineer means the director of public works of the city. 
    Commercial vehicle means every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Controlled-access highway means every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway. 
    Crosswalk means: 
(1)	That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
(2)	Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
    Daytime means from the time the street lights are turned off until they are turned on, or in any event from 30 minutes before sunrise until 30 minutes after sunset. 
    Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight (or passengers). 
    Intersection means: 
(1)	The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
(2)	Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
    Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    Motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively upon tracks, except farm tractors and motorized bicycles. 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Motorized bicycle means any two-wheeled or three-wheeled device having an automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more than 50 cubic centimeters, which produces less than three gross-brake horsepower, and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum speed of not more than 30 miles per hour on level ground. 
    Nighttime means from the time the street lights are turned on until they are turned off, or in any event from 30 minutes after sunset until 30 minutes before sunrise. 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Official traffic control devices means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or an official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    One-way street or alley means any street or alley upon which all vehicular traffic is restricted to movement in one direction only. 
    Operator means every person, other than a chauffeur, who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a highway or street, or who is exercising control over or steering a vehicle being towed by another motor vehicle. 
    Owner means a person, other than a lienholder, having the property interest in or title to a vehicle. The term "owner" includes a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person, but excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security. 
    Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
    Parking meter means a device for the purpose of measuring the time elapsed since the deposit of a coin in the slot provided, and equipped with a mechanism to indicate the legal time a vehicle may remain parked in a designated area. 
    Passenger car means every motor vehicle designed for carrying ten persons or less and used for the transportation of persons; except motorcycles, motorized bicycles, motor tricycles, and trucks with a licensed gross weight of 12,000 pounds or more. 
    Passenger curb loading zone means a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Police officer means every officer of the municipal police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Public building means a building used or owned by the city, the county, any legally constituted park district, the United States government or the state or any legally constituted subdivision thereof. 
    Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
    Railroad sign or signal means any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
    Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
    Registration means the registration certificate and registration plates issued under the laws of this state pertaining to the registration of vehicles. 
    Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance of 300 feet or more predominantly improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
    Right-of-way means the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other. 
    Roadway means that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    School bus means every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children to and from school or privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from school. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians. 
    Stand or standing means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
    State highway means a highway maintained by the state as a part of the state highway system. 
    Stop or stopping, when prohibited, means any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control signs or signal. 
    Stop when required means complete cessation from movement. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the uses of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Taxicab means a motor-driven passenger conveyance, propelled by electric or gas power, held for public hire at designated places, charging upon a time or distance basis, carrying passengers to destinations without following any fixed routes. 
    Taxicab stand means that portion of a public street approved for the standing of taxicabs, and so marked. 
    Through highway means every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
    Through street means every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of travel. 
    Traffic control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Traffic division means the traffic division of the police department of the city, or if a traffic division is not established, the term whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the police department of the city. 
    Trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, designed for carrying property or persons and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    Truck means every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Vehicle means any mechanical device on wheels, designed primarily for use, or used, on highways; this does not include motorized bicycles, vehicles propelled or drawn by horses or human power, or vehicles used exclusively on fixed rails or tracks, cotton trailers or motorized wheelchairs operated by handicapped persons. 
    Yield right-of-way means yielding to another driver or pedestrian the privilege or immediate use of the street. 
(Code 1994, § 86-1; Ord. No. 1019A, art. I, § A, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.010. 
Sec. 46-2. - State driver's license required; driving with a suspended or revoked license. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle upon the streets and highways in the city, unless such person has first procured a valid diver's license or operator's license in accord with the terms and meaning of RSMo 302.020, and has such valid license on his person. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon the streets and highways of the city if any such operator's license has either been suspended or revoked according to the terms of the state authority which issued said license. 
(Code 1994, § 86-2; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, § A, 4-13-1976; Ord. No. 1562, 11-11-2004) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 302.020(1). 
Sec. 46-3. - License required to operate motorcycle or motortricycle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except those expressly exempted by RSMo 302.080, to: 
(1)	Operate a motorcycle or motor-tricycle upon any highway of this state, unless such person has a valid license that shows he has successfully passed an examination for the operation of a motorcycle or motor-tricycle as prescribed by the director. The director may indicate such upon a valid license issued to such person, or shall issue a license restricting the applicant to the operation of a motorcycle or motor-tricycle if the actual demonstration, required by RSMo 302.173, is conducted on such vehicle. 
(2)	Authorize or knowingly permit a motorcycle or motor-tricycle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any highway by any person whose license does not indicate that the person has passed the examination for the operation of a motorcycle or motor-tricycle or has been issued an instruction permit therefor. 
(Code 1994, § 86-3; Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 7-8-1980) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 302.020(2), (3). 
Sec. 46-4. - Duty of owner of motor vehicle to prevent operation of vehicle by unlicensed person. 
    No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any streets, alleys or any other public streets and highways within the city by any person who is not authorized hereunder or in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 86-4; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, § B, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 302.020. 
Sec. 46-5. - Children forbidden to operate motor vehicle. 
    No person shall cause or knowingly permit his child or ward under the age of 16 years to drive a motor vehicle upon any streets, alleys or any other public streets and highways within the city when such minor is not authorized hereunder or under a learner's permit issued pursuant to RSMo 302.130(2) or in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 86-5; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, § C, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-6. - All-terrain vehicles-Prohibited on streets and sidewalks. 
    In order to promote the compatible, normal and safe movement of traffic and pedestrians on the streets and sidewalks of the city the utilization of all-terrain vehicles, including but not limited to three-wheelers and four-wheelers on paved streets and sidewalks within the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1994, § 86-6; Ord. No. 1213, § 1A, 8-24-1987) 
Sec. 46-7. - Same-Operation requires consent of property owner. 
    The operation of all-terrain vehicles, including but not limited to three-wheelers and four-wheelers on private or public property without the consent of the owner or entity controlling the same, within the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1994, § 86-7; Ord. No. 1213, § 1B, 8-24-1987) 
Sec. 46-8. - Seatbelt use required; exceptions. 
(a)	Each driver, except persons employed by the United States Postal Service while performing duties for that federal agency which require the operator to service postal boxes from their vehicles, or which require frequent entry into and exit from their vehicles, and front seat passenger of a passenger car manufactured after January 1, 1968, operated on a street or highway in this state, and persons less than 18 years of age operating or riding in a truck, as defined in RSMo 301.010, on a street or highway of this state shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt that meets federal National Highway, Transportation and Safety Act requirements. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to persons who have a medical reason for failing to have a seat belt fastened about their body, nor shall the provisions of this section be applicable to persons while operating or riding a motor vehicle being used in agricultural work-related activities. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the transporting of children under 16 years of age, as provided in RSMo 307.179. 
(b)	Every driver transporting a child under the age of 16 years shall be responsible, when transporting such child in a motor vehicle operated by that driver on the streets or highways of the city, for providing for the protection of such child as follows: 
(1)	Children less than four years of age, regardless of weight, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate for that child; 
(2)	Children weighing less than forty pounds, regardless of age, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate for that child; 
(3)	Children at least four years of age but less than eight years of age, who also weigh at least forty pounds but less than eighty pounds, and who are also less than four feet, nine inches tall, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system or booster seat appropriate for that child; 
(4)	Children at least eighty pounds or children more than four feet, nine inches in height shall be secured by a vehicle safety belt or booster seat appropriate for that child; 
(5)	A child who otherwise would be required to be secured in a booster seat may be transported in the back seat of a motor vehicle while wearing only a lap belt if the back seat of the motor vehicle is not equipped with a combination lap and shoulder belt for booster seat installation; 
(6)	When transporting children in the immediate family when there are more children than there are seating positions in the enclosed area of a motor vehicle, the children who are not able to be restrained by a child safety restraint device appropriate for the child shall sit in the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle unless the motor vehicle is designed only for a front seat area. The driver transporting children referred to in this subsection is not in violation of this section. This subsection shall only apply to the use of a child passenger restraint system or vehicle safety belt for children less than 16 years of age being transported in a motor vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any public carrier for hire. The provisions of this section shall not apply to students four years of age or older who are passengers on a school bus designed for carrying 11 passengers or more and which is manufactured or equipped pursuant to Missouri Minimum Standards for School Buses as school buses are defined in RSMo 301.010. 
(Code 1994, § 86-8; Ord. No. 1212, § 1, 7-27-1987) 
State law reference- Seatbelts required as part of vehicle equipment, RSMo 307.165; child passenger restraint requirement, RSMo 307.179. 
Sec. 46-9. - Stopping, etc., solely for seat belt compliance; prohibited. 
    No person shall be stopped, inspected or detained solely to determine compliance with section 46-8. 
(Code 1994, § 86-9; Ord. No. 1212, § 2, 7-27-1987) 
Sec. 46-10. - Medical exceptions to seat belt requirements. 
    The provisions of section 46-8 shall not be applicable to persons who have a medical reason for failing to have a seat belt fastened about his body, if that person has documentation from a physician. 
(Code 1994, § 86-10; Ord. No. 1212, § 3, 7-27-1987) 
Sec. 46-11. - Immediate notice of accident. 
(a)	The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $500.00 or more to one person shall immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the police department, if such accident occurs within the city. 
(b)	The driver of any vehicle which collides with an unattended vehicle shall immediately stop, attempt to locate the owner of the unattended vehicle, submitting to the owner the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle; otherwise, the driver shall leave in a conspicuous place in or upon the unattended vehicle struck, a writing denoting the name and address of the driver and owner of the striking vehicle. 
(c)	The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damages to fixtures legally upon or adjacent to a public street or thoroughfare shall take reasonable steps to immediately locate and notify the owner or persons in charge of such property and give his name and address. Upon request he shall exhibit his operator's license, making an immediate report of such accident to the police department. 
(Code 1994, § 86-13; Ord. No. 1019A, art. III, § H, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.110. 
Sec. 46-12. - When driver unable to report accident. 
(a)	Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving immediate notice of an accident as required in section 46-12, and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall give, or cause to be given, the notice not given by the driver. 
(b)	Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report of an accident and such driver is not the owner of the vehicle, the owner of the vehicle involved in such accident shall within five days after the accident make such report not made by the driver. 
(Code 1994, § 86-14; Ord. No. 1019A, art. III, § I, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.120. 
Sec. 46-13. - Leaving scene of motor vehicle accident. 
(a)	A person commits the crime of leaving the scene of a motor vehicle accident when, being the operator or driver of a vehicle on the highway or on any publicly or privately owned parking lot or parking facility generally open for use by the public and knowing that an injury has been caused to a person or damage has been caused to property, due to his culpability or to accident, he leaves the place of the injury, damage or accident without stopping and giving his name, residence, including city and street number, motor vehicle number and driver's license number, if any, to the injured party or to a police officer, or if no police officer is in the vicinity, then to the nearest police station or judicial officer. 
(b)	For the purposes of this section, all peace officers shall have jurisdiction, when invited by an injured person, to enter the premises of any privately owned parking lot or parking facility for the purpose of investigating an accident and performing all necessary duties regarding such accident. 
(Code 1994, § 86-15; Ord. No. 1019A, art. III, § H(c), 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 577.060. 
Sec. 46-14. - Riding bicycle on sidewalks. 
(a)	No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
(b)	Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1994, § 86-16; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, § N, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.347. 
Sec. 46-15. - License plate. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle within the city limits without a valid motor vehicle plate. 
(Code 1994, § 86-17; Ord. No. 1333, § 1, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 46-16. - Financial responsibility. 
(a)	Proof of financial responsibility. No owner of a motor vehicle registered in this state shall operate the vehicle or authorize any other person to operate the vehicle on the streets, alleys, or highways of the city, unless the owner maintains the financial responsibility as required by RSMo ch. 303. Furthermore, no person shall operate a motor vehicle owned by another with the knowledge that the owner has not maintained financial responsibility unless such person has financial responsibility which covers his operation of the other's vehicle. An insurance card shall be carried in the insured motor vehicle at all times. 
(b)	Proof of insurance. No person shall operate a motor vehicle registered in this state whether owned by such operator or by another upon the streets, alleys, or highways of the city, unless said operator shall exhibit an insurance identification card on the demand of any police officer who lawfully stops such operator while that officer is engaged in the performance of the duties of his office. A motor vehicle liability insurance policy, information required by RSMo 303.024, shall be satisfactory evidence of insurance in lieu of an insurance identification card. 
(c)	Definition, penalty. For the purpose of this section, the term "financial responsibility" means the ability to respond in damages for liability occurring after the effective date of proof of such financial responsibility, arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle, in the amount of $25,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of one person, in the amount of $50,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and in the amount of $10,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident. 
(Code 1994, § 86-18; Ord. No. 1394, 1-13-1997) 
Secs. 46-17-46-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-40. - Obedience to police and fire department officials. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. 
(Code 1994, § 86-36; Ord. No. 1019A, art. III, § B, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.080. 
Sec. 46-41. - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(b)	Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)	Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1994, § 86-37; Ord. No. 1019A, art. III, § A, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.375. 
Sec. 46-42. - Records of traffic violations. 
(a)	The police department or the traffic division thereof shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. The record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(b)	All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(c)	All such records and reports shall be public records.
(Code 1994, § 86-38; Ord. No. 1019A, art. II, § C, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.025. 
Sec. 46-43. - Enforcement. 
    The police department or the traffic division thereof is hereby delegated that authority essential in the assistance of the municipal court, or any of its officers, with the necessary clerical work entailed in the supervision and charge of traffic cases. 
(Code 1994, § 86-39; Ord. No. 1019A, art. II, § C, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-44. - Summons; traffic tickets. 
    It shall be the duty of the arresting officer, when effecting an arrest of any person for the violation of any provision of this chapter, to obtain the name and address of the violator, the registration number of the motor vehicle involved and the officer shall issue to the violator, in writing, upon a form provided by the clerk of court, a notice or summons to answer the charges against him within the time specified for hearing as contained thereon before the proper designated authority. Upon rendition by the violator of his written promise to accept the notice or summons as specified thereon, the officer shall release such person from custody and shall provide a copy of the notice or summons to the traffic division or clerk of the court. 
(Code 1994, § 86-40; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XVI, § B, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-45. - Parking tickets. 
    An arresting officer, upon observing a motor vehicle parked in violation of any of the parking regulations of this chapter, shall take the registration number and any other information displayed on said vehicle which may identify its user or owner and shall affix to such vehicle in a conspicuous place, a notice or summons in writing on a form provided by the clerk of the municipal court, instructing the driver or owner to answer to the charge placed against him, within the time specified for hearing as indicated thereon. Further, the driver or owner shall present himself to the proper authority as heretofore designated. It shall be the further duty of the arresting officer to provide a copy of such notice or summons to the traffic division or the clerk of court. 
(Code 1994, § 86-41; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XVI, § C, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-46. - Receipt, handling of bail. 
    The police department or the traffic division thereof shall receive cash bail money in appropriate cases as required by the court. They shall issue receipts for the same, enter or cause to be entered the date and time of the person's appearance on the court docket and notify the arresting officers and witnesses, if any, to be present. 
(Code 1994, § 86-42; Ord. No. 1019A, art. II, § C, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-47. - Written report of accidents. 
    Every officer of the police department, who, in the regular course of duty, investigates a motor vehicle accident, either at the time of and at the scene of an accident or thereafter by interviewing the participants or witnesses, shall immediately prepare and file a written report of the accident within 24 hours. 
(Code 1994, § 86-43; Ord. No. 1019A, art. II, § D, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-48. - City traffic engineer. 
(a)	The office of city traffic engineer is established. The city engineer, the chief of police, or other designated city official shall serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his other functions, and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this chapter. 
(b)	The city traffic engineer shall determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures, conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of the city, and cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 86-44; Ord. No. 1019A, art. II, § H, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.060. 
Sec. 46-49. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)	The chief of police by and with the approval of the city traffic engineer is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make the provision of the traffic ordinances of the city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(b)	The city traffic engineer may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Code 1994, § 86-45; Ord. No. 1019A, art. II, § I, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.065. 
Sec. 46-50. - Driver files to be maintained. 
    The police department or the traffic division thereof shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. 
(Code 1994, § 86-46; Ord. No. 1019A, art. II, § G, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.045. 
Secs. 46-51-46-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC DIVISION 

Sec. 46-74. - Established. 
    There is established in the police department of this city a traffic division to be under the control of an officer of the police department appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police. 
(Code 1994, § 86-56; Ord. No. 1019A, art. II, § A, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.015. 
Sec. 46-75. - Duties generally. 
    The traffic division, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department, shall enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. The traffic division shall make arrests for traffic violations, investigate accidents and cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and shall carry out those duties specially imposed upon the division by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 86-57; Ord. No. 1019A, art. II, § B, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.020. 
Sec. 46-76. - Reporting of fines. 
    It shall be the further duty of the traffic division through the clerk of the municipal court to accept payment of fines from any person, within the meaning of this chapter, charged with a violation of this chapter, such person having the option of paying the fine in such sum as set forth in the schedule of minimum fines contained herein, to the clerk of municipal court, within the time specified for hearing in the notice or summons of arrest; such person shall also have the election to appear before the judge for trial. Upon acceptance of the prescribed fine by the division or the clerk, there shall be issued a receipt to the violator accepting payment thereof. Should such violator fail to pay the prescribed fine or to post bond for appearance in court, within the time specified for hearing in the notice or summons of arrest, the sum to be paid in satisfaction of the fine shall be increased by one-half of the amount designated in the schedule of minimum fines. 
(Code 1994, § 86-58; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XVI, § A, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-77. - Records of notices and summons. 
    The traffic division shall maintain a record of all notices or summonses issued and arrests made for violations of the traffic laws and/or ordinances of this city, of all fines, including costs of court, collected by it and of final disposition or present status of each case of such violations. 
(Code 1994, § 86-59; Ord. No. 1019A, art. II, § C, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-78. - Investigation of accidents. 
    It shall be the duty of the traffic division, assisted by other police officers of the department, to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Code 1994, § 86-60; Ord. No. 1019A, art. II, § D, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.030. 
Sec. 46-79. - Conducting traffic accident studies. 
    Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Code 1994, § 86-61; Ord. No. 1019A, art. II, § E, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.035. 
Sec. 46-80. - Traffic accident reports. 
    The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 1994, § 86-62; Ord. No. 1019A, art. II, § F, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.040. 
Secs. 46-81-46-103. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROCEDURES UPON ARREST 

Sec. 46-104. - Forms, records of traffic citations and arrests. 
(a)	The municipal court shall provide books containing uniform traffic tickets as prescribed by Supreme Court Rule No. 37.46. Such books shall include serially numbered sets of citations in quadruplicate in the form prescribed by supreme court rule. 
(b)	The municipal court shall issue such books to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent and shall maintain a record of every book so issued and shall require a written receipt for every such book. 
(c)	The chief of police shall be responsible for the issuance of such books to individual members of the police department. The chief of police shall require a written receipt for every book so issued and shall maintain a record of every such book and each set of citations contained therein. 
(Code 1994, § 86-76; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIII, § A, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.575. 
Sec. 46-105. - Issuance of traffic tickets-Moving violations. 
    Except when authorized or directed under state law to immediately take a person before the judge of the municipal court for the violation of any traffic laws, a police officer who halts a person for such violation other than for the purpose of giving him a warning or warning notice and does not take such person into custody under arrest, shall issue to him a uniform traffic ticket which shall be proceeded upon in accordance with Supreme Court Rule No. 37. 
(Code 1994, § 86-77; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIII, § B, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.580. 
Sec. 46-106. - Same-When vehicle illegally parked or stopped. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinance of the city or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a uniform traffic ticket for the driver to answer to the charge against him within five days during the hours and at a place specified in the traffic ticket. 
(Code 1994, § 86-78; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIII, § C, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.585. 
Sec. 46-107. - Warning of arrest sent upon failure to appear. 
    If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a uniform traffic ticket affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five days, the traffic violations bureau shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic ticket was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that if such letter is disregarded for a period of five days, a warrant of arrest will be issued. 
(Code 1994, § 86-79; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIII, § D, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.590. 
Sec. 46-108. - Procedure on arrest for driving while intoxicated. 
    Any arrest for driving while intoxicated shall be handled as any other arrest for an offense of the same severity, except as follows: 
(1)	As soon as practicable following such arrest, the police department shall obtain the driving record of the person arrested. 
(2)	No person, regardless of his prior conviction record, shall be prosecuted through the municipal court where it appears possible that a charge of vehicular manslaughter (RSMo 565.024) or vehicle injury (RSMo 565.060) might be sustained, until after the state prosecuting attorney shall have had the opportunity to review the case and to consider filing appropriate charges. 
(3)	In all other cases, the city prosecuting attorney shall have the discretion to file the appropriate charge with the municipal court or he may refer the case to the state prosecuting official. 
(4)	The procedures described herein shall be directory and not mandatory. The failure to follow the procedures provided for in this section shall not invalidate any prosecution or be cause to overturn any conviction for violations of section 46-104 or 46-105, but may be reason for discipline of the city official violating this section. 
(Code 1994, § 86-80; Ord. No. 1137, § 2(F), 9-13-1982) 
Sec. 46-109. - Driving school. 
    The municipal court may, in connection with the disposition of any offense which is a "point offense" resulting in the assessment of one, two, three or four points by the state director of revenue under the provisions of RSMo 302.302(1), (2) or (4), order the staying of the assessment of points upon satisfactory completion of a driver improvement program approved by the state director of the department of public safety, as provided by RSMo 302.302.4. 
(Code 1994, § 86-82; Ord. No. 1137, § 2, 9-13-1982) 
Sec. 46-110. - Reports to highway patrol. 
    A record of the final disposition in any court proceeding involving a violation of section 46-104 or 46-105 shall be forwarded to the state highway patrol within 15 days by the clerk of court. 
(Code 1994, § 86-83; Ord. No. 1137, § 2, 9-13-1982) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 302.225. 
Sec. 46-111. - Penalty for driving while intoxicated. 
(a)	Any person convicted of driving while intoxicated shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00, confined in jail for not more than 60 days, or both such fine and confinement. No person convicted of or pleading guilty to the offense of driving while intoxicated shall be granted a suspended imposition of sentence. 
(b)	Any person convicted of driving with excessive blood alcohol content shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00, confined in jail for not more than 60 days, or both such fine and confinement. 
(c)	Upon a plea of guilty or a finding of guilt for an offense of driving while intoxicated or driving with excessive blood alcohol content, the court may (as a condition for suspending any permissible portion of any sentence or in addition to imposition of any penalties provided by law) order the convicted person to participate in and successfully complete an alcohol or drug related traffic offender education or rehabilitation program as described in RSMo 577.049. Such a program may be used as a condition for suspending any permissible portion of any sentence only once. 
(Code 1994, § 86-84; Ord. No. 1137, § 2(J), 9-13-1982) 
Sec. 46-112. - Reimbursement of cost for alcohol and drug related offenses. 
(a)	Upon a plea of guilty, finding of guilt or conviction for violation of the provisions of section 46-111 alcohol or drug-related traffic offenses, the court may, in addition to imposition of any penalties provided by law, order the person to reimburse law enforcement authorities for the costs associated with such arrest. 
(b)	Such costs shall include the reasonable cost of making the arrest, including the cost of any chemical tests to determine the alcohol or drug content of the persons blood, and the cost of processing, charging, booking and holding such person in custody. 
(c)	Law enforcement authorities may establish a schedule of such cost for submission to the court; however, the court may order the costs reduced if it determines that the schedule of costs is excessive, given the circumstances of the case or for good cause shown. 
(d)	These fees shall be calculated as additional costs by the municipal court and shall be collected by the court in the same manner as other costs and fees are collected and remitted to the city treasurer. 
(e)	The city treasurer shall retain these fees in a separate fund know as the "DWI/Drug Enforcement Fund." Monies within the DWI/Drug Enforcement Fund shall be appropriated by the city council to law enforcement authorities from such find in amounts equal to those costs so incurred and shall be specifically used to enhance and support the enforcement and prosecution of alcohol and drug-related traffic laws within the city. 
(Code 1994, § 86-85; Ord. No. 1378, § 1, 4-9-1996) 
Secs. 46-113-46-137. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 46-138. - Authority to install. 
    The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1994, § 86-106; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § A, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.130. 
Sec. 46-139. - Manual and specifications. 
    All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state highways and transportation commission or resolution adopted by the city council. All signs or signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1994, § 86-107; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § B, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.135. 
Sec. 46-140. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 86-108; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § C, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.140. 
Sec. 46-141. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. 
(a)	Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
(1)	A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train. 
(2)	A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train. 
(3)	An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(b)	No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1994, § 86-109; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XII, § J, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.295. 
Sec. 46-142. - When required for enforcement purposes. 
    No provision of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic control devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or in place. 
(Code 1994, § 86-110; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § D, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.145. 
Sec. 46-143. - Presumption of legality. 
(a)	Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(b)	Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of law and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(Code 1994, § 86-111; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § E, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.150. 
Sec. 46-144. - Traffic control signal legend. 
(a)	Use of colored signal indicators. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and such lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)	Green indication. 
a.	Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.	Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
c.	Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 46-145, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)	Steady yellow indication. 
a.	Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection. 
b.	Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 46-145, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway. 
(3)	Steady red indication. 
a.	Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until a green indication is shown; after a vehicle has made a stop for a red signal, a right turn may be executed if it does not interfere with cross traffic. 
b.	Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 46-145, pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway. 
(b)	Applicability at a place not an intersection. If an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Code 1994, § 86-112; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § F, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.155. 
Sec. 46-145. - Pedestrian control signals. 
    Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "walk" or "don't walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)	Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)	Wait or don't walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is showing. 
(Code 1994, § 86-113; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § G, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.160. 
Sec. 46-146. - Flashing signals. 
(a)	Obedience requirement. Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)	Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)	Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid, intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(b)	Exception. This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by the rules set forth in section 46-141 
(Code 1994, § 86-114; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § H, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.165. 
Sec. 46-147. - Lane direction control signals. 
    When lane direction control signals are placed over the individual lanes of a street or highway, vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a green signal is shown, but shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a red signal is shown. 
(Code 1994, § 86-115; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § I, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.170. 
Sec. 46-148. - Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings. 
    No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(Code 1994, § 86-116; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § J, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.175. 
Sec. 46-149. - Interference with official traffic control devices or railroad signs or signals. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 86-117; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § K, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.180. 
Sec. 46-150. - Authority to establish play streets. 
    The city traffic engineer shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(Code 1994, § 86-118; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § L, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.185. 
Sec. 46-151. - Vehicles on play streets. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 86-119; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § M, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.190. 
Sec. 46-152. - City traffic engineer to designate crosswalks and establish safety zones. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to: 
(1)	Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)	Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Code 1994, § 86-120; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § N, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.195. 
Sec. 46-153. - Traffic lanes. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(b)	Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
(Code 1994, § 86-121; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IV, § O, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.200. 
Secs. 46-154-46-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-175. - Careless and imprudent driving. 
    Any person who operates or drives any vehicle upon any street or thoroughfare in this city carelessly and imprudently in willful or wanton disregard of the rights or safety of others, or without the caution and circumspection at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property, shall be guilty of careless and imprudent driving. Every person who is convicted of careless and imprudent driving shall be punished as provided in section 1-11, in addition to court costs. 
(Code 1994, § 86-141; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIV, § A, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 304.012. 
Sec. 46-176. - Drivers to exercise highest degree of care. 
    Every driver of a vehicle shall exercise the highest degree of care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1994, § 86-142; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VIII, § J, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.010. 
Sec. 46-177. - Driving while intoxicated or drugged. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Drive or operate means physically driving or operating or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle. 
    Percent by weight of alcohol shall have the same meaning as provided by state law, in RSMo 577.012. 
(b)	Driving while intoxicated, drugged. A person commits the offense of driving while intoxicated if he operates a motor vehicle while in an intoxicated or drugged condition. 
(c)	Excessive blood alcohol content. A person commits the offense of driving with excessive blood alcohol content if he operates a motor vehicle with 8/100 of one percent or more by weight of alcohol in his blood. 
(d)	Operating vehicle constitutes implied consent to tests. Any person who operates a motor vehicle shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical test or tests of his breath, blood, saliva or urine for the purpose of determining the alcohol or drug content of his blood. Such tests shall be performed according to the provisions of RSMo 577.020 through 577.049. 
(Code 1994, § 86-143; Ord. No. 1137, § 2, 9-13-1982; Ord. No. 1505, § 1, 1-28-2002) 
Sec. 46-178. - Drivers approaching school crossings. 
    When any driver approaches a school crosswalk, he must yield to pedestrians and come to a complete stop if a stop sign is out. 
(Code 1994, § 86-144; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VIII, § I, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-179. - Proper use of roadway or street. 
    The driver of any vehicular device within the meaning of this chapter shall operate same upon the right half of all roadways or streets, and as closely as is practicable to the right edge or curb, if the paved portion of the roadway or street is of sufficient width to do so, subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)	In overtaking or passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
(2)	If the right portion of a road or street is closed to traffic for the purposes of construction or repair. 
(3)	When traveling upon one-way streets.
(4)	When placing a vehicle in a position for a left turn.
(5)	If the roadway or street is divided into three marked lanes for traffic and then pursuant to the rules applicable thereon. 
(Code 1994, § 86-145; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIV, § E, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.015. 
Sec. 46-180. - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
    The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway or building, shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Code 1994, § 86-146; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XII, § H, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.285. 
Sec. 46-181. - Overtaking and passing a vehicle-Manner. 
    The operator of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall first sound his horn before beginning such movement, and then shall pass at a safe distance to the left thereof, and shall not again drive to the right side of the highway until safely clear of such overtaken vehicle. 
(Code 1994, § 86-147; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIV, § F, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.016. 
Sec. 46-182. - Same-Duty of overtaken operator. 
    The operator of a vehicle upon a highway about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle approaching from the rear shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on a suitable and audible signal being given by the driver of the overtaking vehicle, and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Code 1994, § 86-148) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.016. 
Sec. 46-183. - Same-On the right. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)	When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
(2)	Upon a street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two or more lines of vehicles in each direction; 
(3)	Upon a one-way street;
provided, however, such driver may overtake and pass to the right of another vehicle only when such movement may be made in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the paved or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Code 1994, § 86-149; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIV, § G, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.016. 
Sec. 46-184. - Same-When prohibited. 
    No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)	When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve of the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction. 
(2)	When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct, tunnel or when approaching within 100 feet of or at any intersection or railroad crossing. 
(Code 1994, § 86-150; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIV, § F, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.016. 
Sec. 46-185. - Same-Limitation. 
    Except when a roadway has been divided into three traffic lanes, no vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the centerline of a street or highway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. 
(Code 1994, § 86-151; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIV, § F, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.016. 
Sec. 46-186. - No passing zone. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to pass and overtake another vehicle on any section of a street or roadway where signs, markers or yellow lines are apparent and visible and duly installed within the provisions of this chapter prohibiting such passing. 
(Code 1994, § 86-152; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIV, § I, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-187. - Following too closely. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and conditions of the roadway. 
(Code 1994, § 86-153; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIV, § J, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.017. 
Sec. 46-188. - Persons propelling pushcarts or riding animals to obey traffic regulations. 
    Every person propelling any pushcart or riding any animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1994, § 86-154; Ord. No. 1019A, art. III, § C, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.085. 
Sec. 46-189. - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this article, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 86-155; Ord. No. 1019A, art. III, § E, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.095. 
Sec. 46-190. - Use of coasters, roller skates, similar devices restricted. 
    No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy apparatus or similar devices, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 86-156; Ord. No. 1019A, art. III, § D, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.090. 
Sec. 46-191. - Authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)	The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)	The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(1)	Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter.
(2)	Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)	Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property.
(4)	Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.
(c)	The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle, while in motion, sounds an audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(d)	The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1994, § 86-157; Ord. No. 1019A, art. III, § F, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.100. 
Sec. 46-192. - Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)	Upon the immediate approach of any authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible and/or visual signal only: The driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the righthand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)	This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1994, § 86-158; Ord. No. 1019A, art. III, § G, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.105. 
Sec. 46-193. - Hand signals. 
(a)	An operator or driver when stopping, or when checking the speed of his vehicle, if the movement of other vehicles may reasonably be affected by such checking of speed, shall extend his arm at an angle below horizontal so that the same may be seen in the rear of his vehicle. 
(b)	An operator or driver intending to turn his vehicle to the right shall extend his arm at an angle above horizontal so that the same may be seen in front of and in the rear of his vehicle, and shall slow down and approach the intersecting street or highway as near as practicable to the right side of the street or highway along which he is proceeding before turning. 
(c)	An operator or driver intending to turn his vehicle to the left shall extend his arm in a horizontal position so that the same may be seen in the rear of his vehicle, and shall slow down and approach the intersecting street or highway so that the left side of his vehicle shall be as near as practicable to the centerline of the street or highway along which he is proceeding before turning. 
(Code 1994, § 86-159; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIV, §§ K, L, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.019. 
Sec. 46-194. - When mechanical signals must be used. 
    The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal light or signal device in good mechanical condition of a type approved by the state highway patrol; however, when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand-and-arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle then such signals shall be given by such light or device. A vehicle shall be considered as so constructed or loaded that a hand-and-arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load exceeds 24 inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereon exceeds 14 feet, which limit of 14 feet shall apply to single vehicles or combinations of vehicles. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any trailer which does not interfere with a clear view of the hand signals of the operator or of the signaling device upon the vehicle pulling such trailer; provided further that the provisions of this section as far as mechanical devices on vehicles so constructed that a hand-and-arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle as above provided shall only be applicable to new vehicles registered within this state after January 1, 1954. 
(Code 1994, § 86-160; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIV, §§ K, L, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.019. 
Sec. 46-195. - Ignition key shall be removed from parked cars. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle upon any public street, roadway or alley in the city without first locking the ignition, removing and taking with him the ignition key. 
(b)	Any police officer finding a key in an ignition of a parked car shall deliver it forthwith to a place of safekeeping designated by the chief of police; provided that the officer removing the ignition key must give written notice of the removal and deposit the notice in a conspicuous place upon the vehicle as to where the key may be obtained. 
(Code 1994, § 86-161; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIV, § M, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-196. - Vehicle repair on street. 
    Repairs to any vehicle shall not be effected while such vehicle is standing on a public street, roadway or alley, except in the event of a disability or accident while in motion and then only for such time as is necessary to enable it to be removed from the public street, roadway or alley and to continue upon its way. 
(Code 1994, § 86-162; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIV, § N, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-197. - When lights required. 
    No person shall drive, move, park or be in custody of any vehicle or combination of vehicles on any street or highway during the time when lighted lamps are required by law unless such vehicle or combination of vehicles displays lighted lamps and illuminating devices as required by this division. No person shall use on any vehicle any approved electric lamp or similar device unless the light source of such lamp or device complies with the conditions of approval as to focus and rated candlepower. 
(Code 1994, § 86-163; Ord. No. 487, § 1, 11-6-1923) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.040. 
Sec. 46-198. - Following fire apparatus. 
    The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1994, § 86-164; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, § D, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.300. 
Sec. 46-199. - Crossing fire hoses. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1994, § 86-165; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, § E, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.305. 
Sec. 46-200. - Driving through funeral or other procession. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required by law. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. All drivers in any funeral procession shall operate their respective vehicles as near the right edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as practicable and safe. 
(Code 1994, § 86-166; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, §§ F, H(a), 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.310. 
Sec. 46-201. - Manner of driving in funeral processions and parades. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, within the meaning of this chapter, who shall effect or be responsible for the occupying, utilizing, marching upon or proceeding along any roadway, street or alley within the confines of this city in such fashion so as to constitute a parade or similar type procession, to use the roadways, streets or alleys of the city without initially procuring from the chief of police a permit for the parade or similar type procession. Prior to the issuance of the permit, the applicant therefor shall answer any and all questions propounded to him by the chief of police or authorized representative relative to the parade or procession, and the applicant shall be bound by the answers given with regard to the manner in which the parade or similar type procession is conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The provisions heretofore contained in this section shall not apply to the armed forces of the United States or the military forces of the state, the forces of the police department of the city or any duly recognized fire department forces located within the confines of the city when acting within the course and scope of their respective duties and as authorized by law. 
(Code 1994, § 86-167; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, § H(b), 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.315. 
Sec. 46-202. - Driving on sidewalk. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1994, § 86-168; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, § I, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.330. 
Sec. 46-203. - Limitations on backing. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1994, § 86-169; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, § K, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.335. 
Sec. 46-204. - Opening and closing vehicle doors. 
    No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Code 1994, § 86-170; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, § L, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.340. 
Sec. 46-205. - Riding on motorcycles. 
(a)	A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator. 
(b)	Every person operating or riding as a passenger on any motorcycle as defined in RSMo 301.010 upon any street, highway or thoroughfare of this city shall wear protective headgear at all times the vehicle is in motion. The protective headgear shall meet reasonable standards and specifications as required by state law. 
(Code 1994, § 86-171; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, § M, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.345(1). 
Sec. 46-206. - Clinging to vehicle. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway nor shall any driver of any vehicle permit any person to attach thereto. 
(Code 1994, § 86-172; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, § O, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.350. 
Sec. 46-207. - Driving through safety zone. 
    No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone. 
(Code 1994, § 86-173; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, § Q, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.365. 
Sec. 46-208. - Signs, barricades prohibiting authorization. 
    No person shall operate any vehicle over, upon or across any newly constructed pavement or recently marked pavement in any public street or roadway, over or circumventing which there is a barrier or sign authorized by lawful authority prohibiting such vehicle operation. 
(Code 1994, § 86-174; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VII, § J, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.140. 
Sec. 46-209. - Jake brakes. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate or use a Jacobs Engine Brake or other engine braking device in the city, except in emergencies. For the purpose of this section, a Jacobs Engine Brake is a hydraulic-electric engine attachment that converts a diesel engine into an air compressor by changing engine exhaust valve operation. 
(Code 1994, § 86-176; Ord. No. 1504, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2002) 
Secs. 46-210-46-228. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 

Sec. 46-229. - Required position and method of turning at intersections. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)	Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the righthand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)	Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and bypassing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)	Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme lefthand land lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the lefthand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(Code 1994, § 86-186; Ord. No. 1019A, art. V, § A, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.215. 
Sec. 46-230. - Authority to place, obedience to turning markers. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(b)	When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Code 1994, § 86-187; Ord. No. 1019A, art. V, § B, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.220. 
Sec. 46-231. - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or left turn or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such terms are permitted. 
(Code 1994, § 86-188; Ord. No. 1019A, art. V, § C, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.225. 
Sec. 46-232. - Obedience to no turn signs. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the direction of any such sign. 
(Code 1994, § 86-189; Ord. No. 1019A, art. V, § D, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.230. 
Sec. 46-233. - Limitations on turning around. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1994, § 86-190; Ord. No. 1019A, art. V, § E, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.235. 
Sec. 46-234. - U-turns restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any motorist to operate a motor vehicle for a U-turn at any point on the following streets, or indicated portions of streets: First Street, between Commercial Street and Wyoming Street. 
(Code 1994, § 86-191; Ord. No. 946, § 2, 11-21-1967) 
Secs. 46-235-46-261. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ONE-WAY STREETS 

Sec. 46-262. - Authority to sign. 
    Whenever any ordinance of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1994, § 86-201; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VI, § A, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.240. 
Sec. 46-263. - Authority to restrict direction of movement on streets during certain periods. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period, and the opposite direction during another period of the day, and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The city traffic engineer may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1994, § 86-202; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VI, § D, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.250. 
Sec. 46-264. - Direction of traffic. 
    Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described and designated by ordinance, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1994, § 86-203; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VI, § C, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.245. 
Sec. 46-265. - Enumerated. 
    In accordance with this division and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall not proceed upon streets listed in schedule II, on file at the office of the city clerk, except in the direction indicated therein. 
(Code 1994, § 86-204; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VI, § B, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.240. 
Secs. 46-266-46-293. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPEED LIMITS 

Sec. 46-294. - State speed laws applicable. 
    The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city, except that the city may by ordinance declare and determine upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared when signs are in place giving notice thereof, but no city ordinance shall regulate the speed of vehicles upon controlled access highways of the state. 
(Code 1994, § 86-216; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XI, § A, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provision, RSMo 300.205. 
Sec. 46-295. - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
    The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 86-217; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XI, § B, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Authority, RSMo 300.205, 300.210. 
Sec. 46-296. - Speed limit schedule. 
(a)	The maximum speed for vehicles operating on the streets, roads and alleys of the city shall be no greater than is commensurate with the safety of all who are on the highways, but, where signs are posted, in no event higher than the speeds assigned and in both directions unless otherwise indicated and, if there is no posted indicated, the speed limit shall be not greater than 25 miles per hour. The city's speed limit schedule is available in the office of the public works director. 
(b)	When a named street and a state highway become the same, the named street will take precedence within this section. 
(c)	The speed limits within this section are limits within the city limits. Any new roadways constructed within the city limits shall remain at a speed limit of 25 miles per hour until added to this section. 
(Code 1994, § 86-218; Ord. No. 1019A, sched. VI, 4-13-1976; Ord. No. 1223, § 1, 4-25-1988; Ord. No. 1565, § 3, 12-13-2004) 
Secs. 46-297-46-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS 

Sec. 46-326. - Through streets generally. 
    Those streets and parts of streets described by ordinances of the city are declared to be through streets for the purposes of this division. 
(Code 1994, § 86-231; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XII, § A, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.255. 
Sec. 46-327. - Signs required at through streets. 
    Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes a through street it shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to place and maintain a stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at any intersection of a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of said streets as may be determined by the city traffic engineer upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. 
(Code 1994, § 86-232; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XII, § B, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.260. 
Sec. 46-328. - Stop lights, stop signs and yield right-of-way signs. 
    In accordance with the provisions of sections 46-326 and 46-327, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop or yield the right-of-way, as the case may be, at every intersection indicated in this division in obedience to signs erected and posted on the streets or parts of streets in the city per sections 46-334 and 46-335. 
(Code 1994, § 86-233; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XII, § C, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.140. 
Sec. 46-329. - Other intersections where stop or yield required. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where a particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required, or whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection as prescribed in this article, in which event he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. 
(Code 1994, § 86-234; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XII, § D, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.265. 
Sec. 46-330. - Stop and yield signs. 
(a)	The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersection roadway. 
(b)	Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. 
(Code 1994, § 86-235; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XII, § E, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.270. 
Sec. 46-331. - Vehicles entering-Stop intersections. 
    Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop as required by section 66-330(b), and after having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection. 
(Code 1994, § 86-236; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XII, § F, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.275. 
Sec. 46-332. - Same-Yield intersection. 
    The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection; provided, however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield the right-of-way. 
(Code 1994, § 86-237; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XII, § G, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.280. 
Sec. 46-333. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1994, § 86-238; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XII, § I, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.290. 
Sec. 46-334. - Stop intersections. 
(a)	When signs are erected giving notice to operators of motor vehicles, such operators shall stop, as indicated, at every intersection with a through street when traveling upon a stop street in the directions noted under traffic control in the following schedule: 
Through StreetStop StreetTraffic ControlAdams Cr.Cottonwood Cr.WestAdams Cr.Cottonwood Ave.EastArmstrong St.Harper St.EastHigh St.WestMyrtle St.East and westOak St.East and westSS/Armstrong, North and southOlive St.East and westSS/Armstrong, north and southBenton St.Clay St.WestJackson St.WestWashington St.WestBoardman St.Cedar St.EastMyrtle St.All directionsOak St.East and westOlive St.WestBroadway St.Chappell Dr.SouthClearview St.NorthHillside Dr.North and southWalker St.North and southCampbell St.Harper St.All directionsOak St.East and westOlive St.East and westTimber St.WestCarrol Dr.Lee LaneSouthRichmond Dr.SouthCedar St.Armstrong St.North and southBoardman St.SouthCampbell St.North and southIndependence St.North and southJeffreys St.North and southLake St.SouthMcKissock St.North and southRandolph St.North and southTaylor St.North and southCollege Hill St.Lexington St.SouthCommercial St.Front St.North and southOakland St.NorthPine St.WestSecond St.EastWalnut St.North and southWebster St.NorthCountry Club Dr.Eklund Dr.NorthHillcrest Dr.SouthLawndale Ave.SouthLexington St.North and southLinwood Ave.SouthDelaware St.Lexington St.North and southFirst St.Commercial St.East and westWyoming St.EastFront St.Second St.NorthWest Main St.EastHarper St.Campbell St.SouthRandolph St.NorthHawthorne Cr.Johnson Cr.North and southPark St.SouthHigh St.Independence St.North and southMcKissock St.North and southHillcrest Dr.Baltimore St.EastDelaware St.EastHawthorne Cr.East and westLawndale Ave.East and westMaple LaneEast and westIndependence St.Kellogg St.EastOlive St.EastLake St.Cedar St.East and westOak St.East and westLexington Rd. (St.)Baltimore St.EastCarrol Dr.WestCrest Dr.WestMaple LaneAll directionsMatthes LaneEast and westRussell Rd.NorthSycamore Dr.SS/Sycamore, westWoodlawn Rd.WestWright St.East and westLincoln St.Redbud Ave.WestLinwood Ave.Lawndale Ave.WestLocust St.Armstrong St.North and southCampbell St.North and southCommercial St.NorthIndependence St.North and southJeffreys St.North and southMcKissock St.SouthMo. Highway 7EastRandolph St.North and southTaylor St.North and southMaple LaneAdams Cr.SouthJohnson Cr.NorthLexington St.East and westLincoln St.SouthMadison St.NorthStone St.NorthMcKissock St.Myrtle St.East and westOlive St.East and westMissouri Highway 7Broadway St.WestCedar St.EastCollege Hill St.WestCountry Club Dr.WestDelaware St.WestHigh St.EastIndustrial Dr.EastLocust St.East and westMaple LaneWestMatthes LaneWestMo. Highway 58 - East LoopNorth and westMo. Highway 58 - West LoopNorthMyrtle St.East and westOak St.EastPine St.EastRice St.WestSouth Main St.NorthStafford Dr.EastTimber St.EastVV HighwayWestWashington St.EastWilla LaneEastWright St.East and westMissouri Highway 58Mo. Highway 7 - East LoopNorth and westMo. Highway 7 - West LoopNorthWalker St.SouthMyrtle St.Armstrong St.East and westNorth and southIndependence St.North and southLexington St.North and southMcKissock St.North and southTaylor St.North and southOak St.Armstrong St.North and southIndependence St.North and southMcKissock St.North and southOlive St.Armstrong St.North and southMcKissock St.North and southPine St.Armstrong St.SouthBenton St.NorthCampbell St.SouthCline St.NorthIndependence St.SouthJeffreys St.SouthPatterson St.NorthRandolph St.SouthSitter St.NorthTaylor St.SouthVermont St.NorthRandolph St.Olive St.East and westRice St.Lexington St.North and southRussell Rd.Lee LaneEastRichmond Dr.EastTaylor St.Oak St.East and westTimber St.Armstrong St.NorthIndependence St.NorthVV HighwayLexington Rd.North and southWalker St.Spring St.WestWashington St.Cline St.North and southVermont St.North and southWyoming St.Front St.SouthSecond St.West 
(b)	When a named street and a state highway become the same, the named street will take precedence within the schedule. 
(Code 1994, § 86-239; Ord. No. 1019A, sched. VI, 4-13-1976; Ord. No. 1223, § 1, 4-25-1988; Ord. No. 1326, § 1, 10-11-1993; Ord. No. 1330, 1-10-1994; Ord. No. 1406, § 1, 8-25-1997) 
Sec. 46-335. - Yield intersections. 
(a)	When signs are erected giving notice to operators of motor vehicles, such operators shall yield, as indicated, at every intersection with a through street when traveling upon a yield street as noted under traffic control per the following schedule: 
Through StreetYield StreetTraffic ControlBaltimore St.Jefferson St.NorthLinwood Ave.NorthMadison St.NorthCedar St.Boardman St.NorthMissouri Highway 7North and southClay St.Clay Cr.SouthVermont St.NorthCommercial St.Lake St.EastDelaware St.Jefferson St.SouthLinwood Ave.North and southMadison St.SouthIndependence St.Kellogg St.EastJackson St.Vermont St.SouthLake St.Locust St.WestMyrtle St.East and westOlive St.East and westPaul St.EastMadison St.Baltimore St.YS/Madison, northDelaware St.YS/Madison, southMyrtle St.Jeffreys St.North and southRandolph St.North and southOak St.Jeffreys St.North and southOlive St.Jeffreys St.North and southTaylor St.Paul St.Boardman St.SouthLake St.EastSouth Main St.LaJett St.EastSycamore Dr.Adams Cr.North and southTaylor St.Olive St.East and westWest Main St.Walnut St.North and south 
(b)	When a named street and a state highway become the same, the named street will take precedence within the schedule. 
(Code 1994, § 86-240; Ord. No. 1019A, sched. VI, 4-13-1976; Ord. No. 1223, § 1, 4-25-1988) 
Sec. 46-336. - Four-way stop streets. 
(a)	The intersection at Myrtle and Campbell Streets shall be a four-way stop with a stop sign being placed for traffic approaching in all directions. 
(b)	The intersection at Oak and Randolph Streets shall be a four-way stop with a stop sign being placed for traffic approaching the intersection in all directions. 
(c)	Anyone found in violation of any of the above provisions shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-11 
(Ord. No. 1565, §§ 1, 2, 12-13-2004) 
Sec. 46-337. - Unsigned intersections. 
    The following intersections are unsigned and uncontrolled, unless or until the city traffic engineer determines that vehicular traffic warrants control: 
Campbell Street and Kellogg Street 
Carrol Drive and Russell Road 
Cedar Street and Welsh Street 
Cline Street and Jackson Street 
College Hill Street and Walker Street 
Front Street and Harrison Street 
Harper Street and Taylor Street 
Harrison Street and Front Street 
Harrison Street and Webster Street 
Hawthorne Creek and Stone Street 
Hillcrest Drive and Redbud Avenue 
Independence Street and Willa Lane 
Independence Street and Wright Street 
Jackson Street and Cline Street 
Kellogg Street and Campbell Street 
Lincoln Street and Sycamore Drive 
Locust Street and Hillside Drive 
Maple Lane and Park Street 
Maple Lane and Welsh Street 
Park Street and Maple Lane 
Paul Street and Wyoming Street 
Redbud Avenue and Hillcrest Drive 
Russell Road and Carrol Drive 
Stone Street and Hawthorne Creek 
Taylor Street and Harper Street 
Walker Street and College Hill Street 
Webster Street and Harrison Street 
Welsh Street and Cedar Street 
Welsh Street and Oak Street 
Willa Lane and Independence Street 
Wright Street and Independence Street 
Wyoming Street and Paul Street 
(Code 1994, § 86-241; Ord. No. 1019A, sched. VI, 4-13-1976; Ord. No. 1223, § 1, 4-25-1988) 
Secs. 46-338-46-362. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 46-363. - Standing or parking close to curb. 
    Except as otherwise provided in sections 46-364 through 46-366, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the righthand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 18 inches of the righthand curb. 
(Code 1994, § 86-261; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IX, § A, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.415. 
Sec. 46-364. - Signs or markings indicating angle parking. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal-aid or state highway within the city unless the state highways and transportation commission has determined by a resolution or order entered in its minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. 
(b)	Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. 
(Code 1994, § 86-262; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IX, § B, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.420. 
Sec. 46-365. - Obedience to angle parking signs or markers. 
    On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city traffic engineer for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1994, § 86-263; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IX, § C, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.425. 
Sec. 46-366. - Permits for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized in this section. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Code 1994, § 86-264; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IX, § D, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.430. 
Sec. 46-367. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1994, § 86-265; Ord. No. 1019A, art. X, § B, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.445. 
Sec. 46-368. - Parking in alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1994, § 86-266; Ord. No. 1019A, art. X, § C, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.450. 
Sec. 46-369. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)	Displaying such vehicle for sale.
(2)	Repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(Code 1994, § 86-267; Ord. No. 1019A, art. X, § D, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.455. 
Sec. 46-370. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)	When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1994, § 86-268; Ord. No. 1019A, art. X, § E, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.460. 
Sec. 46-371. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)	When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1994, § 86-269; Ord. No. 1019A, art. X, § F, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.465. 
Sec. 46-372. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. 
    The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs upon the lefthand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are in place no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such lefthand side in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1994, § 86-270; Ord. No. 1019A, art. X, § G, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.470. 
Sec. 46-373. - Standing or parking on one-way roadways. 
    If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the lefthand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the lefthand side of any such roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 86-271; Ord. No. 1019A, art. X, § G, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.475. 
Sec. 46-374. - Prohibited near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)	The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)	When official signs are erected at such hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1994, § 86-272; Ord. No. 1019A, art. X, § I, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.480. 
Sec. 46-375. - Prohibited in specified places. 
(a)	Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall: 
(1)	Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
a.	On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of curb of a street.
b.	On a sidewalk.
c.	Within an intersection.
d.	On a crosswalk.
e.	Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the traffic engineer indicates a different length by signs or markings. 
f.	Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic. 
g.	Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel.
h.	On any railroad tracks.
i.	At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
(2)	Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger: 
a.	In front of a public or private driveway.
b.	Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
c.	Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
d.	Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
e.	Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance (when properly signposted). 
f.	At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
(3)	Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers: 
a.	Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
b.	At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
(b)	No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1994, § 86-273; Ord. No. 1019A, art. IX, § A, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.440. 
Sec. 46-376. - Limited parking. 
(a)	When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle on the following streets or parts thereof for longer than the time indicated, during the hours or time indicated: 
Two hours, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday except legal holidays Lake Street, on the east side, between Locust Street and Cedar StreetTwo hours, between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays Boardman Street, from Paul Street to Cedar Street, on the east side of the streetCedar Street, from Boardman Street to Lake Street, on the north side of the streetFirst Street, from Commercial Street to Wyoming Street, on each side of the streetLake Street, from Cedar Street to Paul Street, on the east side of the streetPaul Street, from Lake Street to Wyoming Street, on the north side of the streetWyoming Street, from Paul Street to Second Street, on the west side of the street 
(b)	The city shall place appropriate signs designating the above-described locations as limited parking zones, in accordance with the limitations provided in this section. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to attach to any vehicle parked in violation of the restrictions provided in subsection (a) of this section a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of the provisions of this section and instructing the owner or operator to report to city hall in regard to such violation. Each such owner or operator may within 24 hours of the time when such notice was attached to such vehicle pay to the city clerk at the city hall as a penalty for in full satisfaction of such violation such sum as provided in the schedule of traffic fines from time to time adopted or in such place as may be designated from time to time by the city. The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment within such 24 hours shall render such owner or operator subject to the penalties provided in section 1-11; provided, however, that if any such violation shall occur on Saturday, then such owner or operator may, within 48 hours of the time when such notice was attached to the vehicle, pay to the city clerk or place in the appropriate receptacle the sum specified in the schedule of traffic fines. 
(d)	The presence of any vehicle in or upon any public street in violation of this section regulating the parking of such vehicle shall be prima facie evidence that the person in whose name such vehicle is registered in the records of the director of revenue of the state committed or authorized such violation. 
(e)	Each additional period of parking beyond the limits specified in this section shall constitute a new offense and the owner or operator of a vehicle shall be subject to additional penalties. 
(Code 1994, § 86-274; Ord. No. 946, § 1, 11-21-1967; Ord. No. 1053, §§ 1-6, 11-22-1977) 
Sec. 46-377. - Prohibited at all times on certain streets. 
(a)	No person shall park a vehicle at any time on the following streets, or indicated portions thereof: 
Lexington Road, both sides, between Mathis Lane and Carroll Drive; 
Myrtle Street, between Armstrong and McKissock Streets; 
Myrtle Street, south side, from Armstrong to McKissock Streets; 
Armstrong Street, east side, from Myrtle to Olive Streets, except areas therein designated for bus loading only; 
McKissock Street, west side, from Olive to within 120 feet of Myrtle Street, except areas designated for bus loading; 
Sugarland Drive, between 7 Highway and Hidden Valley Drive; and 
Parking shall be allowed on the North side of Myrtle Street to within 15 feet of Armstrong. 
(b)	Parking in areas designated for persons with disabilities shall be limited to vehicles displaying the appropriate license plates or permits authorized for that purpose by the state. 
(Code 1994, § 86-275; Ord. No. 1238, § 1, 1-9-1989; Ord. No. 1279, § 1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 1398, 5-12-1997) 
Sec. 46-378. - Parking of commercial motor vehicles and other vehicles. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for the driver, owner operator of a commercial motor vehicle, trailer, tractor or truck-tractor, or any recreational vehicle to park or cause to be parked such motor vehicle or trailer for a period in excess of two hours on any street, alley, or street or alley right-of-way in a residential area; except that any operator may park any such vehicle for a longer period while actually and continuously engaged in loading or unloading; provided, however, that the motor vehicle or trailer may be parked in front of a place of business in such area during regular business hours or at the site of a construction project during such time as construction is taking place and the vehicle or trailer is actually being used. 
(b)	A residential area is that area within the city limits zoned for residential use or principally used for residential purposes. A commercial motor vehicle, as used in this section, is a motor vehicle designed or regularly used for carrying freight, merchandise, or other property, or more than eight passengers, or licensed in excess of 18,000 pounds. A tractor or truck-tractor is a self-propelled motor vehicle designed for drawing other vehicles, but not for any other load when operating independently; when attached to a semi-trailer the tractor supports a part of the weight thereof. A trailer is any vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property or passengers on its own structure and for being drawn by a self-propelled vehicle, except those running exclusively on tracks, including a semi-trailer or vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a self-propelled vehicle that a considerable part of its own weight rests upon and is carried by the towing vehicle. A recreational vehicle is any motor vehicle designed, constructed or substantially modified so that it may be used for the purposes of temporary housing quarters, including therein sleeping and eating facilities, which are either permanently attached to the motor vehicle or attached to a unit, which is securely attached to the motor vehicle. Nothing herein shall prevent any motor vehicle from being registered as a commercial vehicle if the motor vehicle could otherwise be so registered. 
(c)	The operation or use of a motor vehicle or trailer in violation of the provisions of this article shall be prima facie evidence that said motor vehicle or trailer was at the time of such violation controlled, operated and used by the owner thereof. 
(d)	Any person or entity found in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine, not to exceed $300.00 per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 1549, 7-26-2004) 
Secs. 46-379-46-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION 

Sec. 46-400. - Driving defective device. 
    No operator of any vehicular device within the meaning of this article shall drive such device upon any street or roadway if the vehicle is in such defective mechanical condition as to be reasonably likely, because of such condition, to cause damage to persons or property while being so operated. All vehicular devices operated upon any street or roadway within the corporate limits of the city shall contain equipment in accordance with this article, and in good working order. 
(Code 1994, § 86-296; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § M, 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-401. - Lamps and signaling devices. 
(a)	Each vehicle operated upon a street or roadway of the city shall have lighted lamps and red reflectors, as required by RSMo 307.020 through 307.127 and shall not use any other beam other than the depressed beam of the headlights while operating on the streets of the city. 
(b)	One spotlight is permissible if aimed and used at all times so as not to be dazzling or glaring to anyone. 
(c)	Mechanical or electrical signaling devices which shall plainly display a signal visible from the rear and front indicating an intention to turn, stop or slow. 
(Code 1994, § 86-297; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § M(a), 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-402. - Safety glass. 
    Each vehicle operated on a street or roadway of the city shall have safety glass pursuant to the requirements set forth in RSMo 307.130-307.160. 
(Code 1994, § 86-298; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § M(b), 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-403. - Horns and warning devices. 
(a)	Each vehicle operated on a street or roadway of the city shall be equipped with horns and warning devices capable of emitting a reasonable sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet; provided that audible warning shall be given by a driver of any motor vehicle when reasonably necessary to ensure the safe operation thereof, but such driver shall not otherwise use such horn when upon any street or roadway. 
(b)	No vehicle within the meaning of this chapter shall be equipped with any siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise permitted herein. 
(Code 1994, § 86-299; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § M(c), 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-404. - Brakes. 
    Every motor vehicle operated on a street or roadway of this city shall be equipped with at least two adequate brakes, each of which shall work independently of the other, except motorcycles and animal-drawn vehicles, which shall have not less than one adequate brake thereon. 
(Code 1994, § 86-300; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § M(d), 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-405. - Mirrors. 
    Each vehicle operated on a street or roadway of the city shall have mirrors so placed in or upon the vehicle and adjusted as to reveal the road behind from the seat of the operator. 
(Code 1994, § 86-301; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § M(e), 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-406. - Windshields. 
    The windshield of each vehicle operated on a street or roadway of the city shall be maintained clearly transparent at all times and be equipped with a device in good working order for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from same, such device to be controlled by the operator of the vehicle. 
(Code 1994, § 86-302; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § M(f), 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-407. - Windows. 
    The windows of each vehicle operated on a street or roadway of the city shall, at all times, be maintained in a transparent condition and no obstruction or thing shall be suspended or maintained in or upon any motor vehicle so as to obstruct the operator's vision in the vehicle. 
(Code 1994, § 86-303; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § M(g), 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-408. - Speedometer. 
    The speedometer of each vehicle operated on a street or roadway of the city shall be kept and maintained in good operating condition and accurately reflect the speed of such vehicle at all times. 
(Code 1994, § 86-304; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § M(h), 4-13-1976) 
Sec. 46-409. - Excessive noise. 
(a)	No vehicle shall be operated upon any street or roadway of this city at a time when such vehicle is so out of repair, loaded in such a manner as to create an unreasonably loud or unnecessarily grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(b)	All motor vehicles shall, at all times, be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation so as to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke or fumes; provided, the use of a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device on any motor vehicle is hereby prohibited. 
(c)	The engine, power mechanism, exhaust pipes or openings on any vehicle shall not be operated or utilized so as to emit an undue, great amount of steam, smoke, flame, combustion, exhaust or noise. 
(Code 1994, § 86-305; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XV, § M(i), 4-13-1976) 
Secs. 46-410-46-431. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SCHOOL BUSES 

Sec. 46-432. - Manner of identifying. 
    Every bus used for the transportation of schoolchildren shall bear upon the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words "school bus" in letters not less than eight inches in height. Each bus shall have lettered on the rear in plain and distinct type the following: "State Law: Stop while bus is loading and unloading." Each school bus subject to RSMo 304.050-304.070 shall be equipped with a mechanical and electrical signaling device approved by the state board of education, which will display a signal plainly visible from the front and rear and indicating intention to stop. 
(Code 1994, § 86-326; Ord. No. 1272, § 2, 12-10-1990) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.050. 
Sec. 46-433. - Driver's duties. 
    The driver of a school bus in the process of loading or unloading students shall activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices, in the manner prescribed by the state board of education, to communicate to drivers of other vehicles that students are loading or unloading. No driver of a school bus shall take on or discharge passengers at any location upon a highway consisting of four or more lanes of traffic, whether or not divided by a median or barrier, in such manner as to require the passengers to cross more than two lanes of traffic; nor shall he take on or discharge passengers while the vehicle is upon the road or highway proper unless the vehicle so stopped is plainly visible for at least 300 feet in each direction to drivers of other vehicles upon the highway and then only for such time as is actually necessary to take on and discharge passengers. 
(Code 1994, § 86-327; Ord. No. 1272, § 3, 12-10-1990) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.050. 
Sec. 46-434. - To allow vehicles to pass, when. 
    The driver of any school bus driving upon the streets of this city, after loading or unloading school children, should remain stopped if the bus is followed by three or more vehicles, until such vehicles have been permitted to pass the school bus, if the conditions prevailing make it safe to do so. 
(Code 1994, § 86-328; Ord. No. 1272, § 4, 12-10-1990) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.050. 
Sec. 46-435. - Driver approaching stopped school bus to stop, when. 
    The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging any schoolchildren and whose driver has in the manner prescribed by law given the signal to stop shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by its driver to proceed. 
(Code 1994, § 86-329; Ord. No. 1272, § 1, 12-10-1990) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.050. 
Sec. 46-436. - Violations, presumption. 
    If any vehicle is witnessed by a police officer or the driver of a school bus to have violated the provisions of this division and the identity of the operator is not otherwise apparent, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that the person in whose name such vehicle is registered committed the violation. If charges are filed against multiple owners of a motor vehicle, only one of the owners may be convicted and court costs may be assessed against only one of the owners. If the vehicle which is involved in the violation is registered in the name of a rental or leasing company and the vehicle is rented or leased to another person at the time of the violation, the rental or leasing company may rebut the presumption by providing the police officer or prosecuting authority with a copy of the rental or lease agreement in effect at the time of the violation. No prosecuting authority may bring any legal proceedings against a rental or leasing company under this section, unless prior written notice of the violation has been given to that rental or leasing company by registered mail at the address appearing on the registration and the rental or leasing company has failed to provide the rental or lease agreement copy within 15 days of receipt of such notice. 
(Code 1994, § 86-330; Ord. No. 1272, § 5, 12-10-1990) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.050. 
Secs. 46-437-46-455. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 46-456. - Subject to traffic control devices. 
    Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared in sections 46-144 and 46-145, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in sections 46-458 through 46-464. 
(Code 1994, § 86-351; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VIII, § A, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.370. 
Sec. 46-457. - Drivers to exercise highest degree of care. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise the highest degree of care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1994, § 86-352; Ord. No. 1019A, art. XIV, § K, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.410. 
Sec. 46-458. - Right-of-way in crosswalks. 
(a)	When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(b)	No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(c)	Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply under the conditions stated in subsection 46-461(b). 
(d)	Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle shall not proceed through the crosswalk until the pedestrian has cleared the roadway. 
(Code 1994, § 86-353; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VIII, § B, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.375. 
Sec. 46-459. - To use right half of crosswalks. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Code 1994, § 86-354; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VIII, § C, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.380. 
Sec. 46-460. - Crossing at right angles. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1994, § 86-355; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VIII, § D, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.385. 
Sec. 46-461. - When pedestrian shall yield. 
(a)	Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)	The foregoing rule in this section has no application under the conditions stated in section 46-462, when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain designated places. 
(Code 1994, § 86-356; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VIII, § E, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.390. 
Sec. 46-462. - Prohibited crossing. 
(a)	Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. 
(b)	No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any street designated by ordinance. 
(c)	No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements. 
(Code 1994, § 86-357; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VIII, § F, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.395. 
Sec. 46-463. - Obedience to railroad signals. 
    No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1994, § 86-358; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VIII, § G, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.400. 
Sec. 46-464. - Walking along roadways. 
(a)	Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)	Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(Code 1994, § 86-359; Ord. No. 1019A, art. VIII, § H, 4-13-1976) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.405. 
Chapter 48 - UTILITIES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal public utilities generally, RSMo 71.520 et seq.; authority to contract for utilities, RSMo 71.530; lands, levees, drainage, sewers, and public water supply, RSMo 241.010 et seq.; water resources, RSMo 256.200 et seq.; water usage, RSMo 256.400 et seq.; telephone and telegraph companies, RSMo 392.010 et seq.; gas, electric, water, heating, and sewer companies, RSMo 393.010 et seq.; joint municipal utilities commissions, RSMo 393.700 et seq.; voluntary water usage reports, RSMo 71.287; municipal authority to regulate and license water supply, RSMo 71.700; municipal authority to protect water sources, RSMo 71.710; authority for imposition of sewer service charges, RSMo 71.715; municipally owned utilities generally, RSMo 91.010 et seq.; municipally owned utilities in special charter cities having populations of less than 10,000, RSMo 91.560 et seq.; Missouri Clean Water Law, RSMo 644.006 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 48-1. - Supervision by superintendent of public works, water/sewer division. 
    The superintendent of public works, water/sewer division, shall supervise the operation of the water/sewer department. 
(Code 1994, § 90-1; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 1, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-2. - Composition. 
    Municipal utilities shall consist of the following: 
(1)	City water.
(2)	City sewer.
(Code 1994, § 90-2; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 2, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-3. - Conditions precedent to city furnishing. 
    The city shall furnish utility service from any of its utilities to customers only upon the expressed conditions precedent that the city will not be liable to the consumer or other person for any inconvenience, delay, injury, loss or damage whatsoever, accruing by reason of derangements, stoppage, leaks, faults or negligent construction or operation of any of the utility equipment, apparatus, distribution means, pipes or lines, or by reason of the temporary shutting off of any of the utility service to clear or repair the same or for any other purpose, or by reason of the scarcity or insufficiency of the particular utility service supply, or the character or condition of the water supply, or by reason of the clogging or freezing of the mains or service pipes, or the disruptions of distribution due to weather or other acts of God; nor shall the city be liable for the expense of repair of any service, pipes, mains or lines not owned by the city. The city reserves the right at any time to restrict the use of any utility service for any and all purposes. The superintendent of public works, water/sewer division, may, if he determines it necessary, impose a system of rationing or otherwise restrict the delivery of any or all utility services to a consumer. 
(Code 1994, § 90-3; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 3, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-4. - Duties of city clerk. 
    The city clerk shall register all applications for the supply of any utility service, keep a full and accurate account of all utility services provided, promptly collect all utility charges and pay the same to the treasurer and report to the city council monthly all moneys received. 
(Code 1994, § 90-4; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 4, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-5. - Application for service connection. 
    All applications for utility services, or any utility service, shall be made in writing at the city hall to the city clerk upon an appropriate form furnished by the city. The application, in writing, shall plainly show the charges to be made for the installation of the utility service by the city, and all such charges shall be paid by the applicant at that time. The application shall also show the deposits required, the conditions under which deposits may be returned, and such deposits shall be paid by the applicant at that time. It shall be expressly understood, and shall be made a part of the application, that as a consideration for the provision of the particular utility service and of all utility services within the city, incorporated within such contract shall be the requirements of this chapter, and every person by applying for such utility service, by accepting such service has thereby expressed his assent to be bound thereby. The applicant shall be furnished a copy of his application, which shall serve as a receipt for moneys paid. 
(Code 1994, § 90-5; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 5, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-6. - Termination of service. 
    Any or all utility services may be discontinued without notice to the customer, for the following reasons: 
(1)	Failure to pay utility service charges, provided that notice of the utility service charge and the right to protest or complain about the calculation of the charges has been given as provided in section 48-313 
(2)	Upon the discovery of any unauthorized connection or diversion of utility service beyond any meter. 
(3)	Upon the discovery that utility service through one meter is being used by more than one customer. 
(Code 1994, § 90-6; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 11, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-7. - Notice of violations; enforcement. 
    Upon violation by a user of any of the rules and regulations of this chapter, the user shall be informed in writing of the particular violations and that service shall be terminated if the circumstances constituting the violation are not rectified to the satisfaction of the city clerk within 15 days; and that the user, within the 15-day period, may meet with the city clerk during regular business hours of the city if the user believes the charges are erroneous or incorrect. The city clerk shall be empowered to require compliance by the user with all the rules and regulations adopted and imposed by this chapter and may require the user to reasonably demonstrate such compliance to stay the order of disconnection at the end of the 15-day period. If the user does not comply with the rules and regulations within the 15-day period, the service shall be disconnected and the user informed in writing that service will be reconnected upon demonstration to the satisfaction of the city clerk that the user has complied with the rules and regulations and upon payment by the user of the standard reconnection fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule; provided that, where dishonest or unauthorized water piping shall be found, the city may terminate the utility service immediately and the city shall notify such person that the service will be reconnected upon rectification of the circumstances causing the disconnection to the satisfaction of the city clerk and the payment of the enhanced reconnection fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule; provided further, that when any person after prior notice and prior opportunity for hearing consistent with the provisions of this section has been denied service and is still owing the city, moves into a building or dwelling connected with water, the service shall be cut off immediately and the city shall notify such person that service will be reconnected upon the payment of the amount due and the reconnection charge. 
(Code 1994, § 90-7; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 15, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-8. - Minimum and additional deposits. 
(a)	The city council has established, as provided in the city fee schedule, minimum deposits for: 
(1)	Owner occupied single-family residences;
(2)	Rental homes or units; and
(3)	Commercial or industrial properties as shown in the city's fee schedule.
(b)	A greater deposit may be required, at the inception of service and from time to time thereafter, if, in the city's absolute discretion, credit or past service history indicates that an additional deposit is required to secure payment for utility services provided. 
(c)	The amount of additional deposit, above the minimum, shall generally be equivalent to two times the highest monthly billing assessed during the duration of the service or the preceding 12 months, whichever is applicable, but may be greater or lesser, as credit and service history may indicate is necessary or appropriate. 
(d)	As indicated by the minimum deposit amounts established by the city council, the minimum deposit may be zero (i.e., no deposit required) only if determined by the clerk to be appropriate and only with regard to service provided to owner occupied single-family dwellings. For service to rental, commercial, or industrial properties a deposit of not less than the minimum deposit established by the city council is required. 
Secs. 48-9-48-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-24. - Service installations made by water department only. 
    No water shall be furnished except through a service installed by the city water department. Such service installation shall include excavation, tapping the main, service line to the meter installation, but not beyond the property line, meter tile, meter tile cover, five-eighths-inch through three-fourths-inch meter and meter connecting fittings and backfilling the installation. 
(Code 1994, § 90-31; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 1, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-25. - Costs of installation, ownership; responsibility for maintenance, etc. 
    The costs of water service installation shall be in lieu of any other main connecting charges and shall be such a charge and not a transaction in which the materials are purchased. The ownership of such service line and other appurtenances installed by the city water department shall remain with the water system of the city. The responsibility for maintenance and repairs to installed service lines will be that of the water department. The maintenance for any meter which is over five-eighths inch through three-fourths inch in size shall remain the responsibility of the property owner. If the service line is replaced by the water department and if the owner executes an assignment of such service line to the water department, then such service line shall be the property of the water department and shall be maintained by the department. 
(Code 1994, § 90-32; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 1, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-26. - Applicant responsible for main tapping costs. 
(a)	The applicant for water service shall pay all costs of tapping the main and tapping shall be under the supervision and inspection of the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division. The cost of such taps shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)	Wherever the water main is on the opposite side of the street from the premises to be supplied, the city will contribute the net cost of 15 feet of pipe towards the cost of installation or replacement of connections heretofore made. 
(Code 1994, § 90-33; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 2, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-27. - Standards used in tapping main. 
    In tapping, a main stopcock, to be known as the corporation cock, shall be inserted at the top and to it will lay at a depth of three feet or more below the surface of the ground the service pipe, which service pipe shall conform to AWWA standards. 
(Code 1994, § 90-34; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 3, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-28. - Control of flow. 
    A suitable brass stopcock with round waterway must be placed in the service pipe so that the T head will stand parallel with the curb when the water is off, to allow the city to control the flow of water through any such pipe, located inside the curbstone or as near thereto as practicable, with iron stop box of such pattern as may be approved by the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division. Should it become necessary to dig the box out for the purpose of turning the water on or off, it shall be at the expense of the water taker. No person other than the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division, or one duly authorized by him shall turn on the water at any stopcock or meter or in any other manner take water from the water mains. 
(Code 1994, § 90-35; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 4, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-29. - Use of service pipes and taps. 
    Along streets where water mains are laid, service pipes shall not be allowed to run from one lot to another, but must be taken from the mains in front of the premises or some point in the street adjacent to the lot, except by special permit of the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division,; provided that, one service pipe may be used to supply all the parties taking water within 60 feet on either side of such service pipe, in which case such branch service must have a curb stop and box. Not more than one house shall be supplied from a tap except by special permit of the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division. 
(Code 1994, § 90-36; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 5, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-30. - Use of corporation cocks. 
    No corporation cock shall be inserted for any premises where one has been previously inserted for water conveyed, for the purpose of giving an increased supply, except pursuant to a new application and permit. Nor shall any attachment be made to any premises previously supplied with water, until the corporation cock previously used shall be drawn and the opening securely stopped with a brass plug, at the expense of the owners of the premises. Nor shall any two corporation cocks be inserted into any street within less than ten inches of one another. 
(Code 1994, § 90-37; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 6, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-31. - Positioning of source and use. 
    No cross connection or connection between any pipe carrying water from the waterworks of the city and water from any other source of supply shall be made and no pipe or orifice or opening of any kind shall be installed or permitted in any pipe or conductor of water from such waterworks into any tank, vessel, reservoir or container of any kind, below the water level or possible water level. 
(Code 1994, § 90-38; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 7, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-32. - Certain consumers keep reserve supply. 
    All persons using city water for steam engines or heating or refrigerating plants shall provide suitable tanks of capacity sufficient to afford a supply for at least ten hours in case the water should be shut off. 
(Code 1994, § 90-39; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 8, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-33. - Connection for building purposes. 
    When a connection is made to supply water for building purposes the service pipe shall be carried, at the expense of the party building, to the inside of the curbstone line where a proper curb stop shall be placed with a pipe leading to the surface, the faucet of which shall be kept secured and locked when not in use. When the building is completed the faucet and pipe shall be taken up and the water shut off at the curb stop. 
(Code 1994, § 90-40; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 11, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-34. - Duty of plumbers concerning connection permits. 
    Whenever extensions are desired or new connections are to be made in place of old ones to the city water supply, permits must be obtained in the usual manner. It shall be the duty of all plumbers to make a written return to the office of the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division, before the water will be turned on, of all connections made by them, giving a description of the premises, location of the corporation cock, length of service pipe, number of feet from the northerly or easterly line of the lot or premises to the place where the tap in the main is located, together with the names of the occupants and the owner of the premises. It shall be the duty of all plumbers to produce a special permit before making any change in any connections that have been made with the water mains. 
(Code 1994, § 90-41; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 12, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-35. - Turn-on after cutoff requires order of director. 
    No consumer or other person whose water service has been turned off for any reason shall turn on the water or reopen the service, or permit the same to be done by any person, except by order of the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division. 
(Code 1994, § 90-42; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 13, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-36. - Special permit required for use of public hydrants, hoses, etc. 
    No person shall take water for private use from any public hydrant, plug, drawcock, hose, pipe or fountain furnished for fire protection purposes or other public use, without the consent of the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division, and a special permit therefor having been paid for and received therefor. The superintendent shall determine the charge for such permit, which shall be his estimate as to the cost of any water used and extraordinary expenses incurred by the city in providing supervisory personnel or other extraordinary service. For all permits, there shall be a deposit of not less than the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1994, § 90-43; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 14, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-37. - Interference with waterworks prohibited. 
    No person shall hitch any horse or mule to any fire hydrant, or open a hydrant, or remove or obstruct the stopcock cover of any fire hydrant, or paint, mark or deface any fire hydrant or any public or private stopcock, or place or deposit any dirt or other material in any such stopcock, boxes or in any meter box, or turn any public or private stopcock, or commit any act tending to obstruct the use thereof, or in any manner tamper with or injure any building, meter box, valve box, valve, engine, motor, pump or other machinery, pipe, hose, tools, fixtures or apparatus of the waterworks. 
(Code 1994, § 90-44; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 15, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-38. - Lead ban. 
(a)	This section shall apply to all premises served by the public drinking water system of the city. 
(b)	This section will be reasonably interpreted by the water purveyor. It is the purveyor's intent to ban the use of lead-based material in the construction or modification of the city's drinking water system or private plumbing connected to the city system. The cooperation of all consumers is required to implement the lead ban. 
(c)	If, in the judgment of the water purveyor or his authorized representative, lead-based materials have been used in new construction or modifications after January 1989, due notice shall be given to the consumer. The consumer shall immediately comply by having the lead-based materials removed from the plumbing system and replaced with lead-free materials. If the lead-based materials are not removed from the plumbing system, the water purveyor shall have the right to discontinue water service to the premises. 
(Code 1994, § 90-45; Ord. No. 1466, §§ 1, 2, 6-12-2000) 
Secs. 48-39-48-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 48-50. - Declaration of water emergency. 
    Whenever the mayor or president pro tempore, upon the recommendation of the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division, determines that the city water supply is in danger of being depleted as the result of the breakdown of the water supply system, lack of storage facilities or increased user demand for water, the mayor or president pro tempore shall have the authority to declare a water emergency. 
(Code 1994, § 90-56; Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 7-24-1980) 
Sec. 48-51. - Notification of declaration. 
    Upon the declaration of a water emergency by any one of the individuals named in section 48-50, there shall be placed upon the public bulletin board at the city hall a notice that a water emergency has been declared together with limitations and prohibitions of water use and the notice shall remain posted on the bulletin board until the water emergency is abated. In addition, at least one radio or television station whose broadcasts are normally received within the city shall be contacted and requested to broadcast, as a public service announcement, the fact that a water emergency has been declared by the city and the provisions of this division which are in effect during the water emergency. In addition, all water districts supplied by the city shall be notified of the water emergency and the applicable limitations and prohibitions relating to water use. 
(Code 1994, § 90-57; Ord. No. 1101, § 2, 7-24-1980) 
Sec. 48-52. - Water use limitations during water emergency. 
    The following uses of water shall be limited or prohibited during any water emergency and the specific limitations or prohibitions adopted shall be stated in any declaration of water emergency as provided in section 48-51: 
(1)	Phase I. Phase I prohibitions and limitations are: 
a.	The prohibition of lawn or garden watering by residents.
b.	The limitation or prohibition of washing motor vehicles, boats or filling of swimming pools by any water user. 
(2)	Phase II. Phase II prohibitions and limitations are: 
a.	The limitation, as the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division, shall determine, or the prohibition of water use by commercial carwashes and laundromats. 
b.	The limitation, as the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division, shall determine, or the prohibition of water use by industrial or commercial business establishments. 
(Code 1994, § 90-58; Ord. No. 1101, § 3, 7-24-1980) 
Sec. 48-53. - Duration, termination. 
    All limitations and prohibitions adopted during the water emergency relating to water use shall remain in effect until terminated by the announcement of the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division, mayor or president pro tempore of the council. Such termination shall be evidenced by placement of a notice of the termination upon the public bulletin board in the city hall and when at least one radio or television station broadcasts, as a public service announcement, the fact that the water emergency has been terminated. 
(Code 1994, § 90-59; Ord. No. 1101, § 4, 7-24-1980) 
Sec. 48-54. - Turning off water service for violation. 
    If any water user is found to be using water in violation of any of the limitations or prohibitions invoked during a water emergency, he shall first be requested to cease or limit use during the water emergency in accordance with the declared limitations or prohibitions of the water emergency. If the water user is again found to be using water in violation of the limitation or prohibitions declared in the water emergency the water service to such water user shall be shut off until the water emergency has been terminated. 
(Code 1994, § 90-60; Ord. No. 1101, § 5, 7-24-1980) 
Secs. 48-55-48-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State standards for on-site disposal systems, RSMo 701.025 et seq. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-71. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)	Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge. 
(2)	Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system. 
(3)	Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system.
(4)	Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system.
(Code 1994, § 90-81; Ord. No. 1149, § 1.1, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-72. - Purpose and policy. 
    This article sets forth uniform standards and requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq. and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR 403). This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that the existing customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Code 1994, § 90-82; Ord. No. 1149, § 1.1, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-73. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city POTW. Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent of the city POTW shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 90-83; Ord. No. 1149, § 1.1, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-74. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the act means the federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the director in an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the administrator of the EPA in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)	A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation. 
(2)	A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively. 
(3)	A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in this definition if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
    Categorical standards means national categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Control authority refers to the approval authority, defined hereinabove; or the superintendent if the city has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the wastestream and without consideration of time. 
    Hearing board means the city council. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b) or (c)), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
    Industrial user means a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act (33 USC 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), 42 USC 6901 et seq., the Clean Air Act, 42 USC 7401 et seq., the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 USC 2601 et seq., or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b), (c)) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
    National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    New source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a section 307(c) of the Act (33 USC 1317(c)) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of proposal in the federal register. Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days after proposal, a new source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
    POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. The term "POTW" also includes any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day, or has a flow greater than five percent of the flow in the city's wastewater treatment system, or has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the Act, or state statutes and rules or is found by the city, (state control agency) or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    Storm drain or storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwaters, surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other acts. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Wastewater contribution permit means as set forth in section 48-203. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 90-84; Ord. No. 1073, art. I, §§ 2, 4-7, 11, 12, 14-16, 18, 19, 22, 23, 12-12-1978; Ord. No. 1149, § 1.2, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-75. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations as used in this article shall have the designated meanings: 
ASTM means the American Society for Testing and Materials 
AWWA means the American Water Works Association 
BOD means biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR means Code of Federal Regulations 
COD means chemical oxygen demand 
EPA means Environmental Protection Agency 
l means liter 
mg means milligrams 
mg/l means milligrams per liter 
NPDES means national pollutant discharge elimination system 
POTW means publicly owned treatment works 
SIC means standard industrial classification 
SWDA means Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq. 
TSS means total suspended solids 
USC means United States Code 
(Code 1994, § 90-85; Ord. No. 1149, § 1.3, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-76. - Confidential information. 
(a)	Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(b)	When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(c)	Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(Code 1994, § 90-86; Ord. No. 1149, § 4.7, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-77. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1994, § 90-87; Ord. No. 1149, § 6.2, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-78. - Unlawful deposits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1994, § 90-88; Ord. No. 1073, art. II, § 1, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-79. - Unlawful discharges to natural outlets. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 90-89; Ord. No. 1073, art. II, § 2, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-80. - Connection to public system required; when. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is located within 100 feet, 30.5 meters of the property line. 
(Code 1994, § 90-90; Ord. No. 1073, art. II, § 4, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-81. - Discharge of surface runoff or groundwater. 
(a)	Prohibited in public sanitary sewers. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior or interior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(b)	Use of combined or storm sewers. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the codes enforcement officer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the codes enforcement officer, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1994, § 90-91; Ord. No. 1073, art. IV, § 8, art. V, § 2, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-82. - Authority to enter, inspect property. 
(a)	The codes enforcement officer and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The codes enforcement officer shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)	The codes enforcement officer and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1994, § 90-92; Ord. No. 1073, art. VII, §§ 1, 3, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-83. - Compliance with safety rules required. 
    While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 48-82, the codes enforcement officer shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by the negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions. 
(Code 1994, § 90-93; Ord. No. 1073, art. VII, § 2, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-84. - Tampering with, damaging sewage works. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the sewage works. 
(Code 1994, § 90-94; Ord. No. 1073, art. VI, § 1, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-85. - Violation notice; penalties. 
(a)	Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except section 48-84 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)	Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11. Each 24-hour period in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1994, § 90-95; Ord. No. 1073, art. VIII, §§ 1-3, 12-12-1978) 
Secs. 48-86-48-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 48-97. - Harmful contributions, suspension of permits. 
    The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
(Code 1994, § 90-106; Ord. No. 1149, § 5.1, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-98. - Permittee to cease contribution upon suspension. 
    Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(Code 1994, § 90-107; Ord. No. 1149, § 5.1, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-99. - Revocation of permit. 
    Any user who violates the following conditions of this article, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this division: 
(1)	Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge. 
(2)	Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)	Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. 
(4)	Violation of any of the conditions of the permit.
(Code 1994, § 90-108; Ord. No. 1149, § 5.2, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-100. - Notification of violation. 
    Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, wastewater contribution permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction shall be submitted to the city by the user. 
(Code 1994, § 90-109; Ord. No. 1149, § 5.3, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-101. - Show cause hearing regarding enforcement action. 
    The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city council regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(Code 1994, § 90-110; Ord. No. 1149, § 5.4, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-102. - Conduct of show cause hearing. 
    The city council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee to: 
(1)	Issue in the name of the city council notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings. 
(2)	Take the evidence.
(3)	Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city council for action thereon. 
(Code 1994, § 90-111; Ord. No. 1149, § 5.4.2, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-103. - Show cause hearing testimony to be under oath. 
    At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 90-112; Ord. No. 1149, § 5.4.3, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-104. - Council's enforcement orders. 
    After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Code 1994, § 90-113; Ord. No. 1149, § 5.4.4, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-105. - City may institute civil action. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the circuit court of this county. 
(Code 1994, § 90-114; Ord. No. 1149, § 5.5, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-106. - Penalties. 
    Any user who is found to have violated an order of the city council or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this article, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(Code 1994, § 90-115; Ord. No. 1149, § 6.1, 5-14-1984) 
Secs. 48-107-48-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 48-126. - Construction, maintenance restricted. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1994, § 90-126; Ord. No. 1073, art. II, § 3, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-127. - Permitted, when. 
    Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 48-80, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1994, § 90-127; Ord. No. 1073, art. III, § 1, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-128. - Construction permit required. 
    Before the commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the codes enforcement officer. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as may be deemed necessary by the codes enforcement officer. A permit and inspection fee as provided in the city fee schedule shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1994, § 90-128; Ord. No. 1073, art. III, § 2, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-129. - When construction permit effective. 
    A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the codes enforcement officer. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the codes enforcement officer when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the codes enforcement officer. 
(Code 1994, § 90-129; Ord. No. 1073, art. III, § 3, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-130. - Type, capacity, location and layout specifications. 
    The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations and requirements of the Cass County Department of Health or the Jackson County Health Department, as applicable to the location of the disposal system. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet, or 1,395 square meters. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Code 1994, § 90-130; Ord. No. 1073, art. III, § 4, 12-12-1978; Ord. No. 1568, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 48-131. - Sanitary maintenance by owner required. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1994, § 90-131; Ord. No. 1073, art. III, § 6, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-132. - Additional requirements may be imposed. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the codes enforcement officer. 
(Code 1994, § 90-132; Ord. No. 1073, art. III, § 7, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-133. - Connection to public sewer upon availability. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in section 48-130, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt. 
(Code 1994, § 90-133; Ord. No. 1073, art. III, § 5, 12-12-1978) 
Secs. 48-134-48-164. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 48-165. - Permits required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city and paying the permit fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1994, § 90-146; Ord. No. 1073, art. IV, § 1, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-166. - Classes of building sewer permits; application; fees. 
    There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: one for residential and commercial service; and one for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the codes enforcement officer. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and for an industrial building sewer permit in the amount provided in the city fee schedule shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1994, § 90-147; Ord. No. 1073, art. IV, § 2, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-167. - Expenses and liability incident to installation to be borne by owner. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1994, § 90-148; Ord. No. 1073, art. IV, § 3, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-168. - Separate building sewer required for each building. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. 
(Code 1994, § 90-149; Ord. No. 1073, art. IV, § 4, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-169. - Use of old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the codes enforcement officer, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 90-150; Ord. No. 1073, art. IV, § 5, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-170. - Specifications. 
    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Code 1994, § 90-151; Ord. No. 1073, art. IV, § 6, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-171. - Elevation. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1994, § 90-152; Ord. No. 1073, art. IV, § 7, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-172. - Standards for connection into public sewers. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and must be approved by the codes enforcement officer before installation. 
(Code 1994, § 90-153; Ord. No. 1073, art. IV, § 9, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-173. - Connection to be made under supervision of codes enforcement officer. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the codes enforcement officer when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the codes enforcement officer. 
(Code 1994, § 90-154; Ord. No. 1073, art. IV, § 10, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-174. - Excavations to be guarded, restored. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1994, § 90-155; Ord. No. 1073, art. IV, § 11, 12-12-1978) 
Secs. 48-175-48-201. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 

Sec. 48-202. - Discharger permits. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge without a city permit to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, and/or to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the codes enforcement officer in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 90-166; Ord. No. 1149, § 4.1, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-203. - Contribution permits-Required. 
    All significant users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. 
(Code 1994, § 90-167; Ord. No. 1149, § 4.2.1, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-204. - Same-Application. 
    Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city, and accompanied by a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)	Name, address, and location, if different from the address.
(2)	SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended. 
(3)	Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in division 6 of this article as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended. 
(4)	Time and duration of contribution.
(5)	Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any. 
(6)	Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation. 
(7)	Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged. 
(8)	Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
(9)	If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.	The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
b.	No increment referred to in subsection (9)a. of this section shall exceed nine months.
c.	No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the codes enforcement officer. 
(10)	Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production.
(11)	Type and amount of raw material processed (average and maximum per day).
(12)	Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
(13)	Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the date furnished, the city may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(Code 1994, § 90-168; Ord. No. 1149, § 4.2.2, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-205. - Same-Modifications of national categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by section 48-204, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the superintendent within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by section 48-227(8) and (9). 
(Code 1994, § 90-169; Ord. No. 1149, § 4.2.3, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-206. - Conditions. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this division and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)	The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer. 
(2)	Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics.
(3)	Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
(4)	Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities.
(5)	Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule. 
(6)	Compliance schedules.
(7)	Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (see section 48-209). 
(8)	Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city and affording city access thereto. 
(9)	Requirements for notification of the city or any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system. 
(10)	Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per section 48-99 
(11)	Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Code 1994, § 90-170; Ord. No. 1149, § 4.2.4, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-207. - Duration. 
    Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in division 6 of this article are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Code 1994, § 90-171; Ord. No. 1149, § 4.2.5, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-208. - Transfer. 
    Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(Code 1994, § 90-172; Ord. No. 1149, § 4.2.6, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-209. - Reporting requirements for permittee. 
(a)	Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the codes enforcement officer a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(b)	Periodic compliance reports. Periodic compliance reports shall be made as follows: 
(1)	Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the codes enforcement officer during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the codes enforcement officer, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow reported in subsection (a) of this section. At the discretion of the superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the codes enforcement officer may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
(2)	The codes enforcement officer may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (b)(1) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the codes enforcement officer, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the administrator. Where 40 CFR 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April, 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the administrator. 
(Code 1994, § 90-173; Ord. No. 1149, § 4.3, 5-14-1984) 
Secs. 48-210-48-226. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 48-227. - General discharge prohibitions. 
    No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW: 
(1)	Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interacting with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the city, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)	Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)	Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0, unless the POTW is specifically designed to accommodate such wastewater, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. 
(4)	Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act. 
(5)	Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)	Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), 42 USC 6901 et seq., the Clean Air Act, 42 USC 7401 et seq., the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 USC 2601 et seq., or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)	Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)	Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)	Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) unless the POTW treatment plant is designed to accommodate such temperature. 
(10)	Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation. 
(11)	Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the codes enforcement officer in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)	Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
When the codes enforcement officer determines that a user is contributing to the POTW any of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, such officer shall advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW, and develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference with the POTW. 
(Code 1994, § 90-186; Ord. No. 1149, § 2.1, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-228. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Upon promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The codes enforcement officer shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(Code 1994, § 90-187; Ord. No. 1149, § 2.2, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-229. - Modification of federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. The term "consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in 95 percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in 40 CFR 403.7(c)(2) of General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution promulgated pursuant to the act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(Code 1994, § 90-188; Ord. No. 1149, § 2.3, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-230. - Specific pollutant limitations. 
    No person shall discharge into the publicly owned treatment works any of the following materials in excess of the following concentrations: 
mg/literAluminum29.0Ammonia (as N)64.0Arsenic0.05Barium1.0Boron1.0Cadmium0.01Chromium total1.0CobaltLess than 0.06Copper1.0Cyanide0.05Iron total41.0Lead0.05Magnesium31.0Manganese3.0Mercury0.005MolybdenumLess than 0.012Nickel1.0Nitrogen total organic29.0Oil and grease200.0Phosphorus24.0Silver0.05Sulfate (as SO4) 226.0Sulfide (as S) Less than 1.0Sulfite (as SO3) Less than 2.5Surfactants2.0Tin totalLess than 0.10TitaniumLess than 0.10Zinc4.0BOD440.0pHLess than 5.0 or greater than 9.5TSS520.0Total identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons (phenolic compounds which cannot be removed by the city's wastewater treatment process) 50.0 
(Code 1994, § 90-189; Ord. No. 1149, § 2.4, 5-14-1984; Ord. No. 1150, 9-24-1984) 
Sec. 48-231. - State requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(Code 1994, § 90-190; Ord. No. 1149, § 2.5, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-232. - Monitoring facilities. 
    The city shall require to be provided and operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 90-191; Ord. No. 1149, § 4.4, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-233. - Inspection and sampling. 
    The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The city, the approval authority and, where the NPDES state is the approval authority, the EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Code 1994, § 90-192; Ord. No. 1149, § 4.5, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-234. - Pretreatment. 
    Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. The city shall annually publish in the Pleasant Hill Times a list of the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the 12 previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the users during the same 12 months. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request. 
(Code 1994, § 90-193; Ord. No. 1149, § 4.6, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-235. - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives as provided in section 48-71. 
(Code 1994, § 90-194; Ord. No. 1149, § 2.6, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-236. - Dilution to correct excessive discharge prohibited; exception. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. Dilution may be an acceptable means of complying with some of the prohibitions set forth in section 48-227, the pH prohibition. 
(Code 1994, § 90-195; Ord. No. 1149, § 2.7, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-237. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)	Responsibility for providing protection against accidental discharges. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(b)	Written notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(c)	Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Code 1994, § 90-196; Ord. No. 1149, § 2.8, 5-14-1984) 
Sec. 48-238. - Wastewater disposal system costs recovery. 
(a)	Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)	Charges and fees. The city may adopt charges and fees which may include: 
(1)	Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program. 
(2)	Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
(3)	Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction.
(4)	Fees for permit applications.
(5)	Fees for filing appeals.
(6)	Fees for consistent removal, by the city, of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards. 
(7)	Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 90-197; Ord. No. 1149, §§ 3.1, 3.2, 5-14-1984) 
Secs. 48-239-48-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - GRAVITY SANITARY SEWERS 

Sec. 48-271. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Constructor means the person constructing the gravity sanitary sewer, including the furnishing and installation of pipe, joint materials and appurtenances to complete the construction of gravity sanitary sewers. 
    Gravity sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage from one point to another point utilizing earth's gravity and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
(Code 1994, § 90-211; Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-272. - Specifications; compliance required. 
    All gravity sanitary sewers constructed within this city shall conform to the respective specifications and other requirements specified below: 
(1)	Vitrified clay pipe. The pipe shall be extra strength clay pipe. Maximum pipe lengths produced by the manufacturer shall be furnished, except for fittings, closures and specials. Joints shall be bell and spigot or plain end type with PVC coupling. Fittings shall be monolithic type. Embedment shall be one-half inch or smaller clean, crushed rock, and shall include the area around the pipe from a point four inches below the pipe to six inches above the top of the pipe. Embedment in rock trenches shall include an additional two inches of gravel beneath the pipe. Vitrified clay pipe shall conform to ASTM C 700. 
(2)	Plastic pipe. Plastic sewer pipe shall be polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. Pipe wall thickness shall be as required to provide a minimum wall thickness with an SDR of 35. Joints for pipe and fittings shall be the elastomeric gasket type. Embedment shall be the same as that specified for vitrified clay pipe. Pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D3034 with cell classification 12454-B. 
(3)	Cast iron pipe. All cast iron pipe shall have class 22 minimum wall thickness. Joints shall be push-on type with neoprene or synthetic rubber gaskets. Cast iron pipe shall be lined with cement mortar and manufacturer's standard bituminous coating. Embedment shall include the area around the pipe from a point four inches below the pipe to the pipe centerline. Embedment in rock trenches shall include an additional two inches of gravel beneath the pipe. Cast iron pipe shall be manufactured in accordance with AWWA C106 or C108. 
(4)	Ductile iron pipe. All ductile iron pipe shall have class 50 minimum wall thickness. Joints shall be push-on type with neoprene or synthetic rubber gaskets. Ductile iron pipe shall be lined with cement mortar and manufacturer's standard bituminous coating. Embedment shall be the same as that specified for cast iron pipe. Ductile iron pipe shall be manufactured in accordance with AWWA C151. 
(5)	Sleeves. All sleeves installed in bored or tunneled holes shall be steel pipe. All sleeves installed in open trench construction may be either steel pipe or reinforced concrete pipe. Reinforced concrete sleeves shall be class V. Steel sleeves shall have the following minimum wall thickness: 
Minimum Wall ThicknessSleeve Size Diameter
(inches)Road and highway crossings
(inches)Railroad crossings
(inches)6, 8, 10 and 120.1880.25014 and 160.1880.282180.2500.313200.2500.344220.2500.375240.2810.407260.2810.43828 and 30 0.3120.46932 0.3120.50134 0.3120.53236 0.3440.53238, 40 and 42 0.3440.563 
(6)	Manholes. Manholes may be constructed of precast reinforced concrete manhole sections. Joints shall be rubber O ring gasketed. Manhole rings and lids shall be constructed of gray cast iron. Castings for standard and shallow manholes shall be Clay and Bailey No. 2011 MR or approved equal. Manhole steps shall be polypropylene-coated steel. 
(Code 1994, § 90-212; Ord. No. 1072, § 2, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-273. - Installation. 
(a)	Pipe laying. Pipe laying shall proceed upgrade with the spigot end of the pipe pointing in the direction of flow. Pipe shall be laid so that the sewer has a uniform invert. All exposed ends and openings to the pipe shall be suitably protected at all times and shall be closed to keep out all foreign matter. Only the working end of the line shall be open while pipe is being laid. A night cap shall be provided and kept in the end of the line at all times when pipe laying is not in progress. All pipe shall be installed in strict conformance with the requirements of the pipe manufacturer. No joints shall be made in the trench until the contractor has made a sample joint and all workmen are familiar with the requirements of the joint installation. 
(b)	Sleeves. Joints of the steel sleeve installed in the tunnel or bored hole shall be made by full butt welds. After the sleeve is placed in the tunnel or bored hole, all void spaces between the steel sleeve and the surrounding soil shall be completely filled with Portland cement grout. Joints of steel sleeves installed in trenches shall be made by full butt welding. Joints of reinforced concrete pipe sleeves shall be laid with a smooth invert. 
(c)	Pipe in sleeves. Each end of each joint of pipe shall be protected by hardwood skids three feet long. These skids shall be firmly attached to the pipe and shall be liberally lubricated immediately prior to insertion in the sleeve. The pipe may be installed in the sleeve either by jacking or by pulling with a cable. The end of the pipe shall be protected by the use of heavy timbers or other suitable pads. After the pipe is installed through and beyond the full length of the sleeve, both ends of the sleeve shall be closed using common brick, dry laid, with the length of the brick parallel to the pipe. 
(d)	Manholes. Manholes shall be constructed of precast concrete rings with cast iron frames and covers in accordance with the drawings and as specified herein. The invert channels shall be smooth and semicircular in shape conforming to the inside of the adjacent sewer section. Changes in size and grade of the channels shall be made gradually and evenly. The invert channels shall be formed directly in the concrete of the manhole base. The floor of the manhole outside the channels shall be smooth and shall slope toward the channels not less than one inch per foot nor more than two inches per foot. In addition, the following standards shall be maintained: 
(1)	Jointing and plastering. Mortar joints shall be smooth and free from surplus mortar on the inside of the manhole. Installation of rubber gasket joints between precast rings shall be in accordance with the recommendation of the manufacturer. 
(2)	Frames and covers. All castings shall be set flush with finish grade in all roadways, two inches above grade in lawns, and at least 12 inches above finished grade in all other areas. 
(3)	Connections to existing manholes. Pipe connections to existing manholes shall be made in such manner that the finish work will conform to the essential applicable requirements specified for new manholes, including all necessary concrete work, cutting and shaping. 
(Code 1994, § 90-213; Ord. No. 1071, § 3, 12-12-1978) 
Sec. 48-274. - Acceptance tests. 
    Prior to acceptance of the sewers, both visual inspection and leakage tests must be satisfactorily completed. Inspections and testing shall be completed in the presence of the codes enforcement officer. Tests shall not be performed until after the completion of the installation of pipe and appurtenances and backfill of the trench. The tests shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)	Visual inspection. All sewers shall be inspected to determine the presence of any misaligned, displaced or broken pipe, any infiltration or any other physical defects. All defects shall be satisfactorily corrected prior to conducting leakage tests. 
(2)	Leakage tests. All sewers shall be tested for leakage by use of water or air, at the contractor's option. Only one of the following methods (water or air) shall be used throughout the project: 
a.	Water leakage test. If the groundwater level is at least two feet above the top of the sewer pipe, an infiltration leakage test shall be used. If the groundwater level is below two feet above the pipe, an exfiltration test shall be used. The procedures for the tests are as follows: 
1.	Infiltration leakage test. An infiltration leakage test shall be performed on all sewer pipe when the groundwater level is at least two feet above the top of the pipe. The test shall be maintained as long as necessary to locate all leaks, but not less than two hours. Repeat as necessary after repairs until measured leakage does not exceed 0.15 gallons per inch of internal diameter (I.D.) per hour per 100 feet of pipe length (200 gallons/inch I.D./day/mile). 
2.	Exfiltration leakage test. An exfiltration leakage test shall be performed on all sewer pipe when the groundwater level is below two feet above the top of the sewer pipe. Exfiltration tests shall be performed with not less than two feet of head above the top of the pipe or above the water table, whichever is higher. The test shall be maintained as long as necessary to locate all leaks, but not less than two hours. Repeat as necessary after repairs until measured leakage does not exceed 0.15 gallons per inch of internal diameter per hour per 100 feet of pipe length (200 gallons/inch ID/day/mile). Protect manholes and other structures by means of bulkheads to prevent bursting pressures from being applied to the inside surfaces of structures. Dewater pipe upon completion of testing. 
b.	Air leakage test. Plug ends of line and cap or plug all connections to withstand internal pressure. The test connection shall be made by a tap installed in a pipe plug. After connecting air control equipment to the air hose, monitor air pressure so that internal pressure does not exceed 5.0 psig (pounds per square inch gauge). After reaching 4.0 psig, throttle the air supply to maintain between 4.0 and 3.5 psig for at least two minutes in order to allow equilibrium between air temperature and pipe walls. During this time, check all plugs to detect any leakage. If plugs are found to leak, bleed off air, tighten plugs, and again begin supplying air. After temperature has stabilized, the pressure is allowed to decrease to 3.5 psig. At 3.5 psig, begin timing to determine the time required for pressure to drop to 2.5 psig. If the time, in seconds, for the air pressure to decrease from 3.5 psig to 2.5 psig is greater than that shown in the following table, the pipe shall be presumed free of defects. 
Pipe Size
(inches)Required Time per 100 LF
(seconds)8701011012158152481835621485246342776530 85133 935 
If air test fails to meet above requirements, the test is to be repeated as necessary after all leaks and defects have been repaired. In areas where there is groundwater the test shall be performed at 3.5 psi above the groundwater head exerted to the top of the sewer pipe. 
(Code 1994, § 90-214; Ord. No. 1071, § 4, 12-12-1978) 
Secs. 48-275-48-284. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 48-285-48-294. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAXATION 

Sec. 48-295. - Tax imposed. 
    Every electric power and energy company, and every other person, firm, corporation, their successors and assigns, owning, operating, controlling, leasing or managing any electric plant or system generating, manufacturing, selling, distributing or transmitting electric energy and power, shall in addition to all other taxes, payments or fees now or hereafter required by law or ordinance, pay to the city an occupation tax in an amount equal to 81/2 percent of the gross receipts derived from the sale of electric energy within the present or future limits of the city during the period of such occupation. 
(Code 1994, § 82-131; Ord. No. 1291, § 1, 10-14-1991) 
Sec. 48-296. - Basis of tax. 
    The occupation tax levied under this division shall be based upon the sale of electric energy for domestic and commercial consumption and not for resale, but not including any revenue for electric service to the city. 
(Code 1994, § 82-132; Ord. No. 1291, § 2, 10-14-1991) 
Sec. 48-297. - Method of payment; computation of tax. 
    All electric utilities shall pay the occupation tax required by this division monthly, and such tax shall be computed upon the basis of gross receipts from the first day through the last day of each month. The company shall calculate the tax due the city monthly, and within 60 days after the last day of each month file a statement notifying the city of the amount of gross revenue subject to the payment of the tax which was received during the month, and at the time of filing such statement shall pay to the city the tax due. 
(Code 1994, § 82-133; Ord. No. 1291, § 3, 10-14-1991) 
Secs. 48-298-48-306. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RATES, CHARGES, DEPOSITS AND BILLING PROCEDURES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-307. - Service fees and other charges. 
    All service fees, installation fees, deposits and other charges related to city utility services shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
Sec. 48-308. - Connection charges. 
    All charges for connection to the city's water and sewer systems shall be provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1994, § 90-236; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 6, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-309. - Deposits. 
(a)	Before any utility service is furnished to any consumer he shall be required to make a cash deposit to guarantee the payment for all services as the bills therefor become due, for which a receipt shall be given. Such deposit shall be in the minimum amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)	If any consumer who has applied for any utility service has any outstanding delinquent bills from prior utility hookings in the city, the deposit for this new service shall be double the minimum deposit. 
(c)	If upon examination the city clerk at any time finds the amount deposited by any water user is not sufficient to cover the bills for any two consecutive months such water user shall, after 48 hours' written notice has been given, be required to make an additional deposit in any amount sufficient to cover the deficiency. Whenever a user of water shall for any reason cease using water, upon complying with all rules, regulations and ordinances of the city governing the furnishing and using of water and the payment in full of all bills and charges therefor shall, if a cash deposit has been made, be entitled to have returned to him, upon the presentation of his receipt therefor, such deposit in accordance with the provisions of this article and such receipt shall thereupon be cancelled. 
(Code 1994, § 90-237; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 7, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-310. - City authority concerning pass through of changes in rates. 
    The current city water rates are as provided in the city fee schedule. The council recognizes that the city purchases water from sources independent of and outside the city, and the city's rate structure is necessarily based upon the costs to the city as charged from outside sources. Should the sources of water raise or lower their rates to the city, the city is authorized to pass through this increase or decrease to city customers on a pro rata temporary basis until such time as the council shall formally act on the rate change. 
(Code 1994, § 90-240; Ord. No. 1121, art. IV, § 4, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-311. - Hardship cases. 
    Any person who, by reason of financial or other hardship, is unable to pay any utility bill prior to the termination date may be granted by the city council such additional period as the city council may deem appropriate in which to pay his delinquent account, provided that the city council may not grant to any customer the right to pay his utility bill past the date when the next month's utility bill would be presented to such customer. 
(Code 1994, § 90-241; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 13, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-312. - Level payment plan. 
    The city clerk, if and when he deems it appropriate, may establish a level payment plan or level use plan wherein a customer's monthly bills are averaged over a year's cycle, so as to avoid undue financial hardships in a period of peak usage. Such level payment or level use plan shall include the following features: 
(1)	The estimated payments for any one month shall be at least ten percent above the average usage amounts for the previous calendar year. 
(2)	No level payment plan can be entered into during periods of peak use, but can only be agreed upon during periods of average or below average use. 
(3)	If, during the period of the year during which the level payment plan is in effect, the rates or charges for a particular utility be increased, the city shall immediately take a meter reading, and upon final adjustment shall charge the old rates for waters used prior to the effective date of the new rate, and charge the new rate for service used after the effective date. 
(4)	The level payment or level use plan shall be adjusted upward or downward to effect any change in the service rate. 
(5)	At the end of the 12-month period a meter reading shall be calculated and the customer shall be entitled to a credit for any overpayment and shall immediately be required to pay any underpayment that may have occurred during the period of the plan. 
(6)	In the calculation of the level payment plan it should be assumed that the usage within a particular period covered by a particular rate structure was used evenly during the period of the calculation. Thus, an individual would not receive as great a benefit of any graduated rate structure that may exist, even though logic might indicate that there would be a heavier use of a particular utility service in one particular billing cycle. 
(Code 1994, § 90-242; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 14, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-313. - Billing procedure. 
(a)	The city clerk shall render to each utility customer a bill for his utility service monthly. The city clerk may, in his discretion, organize the billing cycle so that certain customers are billed at one part of the month and other customers at a different time and thereby equalize the work required of the city clerk and staff to efficiently operate his office. 
(b)	Each customer shall be billed monthly for all utility services in writing. Such bill shall be presented to the customer at least ten days before the payment due date. Such bill shall include the following information: 
(1)	A clear statement that the utility services will be terminated for nonpayment of the bill if not made by a certain date. 
(2)	A clear statement of the procedure whereby a customer may complain about his utility bill and resolve any disputes that might exist as to whether or not the charges have been computed accurately or whether the customer did not in fact use the indicated amount of utility service. Such a statement may be in the following form: 
"If you have any questions or complaints about this bill, you may, at any time before the due date, contact by phone or in person the city hall, and arrange for an appointment to meet with the city clerk or city administrator to discuss your question or complaint." 
(c)	The city clerk and the city administrator shall be empowered to address such complaints and to make such adjustments as may be warranted by the evidence presented, as to whether or not the utility billing is accurate but may not make any adjustments for any other reason. 
(d)	The utility bill as presented shall provide both a net and a gross charge. The net service charge shall be the service charges figured by the applicable rates as provided by this article. The gross service charge shall be the net rate with an addendum of five percent. If the service charge is paid on or before the due date the amount due shall be the net amount. If the amount of the bill is not paid in full by the due date, the gross amount shall be due and payable. This five-percent differential shall not be a penalty for nonpayment, but is a discount for prompt payment. That the city chooses to structure its rates based upon a calculation of the net amounts shall in no way affect this principle. 
(e)	Any person who does not pay their utility service charge or charges by the due date or within ten days thereafter shall be subject to summary termination of all utilities and services. 
(Code 1994, § 90-243; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 10, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-314. - Estimated bills. 
    All bills for utility service charges furnished by the city may be estimated when, by reason of defect in or failure to read the appropriate meter or for any other reason, the monthly bill of the user or customer cannot be accurately determined. The city clerk shall make such estimate considering the average consumption of the user over the previous 12-month period, considering the relative use of such utility service within the city as a whole for the period of time in question, and considering such other factors as to the city clerk may seem appropriate. Such estimated bills shall be due and payable as are all other bills rendered under this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 90-244; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 12, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-315. - All amounts due upon disconnection. 
    Upon disconnection of a user's water or sewer service, any and all amounts owed by the user to the city for the provision of such service shall become due and payable within 30 days. The city, in the notice which sets forth the terms of reconnection of such service, shall indicate to the user that the user must pay the entire amount due the city for services used in the billing period in which the disconnection took place, plus any past due amounts within 30 days, or the city clerk shall direct that the amounts deposited by the user upon connection shall be apportioned to ensure the payments of any amount due to the city from the user, plus a ten-percent penalty on the total of such amount due to the city. If the user fails to pay the amount due within 30 days of the disconnection, the city clerk shall apportion the deposits consistent with the provisions of this section and shall direct the return of any excess to the user, without interest. If the deposits are insufficient to pay the amount due to the city from the user, the city shall upon a final settlement of the user's account, demand a reasonable amount for expenses incurred in the collection of the user's account. 
(Code 1994, § 90-245; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 16, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-316. - Refunds upon cessation of service. 
    Whenever a user of the city utility service shall for any reason cease to use the service within two years of the connection date of the service and subject to a determination by the city clerk that the user has complied with all city rules, regulations and ordinances governing the supply and use of such utility service and all bills and charges have been paid in full by the user, the city shall refund to such user, upon presentation of the receipt therefor, his utility deposit, without interest, which has not been applied against a delinquent utility bill. The city shall refund, without interest, all utility deposits to those users whose accounts have not been delinquent for a two-year period. However, the city clerk may reimpose on a user for all utility services a deposit requirement consistent with the provisions of this section upon the subsequent delinquency of any utility bill by such user for a period exceeding 30 days. Such deposit must be made by the user within 15 days of written notice by the city clerk of such reimposition of utility deposits. Nonpayment of such deposits reimposed by the city clerk shall result in a $10.00 penalty to be added to the bill of the user in the next billing period for each utility service upon which the deposit has been requested and not timely made. 
(Code 1994, § 90-246; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 17, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-317. - Disconnect fee. 
    The city clerk is authorized and empowered to levy and collect a charge in the amount provided in the city fee schedule from each user of water furnished by the city, whose water has been cut off for failure on the part of the user to promptly pay the monthly charge levied for the use of such water. 
(Code 1994, § 90-247; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 18, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-318. - Access to private premises. 
    The superintendent of public works, water/sewer division, and the persons employed by him in the line of duty shall, at all reasonable hours, have free access to all parts of any building, dwelling house or premises of any kind to which service is furnished, for the purpose of installing, examining, repairing or removing any poles, wires, meters or other material or appliances belonging to the city, or to read meters, turn on or cut off service or for any other purpose that may be deemed essential for the preservation of property, prevention of waste or collection of revenue. 
(Code 1994, § 90-248; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 19, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-319. - Right to change rates. 
    The schedule of rates for the use of municipal utilities may at any time and in any respect be changed by action of the city council, and the right to make such change without notice to the individual consumer is hereby expressly reserved. 
(Code 1994, § 90-249; Ord. No. 1121, art. IV, § 1, 8-25-1981) 
Secs. 48-320-48-326. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - METERS 

Sec. 48-327. - Required. 
(a)	All water supplied by the city utility service shall be charged for in accordance with the registration of the meters installed by the city to record the consumption of utility service. In accordance with the rates established under this chapter all bills will be collected in full (less any rate of discount); provided that, when any meter by actual test, as provided in this article, is found to be imperfect and fast in the measurement of services, there shall be deducted from the total amount of the bill the amount represented by such imperfection for the meter reading period for which such bill is rendered. 
(b)	Employees of the water/sewer department may at any time and with or without the knowledge or consent of any consumer, install an additional meter at any location where such meter may be connected into the service to any building, dwelling house or premises of any kind to which the city is furnishing utility service, and when such meter shall for any period register more utilities than are registered by the first meter on the premises of the consumer, it shall be taken as evidence that the service being furnished to such consumer is not being properly metered by the first meter on such consumer's premises. The consumer shall then pay for all utilities registered over any period by the second or additional meter so installed, instead of the amount that has been improperly registered by his regular meter. 
(Code 1994, § 90-261; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 8, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-328. - Multiple dwellings on one lot. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to mean that more than one meter will be furnished for any one building or premises, but where two or more dwellings are located on one lot, each of its dwellings or the occupant or owner thereof shall pay at the regular rates for the water used in each house or dwelling. 
(Code 1994, § 90-263; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 9, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-329. - Tests authorized; fee. 
    Should any customer desire to challenge the accuracy of any meter supplied by the city, he may do so on request and on payment of an inspection charge. Inspection charges shall be designed to cover the cost of testing the meter and shall roughly approximate the cost to the city. This charge shall be set, from time to time, by the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division. The current charge is as provided in the city fee schedule. Should the meter be found to be imperfect and fast in its measurement of the service by more than two percent, the cost of the test shall be paid by the city and the inspection charge shall be refunded to the consumer. Should the test show the meter is correct in that the margin of error is two percent, the cost of the excess amount of services shall not be adjusted and the inspection charge shall be retained by the city. Should the inspection show that the meter is imperfect and slow in its measurement of the service by more than two percent, there shall be no adjustment of prior billings, and the inspection charge will be retained by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 90-264; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 9, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-330. - Frequency of tests. 
    No consumer shall require a test of any meter more often than once every six months. At the request of the consumer a written report showing the results of such test shall be given the consumer requesting the report. 
(Code 1994, § 90-265; Ord. No. 1121, art. I, § 9, 8-25-1981) 
Sec. 48-331. - Installation, maintenance of water meters. 
(a)	All water meters measuring water furnished by the waterworks of the city shall be installed in an approved meter box provided with inside lugs or bolts by which is secured an approved cast iron meter box cover with a lid that can be locked or sealed. The dial of the meter shall be not less than eight inches or more than 14 inches from the lid of the box, and the lid shall not be lower than the surface of the ground nor more than one inch above the level of the ground. It shall be provided with an approved fastening method that can be securely locked or sealed. 
(b)	All water meter boxes as described in subsection (a) of this section shall:
(1)	Be installed at the expense of the owner and approved by the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division; 
(2)	At all times be easily accessible to city employees duly authorized to read, inspect or repair the meter; and 
(3)	Insofar as shall be found possible or practical, be located as near as possible to the line dividing the street or alley from the lot or in the space between the street pavement and the sidewalk. 
Where a meter box is not installed in an accessible location, such meter box may be installed under the direction and supervision of the superintendent of public works, water/sewer division, and the owner of the building, premises or lot shall be charged for the labor and material required. Where water meters are now installed in buildings or basements in locations safe from frost and accessible at all times to city employees, and where at the same time no other more suitable location can be found for such meter, there may be installed around such meter by the direction and supervision of the superintendent an approved metal box or enclosure that can be securely locked or sealed. 
(c)	No person other than one duly authorized by the superintendent shall open any meter box or lock or break any seal. The owner or water user shall keep meter boxes, locks and seals safe from molestation and where boxes or locks are found open or seals broken it shall be considered prima facie evidence that such has been done by the water user. Wherever water meters are furnished by the city, approved connections or a yoke shall be furnished by the owner or water user. 
(Code 1994, § 90-266; Ord. No. 1121, art. II, § 10, 8-25-1981) 
Secs. 48-332-48-337. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - USER CHARGE SYSTEM 

Sec. 48-338. - Purpose. 
    It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city to collect rates, fees and charges for the use of and services provided by the system. The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used for the purpose of operating and maintaining the system; paying the principal of and interest on all revenue bonds or other obligations of the city now outstanding or hereinafter issued or incurred ("revenue bonds," as hereinafter defined) that are payable solely from the revenues of the system (the "system revenues," as hereinafter defined); and providing funds sufficient to meet the requirements of the ordinances of the city authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds (the "bond ordinances," as hereinafter defined), including replacement of the system. 
(Code 1994, § 90-281; Ord. No. 1339, § I, 7-25-1994) 
Sec. 48-339. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20;deg;C, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
    Bond ordinances means the ordinances duly adopted by the governing body of the city which authorize the issuance of revenue bonds. 
    Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater that has a BOD concentration of not more than 200 mg/l and a suspended solids concentration of not more than 240 mg/l. 
    Operation and maintenance (O&M) means all expenditures during the useful life of the system for materials, labor, utilities, and other items which are necessary for managing and maintaining the system to achieve the capacity and performance for which the system was designed and constructed; provided, however, that the term "operation and maintenance" shall also have the meaning given to it by the bond ordinances, and in the event of any conflict in the meaning hereinabove prescribed and the terms of the bond ordinances, the bond ordinances shall govern. 
    Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the system to maintain the capacity and performance for which the system was designed and constructed. The term "replacement" shall also have the meaning given to it by the bond ordinances, and in the event of any conflict in the meaning hereinabove prescribed and the terms of the bond ordinances, the bond ordinances shall govern. 
    Revenue bonds means all bonds or other obligations of the city now outstanding or hereinafter issued which are payable solely from system revenues. 
    Suspended solids (SS) means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Treatment facilities means that part of the system consisting of any devices and systems for the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage, or liquid industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power, and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions improvement, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment (including land for compositing sludge, temporary storage of such compost, and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment systems before land application); or any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating, or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined stormwater and sanitary sewer systems. 
    Useful life means the estimated period during which the treatment facilities will be operated. 
    User charge means that portion of the total system revenues which is levied and collected in a proportional and adequate manner to pay the cost of operation and maintenance, to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds and to meet all requirements of the bond ordinances, including the cost of replacement. 
    Water meter means a water volume measuring and recording device, furnished and/or installed by the city or furnished and/or installed by a user and approved by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 90-282; Ord. No. 1339, § II, 7-25-1994) 
Sec. 48-340. - Collection. 
(a)	Unless otherwise provided by the bond ordinances, the user charges shall be collected and disbursed as provided by this section. 
(b)	The user charge system shall generate adequate annual system revenues to pay costs of operation and maintenance, to pay principal of and interest on the revenue bonds, and to provide funds to meet the requirements of the bond ordinances, including replacement, which the city may by ordinance designate or have designated to be paid by the user charge system. 
(c)	That portion of the total user charge collected which is to be for operation and maintenance and, after meeting the requirements of the bond ordinances, for replacement shall be deposited in two separate nonlapsing funds and accounts as follows: 
(1)	An account designated for the specific purpose of defraying operation and maintenance costs (excluding replacement) of the system (operation and maintenance account). 
(2)	After making the deposits required by the bond ordinances, in an account designated for the specific purpose of ensuring replacement needs over the useful life of the system (replacement account) deposits in the replacement account shall be made in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(d)	Fiscal year-end balances in the operation and maintenance account and the replacement account shall be carried over to the same accounts in the subsequent fiscal year and shall be used for no other purpose than those designated for these accounts. Monies which have been transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the operation and maintenance account and the replacement account shall be returned to their respective accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the user charge rates for operation and maintenance and for replacement. The user charge rates shall be adjusted such that the transferred monies will be returned to their respective accounts within the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the monies were borrowed. 
(Code 1994, § 90-283; Ord. No. 1339, § III, 7-25-1994) 
Sec. 48-341. - Residential, nonresidential contributors. 
(a)	Each user or contributor shall pay for the services provided by the city sewer system based on the sewer user's actual use of the system as determined by water meters or other measuring devices or methods acceptable to the city. No sewer services shall be furnished or rendered free of charge to any person. 
(b)	For residential contributors, monthly sewer user charges shall be based on the volumetric method of calculation of water usage as determined by water meter readings during the month. 
(c)	Residential contributors shall mean any contributor to the city's sewer collection system whose structure is exclusively used for domestic dwelling purposes with no more than two dwelling units on each separate water meter. Users of a portion of a structure which portion is separately metered for water use and is used exclusively as a dwelling are also classified as residential contributors. Residential contributors shall not include the users of hotels, motels, boardinghouses, nursing homes, residence halls, or multiunit residential complexes served by a common water meter. 
(d)	For nonresidential contributors, including industrial, commercial, or multiunit residential complexes served by a common water meter, monthly sewer user charges shall be based on the volumetric method of calculation of water usage as determined by water meter readings during the month and shall be effective with cycle billings in January 1995. 
(e)	If a nonresidential contributor has a consumptive use of water, or in some other manner uses water which is not returned to the wastewater collection system, the user charge for that contributor may be based on a wastewater meter or separate water meter installed and maintained at the contributor's expense and in a manner acceptable to the city. 
(f)	The monthly rates required and which shall be charged and collected by the city for sewerage services furnished by the sewerage system of said city shall be in the amount per gallons used as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(g)	The wastewater treatment charge shall be based on the metered water used each month in the amount per gallons used as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(h)	For those contributors who contribute wastewater, the strength of which is greater than normal domestic sewage, a surcharge in addition to the normal user charge, in the amount provided in the city fee schedule, will be collected. 
(i)	Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the city's system, or any water user which discharges any substances which singly or by interaction with other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance, or replacement of the system, shall pay for such increased costs. The charge to each such user shall be as determined by the city and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 90-284; Ord. No. 1339, § IV, 7-25-1994) 
Sec. 48-342. - User charge added to water bill. 
    The user charge established in section 48-341 shall be added to and collected with the water bill of each user. All bills for such sewage charges shall be mailed in accordance with section 48-313. For these user charges determined by a service contract approved by the city council, collection will be based upon the terms of said contract. 
(Code 1994, § 90-285; Ord. No. 1339, § V, 7-25-1994) 
Sec. 48-343. - Annual review. 
(a)	The city will review the user charge system each year and revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance, to pay principal of and interest on the revenue bonds, and to provide funds to meet the requirements of the bond ordinances, including replacement, and that the system continues to provide for the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance and replacement costs among users and user classes. 
(b)	The city will notify each user at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate being charged for sewerage service. 
(Code 1994, § 90-286; Ord. No. 1339, § VI, 7-25-1994) 
Chapter 50 - VEGETATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Insect pests and weeds generally, RSMo 263.010 et seq.; Missouri Plant Law, RSMo 263.010; plant pests, RSMo 263.080; destruction of weeds, RSMo 263.190 et seq.; eradication and control of Johnson grass, RSMo 263.255 et seq.; noxious weed control areas, RSMo 263.450 et seq.; removal of plants from highways and roadways prohibited, RSMo 229.475 et seq.; removal of weeds and trash by city, RSMo 71.285. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING 

Sec. 50-56. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to improve the aesthetic qualities of the city and to protect and preserve the appearance, character and value of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 1517-B, § A, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 50-57. - Enforcement. 
    This article shall be a minimum standard and the regulations which are contained herein shall be enforced by the planning officer. 
(Ord. No. 1517-B, § B, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 50-58. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ground cover means a low growing plant, other than turf grass, which forms a continuous cover over the ground surface. 
    Landscape materials means any combination of living plant materials and nonliving materials such as rock, pebbles, sand, bark, pavers, earthen mounds, fencing, walls, fountains and other decorative materials. 
    Landscaping consists of trees, shrubs, vines, turf, ground cover and other landscape materials which are utilized to enhance the aesthetic and functional qualities of a site. 
    Plant materials includes living plants which include trees, shrubs, ground cover, turf and vines which are suitable for ornamental and/or functional use. 
    Screen, screening consist of fencing constructed of cedar, redwood or other durable wood or masonry walls. For the purpose of this article, a screen shall be opaque to a height of six feet above the ground surface. 
    Shrub means a self-supporting woody plant which normally reaches a height of less than 15 feet. 
    Tree means a self-supporting woody plant which normally reaches a height of at least 15 feet. 
    Turf means ground cover composed of one or more species of perennial grass which is grown as a permanent lawn. 
    Vine means a plant which is typically woody and climbs by supporting itself on some other plant or structure. 
(Ord. No. 1517-B, § C, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 50-59. - Landscaping and screening plan. 
(a)	A landscaping and screening plan shall be required upon application for a building permit for new construction or structural alteration of buildings in all zoning districts excluding single-family and duplex structures. In cases where landscaping plan approval would cause harmful delay to the start of construction, the building official may issue footing and foundation permits for the project so that construction may proceed. Permits for construction beyond the footing and foundation shall not be issued until the landscaping plans have been submitted and approved. This article shall not apply to structures for which landscaping and screening plans have previously been submitted and approved. Landscaping plans shall not be required for nonstructural alterations or in the area designated "C-2". Except as noted herein, landscaping and screening plans shall be approved prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)	A landscaping and screening plan shall be required for only that phase of development for which the building permit is being acquired. 
(c)	The landscaping and screening plan shall include the following information:
(1)	Scale at one inch equals 20 feet to 50 feet.
(2)	North reference.
(3)	The location and size of all utilities on the site.
(4)	The location of all existing and proposed parking areas.
(5)	The location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures.
(6)	The location, condition, size and quantity of all proposed landscape materials. Plant materials shall be identified by both common and botanical names. 
(7)	The location, size and common name of all existing plant materials to be retained.
(8)	Plant species shall be shown on the plan by indicating their mature crown spread drawn to scale. 
(9)	The location and common name of all 12-inch diameter or larger (at 41/2 feet above ground) trees which are to be removed. 
(Ord. No. 1517-B, § D, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 50-60. - Minimum standards for landscaping. 
(a)	The minimum landscaping requirements for all uses, including single-family and duplexes, shall be one shade tree and one ornamental tree per building lot. Said trees shall be planted on private property, not on public property. Said shade trees shall be a minimum of 11/2 inches in diameter. The minimum landscaping requirement for all uses, excluding single-family and duplex developments, shall be one tree and two shrubs per 7,500 square feet of total lot area. 
(b)	All portions of all sites including all landscaping strips, parkways and screening areas dedicated to the public not covered with paving or buildings shall be landscaped. Open areas not covered with other materials shall be covered with turf or ground cover. Ground cover shall be utilized on all slopes in excess of 25 percent. 
(c)	Landscaping of parking lot interiors, exclusive of automobile storage and sales lots, shall be required for lots which are more than one aisle in width in all zoning districts. This requirement shall only apply to new construction. The trees and shrubs used to meet the requirements above may not be counted toward this requirement. 
(1)	The minimum requirement for parking lot interior landscaping shall be as follows: No less than 21/2 percent of the total parking lot square footage shall be landscaped. The number of trees used in the parking lot interior shall be not less than one for each 200 square feet, or portions thereof, of required parking lot interior landscaping. 
(2)	Interior landscaped area shall be situated within the lot so as to be surrounded by parking lot pavement on at least three sides. 
(3)	Each landscaped area shall contain at least one tree which is adaptable to the environment of parking areas and the remaining area shall be landscaped using shrubs, ground cover and other suitable landscaping material. 
(4)	Each landscaped area shall be separated from the pavement material by concrete curbing or by an integral concrete sidewalk and curb. 
(Ord. No. 1517-B, § E, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 50-61. - Minimum standards for screening. 
    For all buildings except single-family and two-family dwellings, all exterior trash storage containers shall be screened so that they are not visible from off the property. A permanent masonry or frame enclosure shall be provided for dumpsters and exterior trash storage containers. A detailed drawing of enclosure and screening methods to be used in connection with trash bins on the property shall be included on the landscape plan. 
(Ord. No. 1517-B, § F, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 50-62. - Plant materials. 
(a)	The following tables are the minimum plant sizes and conditions to be used in satisfying the requirements of this article: 
(1)	Table 1.
New Plant MaterialsSmall ornamental trees6-8 feetB & B (1)Shade trees11/2 inchCaliper, B & BEvergreen trees4-5 feetB & BMedium to large shrubs18-24 inchesB & BDwarf to small shrubs12-18 inchesB & BGround cover21/2 inchesP.P. (2) 
(1) B & B = balled and burlapped; container grown stock may be used where appropriate 
(2) P.P. = peat pot 
(2)	Table 2.
Small trees15-30 feet ultimate heightMedium trees30-70 feet ultimate height Large treesOver 70 feet ultimate heightDwarf shrubsLess than 4 feet ultimate heightSmall shrubs4-6 feet ultimate heightMedium shrubs7-10 feet ultimate heightLarge shrubsOver 10 feet ultimate height 
(b)	The American Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the American Association for Nurserymen, is hereby incorporated by reference for the determination of plant standards. 
(c)	Existing trees which are to be retained to satisfy the requirements of this article shall meet the following standards: 
(1)	For shade trees, the diameter 41/2 feet above ground shall be at least 11/2 inches.
(2)	For ornamental trees, the height shall be at least eight feet.
(3)	For evergreen trees, the height shall be at least six feet.
(4)	Trees shall be free from mechanical injuries, insect infestations and disease.
(5)	Trees shall be protected from injury to roots, trunks and branches during grading and construction. Protective fencing, tree wells, and/or retaining walls shall be utilized where necessary to ensure tree vigor upon completion of construction. 
(Ord. No. 1517-B, § G, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 50-63. - Approval of plans. 
    In situations where the contractor or owner feels that he is unable to comply with these requirements, the planning and zoning commission shall determine if the proposed landscaping and screening plans are adequate. 
(Ord. No. 1517-B, § H, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 50-64. - Installation of materials. 
    Landscaping, as required by the provisions of this article, shall be installed by the end of the first planting season following occupancy. For the purposes of this article, there shall be two planting seasons, which are from February 15 through May 31, and September 15 through November 30. 
(Ord. No. 1517-B, § I, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 50-65. - Maintenance. 
(a)	The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be jointly responsible for the maintenance of the landscaping and/or screening which shall be maintained in good condition. The plant materials shall be kept in a healthy, neat and orderly condition and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Plants which are not in sound growing condition or are dead shall be removed and replaced with a plant of the same species, variety or cultivar. 
(b)	Other landscape materials shall be maintained in proper repair and shall be kept clear of refuse and debris. 
(Ord. No. 1517-B, § J, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 50-66. - Obstruction of sight distance at intersections. 
    Landscaping and/or screening materials shall not interfere with the line of sight between 21/2 feet and eight feet above the curb at driveways or intersections. 
(Ord. No. 1517-B, § K, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 50-67. - Prohibited plant species. 
    The following plants shall not be used to satisfy the requirements for new plant materials which are contained in this section: 
American Elm, Ulmus americana 
Bolleana Poplar, Populus alba "Pyramdalis" 
Boxelder Maple, Acer negundo 
Catalpa, Catalpa species 
Cottonwood, Populus deltoids 
Ginkgo, female only, Ginkgo biloba 
Honey Locust, except thornless varieties, Gleditsia triancanthos 
Lombardy Poplar, Populus nigra "Italica" 
Mimosa, Albexia julibrissin 
Osage-Orange, except thornless and seedless varieties, Malcura pomifera 
Red Mulberry, female only, Morus rubra 
Siberian Elm, Ulmus pumila 
Silver Maple, Acer saccharinum 
Silver Poplar, Populus alba "nivea" 
Tree of Heaven, Alanthus altissima. 
(Ord. No. 1517-B, § L, 8-12-2002) 
PART III - BUILDING, PLANNING, AND LAND USE REGULATIONS 
Chapter 52 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, RSMo 67.280; Indoor Clean Air Act, RSMo 191.765 et seq.; state standards for elevator safety and inspection, RSMo 701.350; state standards regarding water closets in certain facilities, RSMo 701.450; permits to move buildings across roads, RSMo 229.230 et seq.; municipal housing generally, RSMo 99.010 et seq.; inadequate and deficient housing as public nuisances, RSMo 441.500 et seq.; dilapidated property causing blight or substantial safety threat as public nuisance, RSMo 447.620; fire protection generally, RSMo 320.010 et seq.; authority for ordinances requiring conspicuous posting of street addresses for fire protection and emergency services purposes, RSMo 67.318. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 52-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the safety, health and public welfare through structural strength and stability, means of egress, adequate light and ventilation and protection to life and property from fire and hazards incident to the design, construction, alteration, removal or demolition of buildings and structures and to establish minimum requirements for property planning. 
(Code 1994, § 14-1; Ord. No. 942, art. 1, § 1, 8-20-1966) 
Sec. 52-2. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter apply to the construction, alteration, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures and to appurtenances such as vaults, areaways, streets and street encroachments. 
(Code 1994, § 14-2; Ord. No. 942, art. 1, § 2, 8-20-1966) 
Sec. 52-3. - Building official/inspector. 
(a)	There is hereby created the office of building official/inspector in and for the city.
(b)	The building official/inspector is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to regulate, determine and inspect any construction for compliance with building regulations herein set forth. Whenever in his opinion, by reason of defective or illegal work in violation of a provision of this chapter the continuance of a building operation is contrary to public welfare, he may order all further work to be stopped and may require suspension of work until the conditions in violation have been remedied. Reports of all orders for suspended work shall be in writing to violators. 
(Code 1994, § 14-3; Ord. No. 942, art. 3, § 2, 8-20-1966) 
Sec. 52-4. - Administrative authority; building permits. 
(a)	The administrative authority shall be the building official/inspector to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to supplement any and all statutes of the state. 
(c)	The building official/inspector may employ inspectors who are qualified by their knowledge, training and experience to make inspections and examinations. The inspectors shall have the right to inspect anything covered by this chapter at such times as it may be deemed necessary to protect the public health and welfare. 
(d)	The building official/inspector shall have authority to give tests with respect to issuing licenses and qualifying inspectors. 
(e)	The building official/inspector shall conduct all plan and design review and issue all building and building-related permits and certificates provided for by and in conformity with the provisions of this Code, upon payment of fees therefor as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1994, § 14-4; Ord. No. 942, art. 1, § 3(A)-(D), 8-20-1966) 
Sec. 52-5. - Copies of codes to be available for public viewing. 
    Copies of the codes adopted by this chapter shall be available for public viewing at the city hall and municipal building during regular business hours. 
(Code 1994, § 14-5; Ord. No. 1265, § 3, 5-14-1990) 
Sec. 52-6. - Chapter not to affect liability for damages. 
    This chapter shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability of any party for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein. 
(Code 1994, § 14-6; Ord. No. 942, art. 1, § 3(E), 8-20-1966) 
Sec. 52-7. - Revocation of licenses. 
    The building official/inspector shall upon notification of the third conviction of the violation of any provisions of this chapter by a licensed person, revoke the license of such person to do and perform such work and services as stipulated by such license for a period of not less than one year or more than five years. 
(Code 1994, § 14-7; Ord. No. 942, art. 1, § 3(N), 8-20-1966) 
Sec. 52-8. - Supplementary requirements. 
    All matters not covered by this chapter shall conform to generally accepted good practice. 
(Code 1994, § 14-8; Ord. No. 942, art. I, § 3(O), 8-20-1966) 
Sec. 52-9. - Penalty for violation of codes. 
    Any person or corporation convicted of a violation of any of the required provisions of the codes provided for in this chapter shall be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable upon conviction as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1994, § 14-9; Ord. No. 1265, § 2, 5-14-1990) 
Secs. 52-10-52-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 52-27. - Adopted. 
(a)	The International Residential Code for One- or Two-Family Dwellings, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, is adopted as the official building code for all construction and remodeling activities within the city, as modified with the amendments attached hereto. 
(b)	The International Building Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, is adopted as the official Building Code for all construction and remodeling activities within the city, subject to the amendments attached hereto. 
(Code 1994, § 14-31; Ord. No. 1265, § 1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 1599, §§ 1, 2, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 1710, § 1, 1-9-2012) 
State law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, RSMo 67.280. 
Sec. 52-28. - Exceptions to adopted code (Reserved). 
Secs. 52-29-52-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1710, § 2, adopted Jan. 9, 2012, amended the title of Art. III to read as herein set out. Formerly said article was entitled "Housing Code." 
Sec. 52-45. - Adopted. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, will continue as the official housing code for the city for all construction and remodeling activities within the city. 
(Code 1994, § 14-51; Ord. No. 1265, § 1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 1599, § 3, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 1710, § 2, 1-9-2012) 
State law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, RSMo 67.280. 
Sec. 52-46. - Exceptions to adopted code (Reserved). 
Secs. 52-47-52-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 52-71. - Adopted. 
    The National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, is adopted as the official electrical code for all construction and remodeling activities within the city. 
(Code 1994, § 14-71; Ord. No. 1265, § 1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 1415, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 1599, § 4, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 1710, § 4, 1-9-2012) 
State law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, RSMo 67.280. 
Sec. 52-72. - Exceptions to adopted code (Reserved). 
Sec. 52-73. - Purpose. 
    This article is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof by establishing minimum standards for electrical equipment and its installation consistent with the practical safeguarding of persons and buildings and their contents from fire and other hazards incident to the use of electricity for light, heat, power, radio signaling and other purposes. 
(Code 1994, § 14-72; Ord. No. 1064-A, § 1(B), 9-12-1978) 
Sec. 52-74. - Conformance of preexisting wiring to article provisions, when required. 
(a)	If an existing building is damaged by fire, or otherwise altered in a manner to require the replacement of 50 percent or more of the wiring equipment, the entire building shall be made to conform to the requirements of this article for new buildings. 
(b)	If the classification or occupancy of an existing building is entirely changed, the building wiring shall be made to conform to the requirements of this article for the classification or occupancy. 
(Code 1994, § 14-74; Ord. No. 1064-A, § 2, 9-12-1978) 
Sec. 52-75. - Electrical equipment; condition, maintenance. 
    Electrical equipment in all buildings and structures, both existing and new and in all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this article shall be maintained in safe working order. 
(Code 1994, § 14-75; Ord. No. 1064-A, § 3, 9-12-1978) 
Sec. 52-76. - Stop work order. 
    Upon notice from the electrical inspector that work in or on any building or structure is being done contrary to the provisions of this article or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property or to his agent to the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 
(Code 1994, § 14-78; Ord. No. 1064-A, § 4(F), 9-12-1978) 
Secs. 52-77-52-97. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR 

Sec. 52-98. - Office created; building official/inspector designated. 
(a)	There is hereby created the office of electrical inspector in and for the city.
(b)	The building official/inspector is hereby designated electrical inspector in and for the city. 
(Code 1994, § 14-91) 
Sec. 52-99. - Duties, authority. 
    The electrical inspector is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to regulate and determine the placing of electric light and power lines in and on buildings of the city so as to prevent fires, accident or injury to persons or property, and to cause all electrical appliances to be so placed, constructed and guarded as not to cause fires, accidents or endanger life or property and, whenever in the judgment of the inspector any electric wires or appliances shall be defective by reason of improper or insufficient insulation, or for any other cause, the electrical inspector shall at once cause the immediate removal of such defects. 
(Code 1994, § 14-92; Ord. No. 1064-A, § 4(C), 9-12-1978) 
Sec. 52-100. - Right of entry. 
    The electrical inspector shall have the right and power to at any time enter any building, manhole or subway in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose of making any tests of the electrical apparatus or appliances therein contained. And for such purposes he shall be given access to all buildings, public and private, and to all manholes and subways, on application to the company or individual owning or in charge or control of the same. 
(Code 1994, § 14-93; Ord. No. 1064-A, § 4(D), 9-12-1978) 
Secs. 52-101-52-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 52-129. - Adopted. 
    The International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, is adopted as the official Mechanical Code for the construction and remodeling activities within the city, subject to the amendments attached hereto. 
(Code 1994, § 14-126; Ord. No. 1265, § 1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 1599, § 5, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 1710, § 5, 1-9-2012) 
State law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, RSMo 67.280. 
Sec. 52-130. - Exceptions to adopted code. 
    The mechanical code adopted in section 52-129 is amended as follows: 
Section 103 is deleted. 
Secs. 52-131-52-158. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 52-159. - Adopted. 
    The International Plumbing Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, is adopted as the official plumbing code for all construction and remodeling activities within the city, subject to the amendments attached hereto. 
(Code 1994, § 14-136; Ord. No. 1265, § 1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 1599, § 6, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 1710, § 6, 1-9-2012) 
State law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, RSMo 67.280. 
Sec. 52-160. - Exceptions to adopted code. 
    The plumbing code adopted in section 52-159 is amended as follows: 
Section 103 is deleted. 
Secs. 52-161-52-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FUEL GAS CODE 

Sec. 52-187. - Adopted. 
    The International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, is adopted as the official fuel gas code for all construction and remodeling activities within the city, subject to the amendments attached hereto. 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 7, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 1710, § 7, 1-9-2012) 
Sec. 52-188. - Exceptions to adopted code. 
    The fuel gas code adopted in section 52-187 is amended as follows: 
Section 103 is deleted. 
Secs. 52-189-52-204. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 52-205. - Adopted. 
    The International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, is adopted as the official fire code for all construction and remodeling activities within the city, subject to the amendment attached hereto. 
(Code 1994, § 34-26; Ord. No. 1265, § 1, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 1599, § 8, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 1710, § 8, 1-9-2012) 
State law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, RSMo 67.280. 
Sec. 52-206. - Exceptions to adopted code. 
    The fire code adopted in section 52-205 is amended as follows: 
Section 103 is deleted. 
Secs. 52-207-52-214. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority and requirements of ordinances, RSMo 67.400, 67.410. (Back)
Sec. 52-215. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous building means that any building or structure having any or all of the following defects shall be and is declared to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city: 
(1)	Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(2)	Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)	Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)	Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants of the people of this city. 
(5)	Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein. 
(6)	Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(7)	Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of communication. 
(8)	Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(9)	Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary, disease promoting or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of this city. 
(10)	Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of this article or other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 14-181; Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 8-9-1977) 
Sec. 52-216. - Standards for repair, vacation or demolition and removal. 
    The following standards shall be followed in ordering repair, vacation or demolition/removal: 
(1)	If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)	If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)	In any case where a dangerous building is 50 percent damaged or decayed, or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished and removed and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article it shall be demolished and removed. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city or statute of the state it shall be demolished and removed. 
(Code 1994, § 14-182; Ord. No. 1046, § 2, 8-9-1977) 
Sec. 52-217. - Declared nuisances. 
    All dangerous buildings within the terms of this article are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished and removed as provided in this article. 
(Code 1994, § 14-183; Ord. No. 1046, § 3, 8-9-1977) 
Sec. 52-218. - Duties of building official/inspector. 
    The building official/inspector may: 
(1)	Inspect or cause to be inspected annually all public buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements, commercial, manufacturing or loft buildings for the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist which render such places to be a dangerous building within the terms of this article. 
(2)	Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this article. 
(3)	Inspect any building, wall or structure reported as probably existing in violation of the terms of this article. 
(4)	Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building or structure as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county, of any building found by him to be a dangerous building and declared to be a nuisance within the standards set forth in this article, that: 
a.	The owner must vacate, or repair, or demolish/remove the building in accordance with the terms of the notice and this chapter. 
b.	The occupant or lessee must vacate the building or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession. 
c.	The mortgagee, agent or other person having an interest in the building as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county may at his own risk repair, vacate or demolish and remove the building or have such work or act done. 
Any person notified under this subsection (4) to repair, vacate or demolish and remove any building shall be given such reasonable time to commence the work or act required and such reasonable time, not exceeding 30 days, as may be necessary to do, or have done, the work or act required by the notice provided for herein. 
(5)	Set forth in the notice provided for in subsection (4) of this section a description of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure a dangerous building and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to comply with the terms of this article within such length of time, not exceeding 30 days, as is reasonable. 
(6)	Reports to the building official/inspector of any noncompliance with the notice provided for in subsections (4) and (5) of this section. 
(7)	Appear at all hearings conducted under this article.
(8)	Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows:
Declaration of Nuisance 
This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the building official/inspector. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired, vacated or demolished and removed, in accordance with the notice which has been given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent of this building as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with. 
(9)	The written notice provided for in subsection (4) of this section shall be served either by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, but if service cannot be had by either of these modes of service, service may be had by publication. 
(Code 1994, § 14-184; Ord. No. 1046, § 5, 8-9-1977) 
Sec. 52-219. - Hearing; procedures. 
(a)	Upon a failure to commence the work of reconditioning or demolition within the time specified in the notice provided by section 52-218 or upon failure to proceed continuously with the work without unnecessary delay, the building official/inspector or designated officer shall call and have a full and adequate hearing upon the matter, giving the affected parties at least 21 days' written notice of the hearing. 
(b)	Any party may be represented by counsel, and all parties shall have an opportunity to be heard. After the hearing, if the evidence supports a finding that the building or structure is a nuisance or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city, the building official/inspector or designated officer shall issue an order making specific findings of fact, based upon competent and substantial evidence, which shows the building or structure to be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city, ordering the building or structure to be demolished and removed, or repaired. If the evidence does not support a finding that the building or structure is a nuisance or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the city, no order shall issue. 
(c)	If the building official/inspector or other designated officer issues an order whereby the building or structure is demolished or repaired, the cost of performance shall be certified to the city clerk, who shall cause a special tax bill therefor against the property to be prepared and collected by the city. At the request of the taxpayer the tax bill may be paid in installments over a period of not more than ten years. The tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be a lien on the property until paid. 
(d)	Interested parties described in section 52-218(4) may appeal from the determination of the building official/inspector or designated officer to the circuit court as provided in RSMo ch. 536. 
(Code 1994, § 14-185; Ord. No. 1046, § 7, 8-9-1977) 
Sec. 52-220. - Emergency powers. 
    Where it reasonably appears there is an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of any person, the building official/inspector or other designated officer may take emergency measures to vacate and repair or demolish a dangerous building or structure. 
(Code 1994, § 14-186; Ord. No. 1046, § 8, 8-9-1977) 
Sec. 52-221. - Safe room standards. 
    All residential structures with no basement (those structures with less than 50 percent of the perimeter foundation walls constructed of reinforced concrete and at least seven feet, six inches in height above finished basement floor) constructed after May 1, 2009, must contain a safe room constructed to FEMA standards put forth in publication 320, August 1999. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 1612, § 1, 7-24-2006; Ord. No. 1666, § 1, 4-27-2009; Ord. No. 1668, § 1(14-187), 7-13-2009) 
Chapter 54 - PLANNING 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Community affairs, RSMo 251.010 et seq.; planning and development generally, RSMo 251.150 et seq.; municipal planning, RSMo 89.300 et seq.; municipal zoning, RSMo 89.010 et seq.; municipal housing, housing authorities law, RSMo 99.010 et seq.; municipal industrial development, RSMo 100.010 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - City to adopt, amend and carry out city plan. 
    The city has adopted, may amend and shall carry out the city plan in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 66-1; Ord. No. 944, § 2, 9-5-1967) 
Sec. 54-2. - Subdivision sales prior to plat approval prohibited. 
    No owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the planning jurisdiction of the city, knowingly or with intent to defraud, may transfer, sell, agree to sell or negotiate to sell that land by reference to or by other use of a plat of any purported subdivision of the land before the plat has been approved by the council or planning commission, and recorded in the office of the county recorder. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall forfeit and pay to the city a penalty not to exceed $300.00 for each lot transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from this penalty. The city may enjoin or vacate the transfer or sale or agreement by legal action and may recover the penalty in such action. 
(Code 1994, § 66-2; Ord. No. 944, § 15, 9-5-1967) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 89.450. 
Sec. 54-3. - Public improvements, approval after adoption of major street plan. 
    Upon adoption of a major street plan and subdivision regulations, the city shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave or light any street, lay or authorize the laying of water mains, sewers, connections or other utilities in any street within the city, unless the street has received the legal status of a public street prior to the adoption of the city plan; or unless the street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the council or the planning commission, or on a street plan made by and adopted by the commission. The council may locate and construct or may accept any other street if the ordinance or other measure for the location and construction or for the acceptance is first submitted to the commission for its approval, and approved by the commission or, if disapproved, is passed by the affirmative vote of not less than two-thirds of the entire membership of the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 66-3; Ord. No. 944, § 16, 9-5-1967) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 89.460. 
Sec. 54-4. - Conformance of streets prior to issuance of building permit. 
    After the adoption of a major street plan, no building permit shall be issued for and no building shall be erected on any lot within the territorial jurisdiction of the commission unless the street giving access to the lot upon which the building is proposed to be placed conforms to the requirements of section 54-3. 
(Code 1994, § 66-4; Ord. No. 944, § 17, 9-5-1967) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 89.470. 
Sec. 54-5. - When setback lines may be changed. 
    Whenever a plan for major streets has been adopted, the city council upon the recommendation of the planning commission is authorized and empowered to establish, regulate, limit and amend, by ordinance, building or setback lines on major streets, and to prohibit any new building being located within building or setback lines. When a plan for proposed major streets or other public improvements has been adopted, the council may prohibit any new building being located within the proposed site or right-of-way when the centerline of the proposed street or the limits of the proposed sites have been carefully determined and are accurately delineated on maps approved by the planning commission and adopted by the council. 
(Code 1994, § 66-5; Ord. No. 944, § 18, 9-5-1967) 
Secs. 54-6-54-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority, RSMo 89.310. (Back)
Sec. 54-29. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Street means any public ways. 
    Subdivision means the division of a parcel of land into two or more lots, or other divisions of land; it includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. 
(Code 1994, § 66-31; Ord. No. 944, § 1, 9-5-1967) 
State law reference- "Subdivision" defined, RSMo 89.300(3). 
Sec. 54-30. - Appointment. 
    The city council shall appoint a planning commission with the powers and duties set forth in this article. 
(Code 1994, § 66-32; Ord. No. 944, § 2, 9-5-1967) 
Sec. 54-31. - Composition; terms. 
    The planning commission of the city shall consist of seven members, including a member of the city council selected by the council annually at its first organizational meeting, and six citizens appointed by the mayor and approved by the council. All citizen members of the commission shall serve without compensation. The term of each of the citizen members shall be for four years, except that the terms of the citizen members first appointed shall be for varying periods, so that the succeeding terms will be staggered. Any vacancy in a membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment as provided in this article. The council may remove any citizen member for cause stated in writing, and after public hearing. 
(Code 1994, § 66-33; Ord. No. 944, § 3, 9-5-1967; Ord. No. 1451, §§ 1, 2, 9-27-1999; Ord. No. 1605, 4-22-2006) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 89.320. 
Sec. 54-32. - Organization, meetings, records, expenditures. 
    The commission shall elect a chairperson and secretary from among the citizen members. The term of chairperson and secretary shall be for one year, with eligibility for reelection. The commission shall hold such regular meetings and special meetings as they provide by rule, and shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, and keep a record of its proceedings. These records shall be public records. The commission shall appoint the employees and staff necessary for its work and may contract with city planners and other professional persons for the services that it requires. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of grants and gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the council. 
(Code 1994, § 66-34; Ord. No. 944, § 4, 9-5-1967) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 89.330. 
Sec. 54-33. - Duties. 
    The planning commission shall make and adopt a city plan for the physical development of the city. The city plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts, and descriptive and explanatory matter, shall show the commission's recommendations for the physical development and uses of land, and may include, among other things, the general location, character and extent of streets and other public ways, grounds, places and spaces; the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned, the acceptance, widening, removal, extension, relocation, narrowing, vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the foregoing; the general character, extent and layout of the replanning of blighted districts and slum areas. The commission shall also prepare a zoning plan for the regulation of the height, area, bulk, location and use of private, nonprofit and public structures and premises and of population density, but the adoption, enforcement and administration of the zoning plan shall conform to the provisions of RSMo 89.010-89.250. 
(Code 1994, § 66-35; Ord. No. 944, § 5, 9-5-1967) 
Sec. 54-34. - Additional functions. 
    The planning commission shall have and perform all of the functions of the zoning commission provided for in RSMo ch. 89, and shall have and perform all of the functions of a planning commission as outlined in such statute. 
(Code 1994, § 66-36; Ord. No. 944, § 10, 9-5-1967) 
Sec. 54-35. - Powers as to recommendations. 
    The planning commission may make reports and recommendations relating to the planning and development of the city to public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations and citizens. It may recommend to the executive or legislative officials of the city programs for public improvements and the financing thereof. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the commission, within a reasonable time, all available information it requires for its work. The commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land to make examinations and surveys. In general, the commission shall have the power necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote city planning. 
(Code 1994, § 66-37; Ord. No. 944, § 8, 9-5-1967) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 89.370. 
Sec. 54-36. - Approval, disapproval of plats. 
    Within 60 days after submission of a subdivision plat to the planning commission, the commission shall approve or disapprove the plat; otherwise the plat is deemed approved by the commission, except the commission, with the consent of the applicant for the approval, may extend the 60-day period. The grounds of disapproval of any plat by the commission shall be made a matter of record. 
(Code 1994, § 66-38; Ord. No. 944, § 13, 9-5-1967) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 89.420. 
Sec. 54-37. - Approval of plat not to constitute acceptance of streets or other grounds. 
    The approval of a plat by the planning commission does not constitute or effect an acceptance by the city or the public of the dedication to public use of any street or other grounds shown upon the plat. 
(Code 1994, § 66-39; Ord. No. 944, § 14, 9-5-1967) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 89.430. 
Secs. 54-38-54-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY PLAN 

Sec. 54-63. - Preparation. 
    In the preparation and amendment of the city plan, the planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of the existing conditions and probable future growth of the municipality. The plan shall be made with the purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development. 
(Code 1994, § 66-61; Ord. No. 944, § 6, 9-5-1967) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 89.350. 
Sec. 54-64. - Adoption. 
    The planning commission may adopt the city plan as a whole by a single resolution, or, as the work of making the whole city plan progresses, may from time to time adopt parts thereof, any part to correspond generally with one or more of the functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan. Before the adoption, amendment or extension of the plan or a portion thereof, the commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon. Fifteen days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in at least one newspaper having general circulation within the city. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time. The adoption of the plan requires a majority vote of the full membership of the planning commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps, descriptive matter and other matters intended by the commission to form the whole or part of the plan and the action taken shall be recorded on the adopted plan or part thereof by the identifying signature of the secretary of the commission, and filed in the office of the commission, properly identified by file number, and a copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the council and the city clerk. A copy shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds, and shall be available at the city clerk's office for public inspection during normal office hours. 
(Code 1994, § 66-62; Ord. No. 944, § 7, 9-5-1967) 
Sec. 54-65. - New streets and public facilities to conform. 
    Whenever the planning commission adopts the plan of the city or any part thereof, no street or other public facilities, or no public utility, whether publicly or privately owned, and the location, extent and character thereof having been included in the recommendations and proposals of the plan or portions thereof, shall be constructed or authorized in the city until the location, extent and character thereof has been submitted to and approved by the planning commission. In case of disapproval, the commission shall communicate its reasons to the council, and the council, by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership, may overrule the disapproval and, upon the overruling, the council or the appropriate board or officer may proceed, except that if the public facility or utility is one the authorization or financing of which does not fall within the province of the council, then the plan shall be submitted to the planning commission which shall be the board having jurisdiction, and the planning commission's disapproval may be overruled by that board by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. The acceptance, widening, removal, extension, relocation, narrowing, vacation, abandonment, change of use, acquisition of land for, sale or lease of any street or other public facility is subject to similar submission and approval, and the failure to approve may be similarly overruled. The failure of the commission to act within 60 days after the date of official submission to it shall be deemed approval. 
(Code 1994, § 66-63; Ord. No. 944, § 9, 9-5-1967) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 89.380. 
Sec. 54-66. - New subdivision plats require commission approval after adoption of city plan. 
    After the planning commission of the city adopts a city plan which includes at least a major street plan or progresses in its planning to the making and adoption of a major street plan, and files a certified copy of the major street plan in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county, then no plat of a subdivision of land lying within the city shall be filed or recorded until it has been submitted to and a report and recommendation made by the commission to the city council and the council has approved the plat as provided by law. 
(Code 1994, § 66-64; Ord. No. 944, § 11, 9-5-1967) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 89.400. 
Chapter 56 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Streets in subdivisions outside corporate limits of city, RSMo 71.270; county regulation of subdivision in unincorporated areas, RSMo 64.285; records and recordation, taxation, RSMo 137.185; planning and development generally, RSMo 251.150 et seq.; municipal planning, RSMo 89.300 et seq.; municipal zoning, RSMo 89.010 et seq.; municipal housing, housing authorities law, RSMo 99.010 et seq.; municipal industrial development, RSMo 100.010 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 56-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the subdividing of land within the city in order to promote public safety, health, and general welfare of the community. The regulations are specifically designed to: 
(1)	Provide for orderly growth and harmonious development of the city consistent with established policies of the city. 
(2)	Secure proper arrangement of streets for efficient traffic circulation through the coordination of existing and planned streets, comprehensive plan, public facilities, and adjoining developed land. 
(3)	Ensure continuous and harmonious development with existing and proposed development of the area. 
(4)	Secure adequate provisions for water, drainage, sanitary sewer facilities based upon city, state, and federal requirements. 
(5)	Provide open space, recreational areas, school sites, and other public facilities.
(6)	Ensure adequate access for emergency vehicles and equipment to all areas within the community. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 100.2; Ord. No. 1154, § 100.2, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-2. - Authority. 
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to the statutory authority of RSMo 89.380 through 89.490 and RSMo ch. 445, together with all other statutory and legal authority. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 100.3; Ord. No. 1154, § 100.3, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-3. - Applicability. 
    This chapter applies to land within the city limits. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 100.4; Ord. No. 1154, § 100.4, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-4. - Subdivision and resubdivision of land. 
    In the subdivision or resubdivision of land within the city limits, the owner, or his representative, shall design proposed subdivision in coordination with existing and proposed streets and surface drainage and provide adequate utilities and satisfactory roadway surface. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 100.5; Ord. No. 1154, § 100.5, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-5. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected the planning commission or its authorized representative shall determine the outline of the block. 
    Curb level means the mean level of the curb in front of the lot, or in case of a corner lot, along that abutting street where the mean curb level is the highest. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one main building or unit group of buildings and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incident thereto including such open spaces as are required under this chapter and having its principal frontage upon a public street. A lot as used herein may consist of one or more platted lots, or tract as conveyed or parts thereof. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. A corner lot shall be deemed to front on that street on which it has its least dimension, unless otherwise specified by the planning commission or its authorized representative; except that a lot as herein defined, when made up of more than one platted lot, shall be deemed to front on the street upon which the platted lots front. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance from the front street line to the rear line. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot whose side lines do not abut any street. 
    Lot line means the lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
    Lot line, front, means the boundary between a lot and the street on which it fronts. 
    Lot line, rear, means the boundary line which is opposite and most distant from the front street line; except, that in the case of uncertainty the planning commission or its authorized representative shall determine the rear line. 
    Lot line, side, means any lot boundary line not a front or rear line thereof. A side line may be a party lot line, a line bordering on an alley or place or a side street line. 
    Lot, through, means an interior lot having frontage on two streets. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between side lines. 
    Plat, final, means a drawing of a permanent nature showing the precise location and dimension of such features as streets, lots, easements and other elements pertinent to transfer of ownership and prepared for permanent record. 
    Plat, preliminary, means a drawing showing the proposed general patterns of streets, lots and land uses within a tract to be subdivided. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes means that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way, and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
    Street line means the dividing line between the street and the abutting property. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 100.6; Ord. No. 1154, § 100.6, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-6. - Required subdivision. 
    Any owner of land, zoned for residential or industrial use, dividing that ownership more than once shall be required to subdivide said land in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the city. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 100.7; Ord. No. 1154, § 100.7, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-7. - Subdivision plan; application. 
    An application by the owner, or his authorized representative for approval of a plan of a subdivision of land shall be made in writing to the planning commission. The plan of the subdivision shall be such as to meet the minimum requirements as detailed under article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 100.8; Ord. No. 1154, § 100.8, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-8. - Subdivision plan; procedure. 
    All plans, plats or replats of land, laid out in building lots and streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated for public use, shall be submitted to the planning commission for their consideration. The planning commission shall then submit their recommendations to the city council for its consideration and action, and no such plat or replat shall be filed with the recorder of deeds as provided by law until such plat or replat shall be endorsed thereon, as approved by the planning commission and by the city council. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 100.9; Ord. No. 1154, § 100.9, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-9. - Performance bond-Required. 
    All developers of real estate, and builders within the city, shall file with the city clerk, as the applicant files for final plat approval, a bond sufficient to provide for the installation of all streets and public utilities. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 100.10; Ord. No. 1154, § 100.10, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-10. - Same-Amount. 
    The superintendent of public works is hereby authorized to determine the amount of the performance bond necessary to provide for the installation of all streets and public utilities, and shall submit the same to the city clerk upon request. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 100.11; Ord. No. 1154, § 100.11, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-11. - Same-Term, renewal. 
    The bond as required by section 56-9 shall be for a period of time to complete utilities and streets, but shall, in no event, exceed the term of one year. However, renewals of the bond may be made for an additional year upon the approval of the city council, provided application for renewal has been made at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the bond. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 100.12; Ord. No. 1154, § 100.12, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-12. - Same-Actions. 
    In the event the utilities and streets are not installed and accepted by the director of public works, within the length of time provided in the bond required under section 56-9, the city shall be authorized to file suit upon the bond, collect the same, and complete the streets or utilities on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 100.13; Ord. No. 1154, § 100.13, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-13. - Exclusion of cemeteries. 
    Cemeteries shall not be included in the definition of subdivision and shall not be subject to provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 100.14; Ord. No. 1154, § 100.14, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-14. - Conformity with zoning chapter. 
    All plats reviewed under provisions of this chapter shall conform to all zoning chapter provisions for the district in which the proposed plat is to be located. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 100.15; Ord. No. 1154, § 100.15, 7-24-1985) 
Secs. 56-15-56-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPROVEMENTS AND STANDARDS OF DESIGN 

Sec. 56-31. - Fees. 
    Fees for filing plats shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
Sec. 56-32. - Preliminary plat and final plat application and checklist. 
    A preliminary plat and final plat checklist will be provided by the community development staff and must be completed upon submittal. 
(Ord. No. 1463, § 7, 5-8-2000; Ord. No. 1590, 12-12-2005) 
Sec. 56-33. - Conformity to official plan or map. 
    A subdivision shall be in harmony with the master plan and conform to all zoning ordinance provisions of the district in which the proposed plat is to be located. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 400.1; Ord. No. 1154, § 400.1, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-34. - Streets-Requirements. 
    Insofar as the master plan or official map does not indicate the size, location, direction and extent of a street, and subject to the regulations specified in this article regarding definite minimum width, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the continuation of the principal streets existing in the adjoining subdivision, or of its proper projection when adjoining property is not subdivided, and shall be a width at least as great as that of such existing streets, except as follows: 
(1)	Where, in the opinion of the planning commission, topographical conditions make such continuance or conformity impractical. 
(2)	In cases where the planning commission adopts a plan of a neighborhood of which the subdivision is a part, and this plan differs from that of such continuation or projection of existing streets and the subdivider's plat conforms to such neighborhood plan of the planning commission, the planning commission may approve the subdivider's plat. 
(3)	Where the plat submitted covers only a portion of the subdivider's tract, a sketch of the prospective future street system of the unsubmitted part shall be furnished, and the street system of the part submitted shall be considered in the light of adjustments and connections with the street system of the part not submitted. 
(4)	Where a tract is subdivided into lots of an acre or more, the planning commission may require an arrangement of lots and streets such as to permit a later resubdivision in conformity with the street requirements specified in this article. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.1; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.1, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-35. - Same-Access. 
    There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets, except where the control of such strip is definitely placed in the city under conditions approved by the planning commission. The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot, by means of either a public street or way or permanent easement, with satisfactory access to an existing public highway, or a thoroughfare as shown on the official map or master plan. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.2; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.2, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-36. - Same-Location. 
(a)	Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, provision shall be made for the extension of existing dead-end streets. Off-center street intersections with an offset of less than 200 feet will not be approved, except in unusual cases. Streets with reverse curves shall have a tangent between curves. 
(b)	Proposed streets shall conform to existing topography as nearly as possible, in order that drainage problems may be reduced. Streets, wherever possible, shall follow valleys so as to form a collection system for surface water. Surface drainage across residential lots, or along side or rear lot lines, shall be avoided wherever possible. Where such surface drainage on residential lots cannot be avoided, easements shall be provided and the planning commission may require installation of pipe, masonry or rip-rap flumes or such other protective devices in order that adjacent and surrounding property, or the welfare of the public shall not be endangered. 
(c)	Block lengths, in general, are determined by intersecting streets at such intervals as to serve cross traffic adequately and to meet existing or future streets. Where there is no existing plat control, the blocks shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length. 
(d)	Block widths preferably shall be such as to allow two tiers of lots, unless exceptional conditions are, in the opinion of the planning commission, such as to render this requirement undesirable. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.3; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.3, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-37. - Same-Culs-de-sac. 
    No dead-end streets will be approved unless provisions are made to connect with future streets in adjacent land and unless they are provided with temporary culs-de-sac. Culs-de-sac may be permitted where the form or contour of the land make it impractical to plat with connecting streets. Such culs-de-sac shall provide proper access to all lots and the distance, from the center of the cul-de-sac to the center of the nearest cross street intersection, shall not exceed 400 feet unless approved by the planning commission. The cul-de-sac shall be provided with a 50-foot radius, with a reverse curve of 60-foot radius from the tangent to the cul-de-sac for 50-foot streets, and shall have proportionate radii for wider streets. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.4; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.4, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-38. - Same-Design requirements; width and grade. 
    Construction of streets shall follow the latest edition of the APWA Design Standards, section 5200, except in no event will any street be constructed less than 28 feet in width, back to back. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.5; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.5, 7-24-1985; Ord. No. 1463, § 1, 5-8-2000) 
Sec. 56-39. - Same-Names and numbers. 
    The planning commission, in order to provide a uniform system of street names and addresses on business and residential properties and to avoid duplication and confusion thereof, shall have the power to: 
(1)	Designate the name by which all existing roads, streets, highways or public ways now dedicated to public use, within the jurisdiction of the planning commission, shall be officially known, and to rename the same and all others which may be opened or dedicated to public use and if at any time, in the judgment of the city council, such action may be deemed advisable and proper. 
(2)	Establish a uniform series of key numbers for all blocks and for such designated sections as may be deemed convenient upon all existing roads, streets, highways or public ways now dedicated to public use, within the jurisdiction of the planning commission, from which official street addresses for residence and business properties may be fixed in numerical order, and to renumber the same and all others which may be established if, at any time in the judgment of the city council, such action may be deemed advisable and proper; provided, that all street names and numbers, and all key numbers established and approved by the planning commission, prior to the adoption of these subdivision regulations, shall remain in effect. 
(3)	Approve or disapprove the designated name and block numbers of any proposed road, street, highway or public way to be opened or dedicated to the public and require that all of same be properly named and numbered. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.6; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.6, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-40. - Curbs and gutters. 
    Concrete curbs and gutters shall be included with all streets constructed. They shall be steel reinforced and constructed in accordance with the city's design and construction manual. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.7; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.7, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-41. - Sidewalks. 
    Concrete sidewalks shall be included with all streets constructed and shall be constructed in accordance with the city's design and construction manual. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.8; Ord. No. 1465, §§ 1, 3, 6-12-2000; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.8, 7-24-1985; Ord. No. 1423, § 1, 7-27-1998) 
Sec. 56-42. - Location for utilities. 
    Utilities shall be located so as to best conform to the layout of existing facilities. In street rights-of-way where no pattern has been established, utilities shall be located in conformance with standards established by the director of public works. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.9; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.9, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-43. - Design for handicapped persons. 
    Access ramps for handicapped persons shall be installed whenever new curbing and/or sidewalks are constructed or reconstructed in the city. Such ramps shall conform with standards adopted by the director of public works and each specific ramp location shall be subject to review and approval by the director of public works. Two ramps shall be installed on each side of the street per lineal block, thereby providing reasonable access to crosswalks for handicapped persons. These standards shall apply to any city street or connecting street for which curbs and sidewalks are required by this article or on which curb and sidewalk have been prescribed by the city council. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.10; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.10, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-44. - Approval of grades. 
    Profiles of streets shall be submitted to and approved by the director of public works, as required in the plat review process. Submittal information required for review of the preliminary plat shall include preliminary street profiles. Final calculated street profiles will be required in the submittal. Submittal information required for review of the preliminary plat shall include preliminary street profiles. Final calculated street profiles will be required in submittal of construction plans required during review of the final plat. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.11; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.11, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-45. - Compaction requirements of cut and fill areas. 
    All fill areas within the street right-of-way shall be compacted in accordance with the standards provided in the city's design and construction manual. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.12; Ord. No. 1154, §§ 401.10, 401.12, 401.13, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-46. - Approval of subgrade. 
    The director of public works shall approve the subgrade before any base course or surface is placed thereon. The subgrade shall be so constructed that it will be uniform in density throughout. The entire width and length shall conform to line, grade, and typical cross section shown on the plans or as established by the director of public works. If any settling or washing occurs, or where hauling results in ruts or other objectionable irregularities, the contractor shall reshape and reroll the subgrade before the base or surfacing is placed. Tolerance allowed on all line, grades, and cross sections shall be plus or minus 0.04 feet. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.13; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.13, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-47. - Sewer and water work prior to base construction. 
    No base course work may proceed on any street until all trenching for storm and sanitary sewers and for water lines within an area extending one foot, zero inch behind curbs has been properly backfilled with one-half-inch or larger clean stone, or with earth mechanically tamped in ten-inch lifts and allowed to set for a length of time satisfactory to the director of public works. Wherever possible, the developer shall schedule installation of gas or buried electric utility lines so that trenches for such lines can be properly backfilled prior to street base course construction. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.14; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.14, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-48. - Miscellaneous requirements. 
    Manholes, storm sewers, inlets and utility valves shall be adjusted to meet the proper grade of street or yard areas to the satisfaction of the director of public works. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.15; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.15, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-49. - Rule exception. 
    All streets hereafter constructed shall conform to the specifications of this article unless, upon the recommendation of the director of public works, undue hardship is encountered, in which case the city council may authorize a rule exception if it is in the public interest to do so. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 401.16; Ord. No. 1154, § 401.16, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-50. - Lots; arrangement. 
    In all quadrangular lots, and so far as practicable all other lots, the side lines shall be at right angles to straight lines. An arrangement placing adjacent lots at right angles to one another shall be avoided where practicable. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 402.1; Ord. No. 1154, § 402.1, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-51. - Lots; sizes. 
(a)	The minimum dimensions for one family dwelling lots shall be 70 feet in width, measured at any point through the length of the lot and have a minimum square footage of 10,000 square feet. In the case of nonrectangular lots, this width shall be measured at the front building line. Corner lots shall have a minimum front width of 80 feet. The minimum front building line for residential areas shall be as herein stated. Where alleys are shown, the planning commission may limit the depth of lots for the purpose of preventing future alley lots or buildings, or may require the establishment of building lines along the alley adjacent for the conversion of such alley into a minor street. 
(b)	The minimum dimensions of lots utilized for other than one-family dwellings shall be as herein stated. 
(Ord. No. 1222, § 2, 3-14-1988; Ord. No. 1556, 9-27-2004) 
Sec. 56-52. - Grandfather provision. 
    Any residential building lots in which the final plat was approved prior to 1985 shall be exempt from the lot minimum square footage requirement and also exempt from the minimum frontage requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1518, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 56-53. - Lots; easements. 
    Except where alleys of not less than 20 feet are provided for the purpose, the planning commission may require easements, not exceeding six feet, on any lot line where necessary or, in the opinion of the planning commission, advisable for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and heat mains or other utilities. Easements of the same or greater width may be required along the line of, or across lots, where necessary for the extension of the existing or planned utilities. 
(Ord. No. 1154, § 402.4, 7-24-1985; Ord. No. 1154, § 402.4, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-54. - Minimum dwelling sizes. 
(a)	The planning commission shall, before the preliminary plan is approved, classify the lots in the subdivision as to the minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area shall not include open or screened porches, garages, utility rooms or finished basement areas. The class of dwelling sizes are as follows: 
Minimum Ground Floor Area

(in square feet)ClassificationOne story and split level11/2 storyTwo storyA2,5001,6671,250B2,1001,4001,050C1,9001,267950D1,7001,133850E1,5001,000750F1,400933700G1,300867650H1,200800600J1,080720540 
The minimum floor area for other dwelling units shall be 900 square feet for duplexes, 750 square feet for apartments, and 475 square feet for garden apartments. 
(b)	No land shall be so classified as to reduce the minimum ground area requirements thereof below that provided by the next lower classification to that designated for any separately owned land contiguous to or directly adjacent across a street. In the event the differential between such classifications is so great as to render impractical such a limitation, then the planning commission may designate a classification for the proposed subdivision which will, in its judgment, be in harmony with the surrounding area. 
(c)	Each one-story one-family dwelling or residence hereafter located or constructed within the jurisdiction of the planning commission, which is situated upon land not previously classified and designated as to minimum floor area for one-family dwelling purpose, shall contain a minimum floor area of 1,080 square feet. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 402.5; Ord. No. 1154, § 402.5, 7-24-1985; Ord. No. 1574, § 1, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 56-55. - Drainage-Requirements. 
    No land shall be developed or altered within the city, except in accordance with a stormwater drainage plan as approved by these regulations. No building permit shall be issued until a stormwater drainage plan has been approved by the director of public works. These requirements shall apply to all new development within the city, residential, commercial, industrial, or other land uses. No new home or other habitable structure shall be constructed in the city, unless the lowest habitable floor level of such structure is located at an elevation which exceeds the flood level having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (the flood level to be expected from a storm with an average recurrence interval of 100 years). 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 403.1; Ord. No. 1154, § 403.1, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-56. - Same-Procedures. 
    Plat review procedures and specifications shall be followed in developing an approved stormwater plan for any proposed subdivision or development of property within the city. Provisions for management and control of stormwater runoff shall be considered at each stage of the plat review process as previously described. 
(1)	Preliminary plat review. A preliminary draft of a stormwater runoff plan shall be submitted as a part of the information required for preliminary plat review. The said preliminary stormwater runoff plan shall indicate the concepts which will be considered within the development to adequately handle all stormwater runoff generated from the proposed project, said plan to include the methods for detention or control of increased runoff generated by the project. The preliminary stormwater plan shall be accompanied by maps as described in the preliminary plat review procedures plus additional descriptive information which shall indicate the following: 
a.	Location of any existing drainage facilities situated within the proposed project site. Also the location of existing drainage facilities which fall in the same watershed within which the project falls but within a distance of 250 feet from the perimeter of said site. 
b.	The location of any apparent flowing springs, existing wells or existing seepage areas as determined by the developer and his engineer, and subject to verification by the director of public works. 
c.	The extent of area and imperviousness in each watershed tributary to the drainage channels or drainage facilities within the proposed development. 
d.	General plan indicating the extent and nature of storm drainage facilities proposed to serve the project, including preliminary calculations indicating the runoff which must be handled by such facilities, the methods and criteria which have been utilized in calculating such runoff, and basic information regarding the receiving stream waterway into which such drainage facilities will discharge including typical cross sections of said channel; existing vegetative cover; approximate slope of the channel; degree of erosive action which has previously taken place; and other relevant information which may be required by the director of public works. 
e.	A general grading plan for the project indicating, by means of rough grading contours and spot elevations, the grades which will be established in critical areas during construction of the project. 
(2)	Final plat review. After general approval of the preliminary plat, and after review and approval of the preliminary stormwater plan by the director of public works, a final and comprehensive stormwater runoff plan shall be prepared for the proposed project. This final plan shall be submitted along with information required in review of the final plat and shall constitute a refinement of the concepts approved in the preliminary plan. The final stormwater runoff plan shall include the following information: 
a.	The location of all existing sanitary and storm sewers which fall within the project limits, including a distance of 100 feet beyond the exterior boundaries of said project. 
b.	Detailed determination of runoff anticipated for the entire project site following development, indicating design volumes of developed runoff for each portion of the watershed tributary to the storm drainage system, the calculations used to determine said runoff volumes and a restatement of the criteria which have been used by the project engineer throughout his calculations. 
c.	General information regarding the type and characteristics of soils which will be encountered within the project site, such as information available from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. 
d.	A refined layout of the proposed stormwater system proposed for the project including the location and size of all drainage structures, storm sewers, channels and channel sections, proposed detention basins, if required, and analyses regarding the effect that the proposed project development will have upon the receiving stream or channel during design storm conditions. 
e.	The slope, type and size of all existing and proposed sewers, drainage structures, channels and other waterways. 
f.	For all detention basins, if any, design hydrographs of inflow and outflow from the drainage basin under existing and proposed development conditions based on the design storm return frequency required by this article. 
g.	A refined grading plan for the entire project site drawn at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet with contour interval which shall not exceed two feet, said grading to indicate both existing and proposed final grading contours in critical areas and a plotting of line defining the high-water elevation to be expected through the project under a 100-year peak flow condition. 
h.	Cross sections of existing and proposed channels or other open drainage facilities in critical drainage areas showing the elevation of existing land and the proposed changes thereto, together with the high-water elevations expected from stormwater runoff under controlled 50-year and 100-year return frequency storm conditions, and the relationship of such high-water elevation to existing or proposed structures, streets, utilities, and adjacent properties. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 403.2; Ord. No. 1154, § 403.2, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-57. - Same-Design criteria. 
(a)	Generally. 
(1)	In the planning and design of stormwater management systems in the city, the design criteria set forth in the latest edition of the publication titled Design Criteria for Storm Sewers and Appurtenances, prepared by the Kansas City Metropolitan Chapter of the American Public Works Association, sections 5100 to 5112 inclusive, shall be used. The portions of this document which are hereby referenced are made a part of this article as though expressly rewritten and incorporated herein. 
(2)	Section 56-54 of the stormwater runoff management plan, as required by this article, shall be to apply stormwater drainage policies and practices on a total watershed area basis so as to prevent or alleviate, to the greatest extent possible, downstream flooding problems and resulting property damage and/or deterioration. It is the policy of the city to encourage the developer to locate and design streets, blocks, lots, parks and open space in such a manner as to reduce the velocity of overland flow; allow the maximum opportunity for infiltration of stormwater into the ground; and to preserve existing streams, channels, detention basins and floodplain areas as open space. 
(3)	Where the stormwater plan, as approved by the director of public works, indicates that the proposed development will aggravate downstream drainage or flooding problems, provisions shall be included in the design of storm drainage improvements for the temporary controlled detention of stormwater runoff and its regulated discharge to the downstream storm drainage system. If stormwater detention is required, the criteria and policies set forth in this section shall be applied in the design and development of the final stormwater plan for the proposed project. 
(b)	Method of determining runoff. 
(1)	The rational method shall be used in calculating runoff for all developments less than 200 acres in size. For developments exceeding 200 acres in area, the applicant shall submit a proposed method of evaluation for the calculation of runoff to the director of public works, for approval. Such proposal and all drainage calculations required hereunder shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state. 
(2)	When the proposed development abuts, includes or encompasses a portion of a floodplain, as defined herein, the professional engineer, preparing the stormwater plan, shall review and in all ways comply with requirements of other city ordinances regarding construction of buildings and other development in the floodplain areas of the city. He shall also consult the flood insurance study as previously prepared for the city by the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(c)	Stormwater detention. 
(1)	Requirements. Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the director of public works, the stormwater detention facilities, when required by the approved stormwater plan, shall be designed to comply fully with the following requirements: Such facilities shall be designed to detain the differential runoff from the project site under the design conditions so stated. The term "differential runoff" shall be defined as the increase in volume or rate of runoff generated by the proposed development or redevelopment of a parcel of land as compared to the runoff volume which occurred prior to said development or redevelopment. 
(2)	Storage volume. The volume of storage provided in detention basins shall be sufficient to control the differential runoff from a 50-year storm return frequency of 24-hour duration. The rate of runoff from the project following development, including discharge from the detention basin, shall not exceed the rate of runoff that occurred prior to development. 
(3)	Freeboard. Detention storage areas shall include adequate capacity to contain maximum volume of tributary runoff with at least 2.0 feet of freeboard or as otherwise required by state or federal regulations. 
(4)	Outlet control works. 
a.	Outlet works shall be designed to limit peak outfall rates so that the rate of runoff from the proposed development, including discharge from the detention basins, shall not exceed the rate of runoff that occurred prior to the development. The outlet works shall not include any mechanical components or devices. 
b.	Size and hydraulic characteristics shall be such that all water and detention storage is released to the downstream storm drainage system within 24 hours following the end of the design rainfall. 
c.	The minimum pipe size for use as an outlet or low flow control orifice pipe shall be 12-inch diameter. 
(5)	Spillway. Emergency overflows and/or spillways shall be provided to permit safe passage of runoff for a storm with a return frequency of at least 100 years. 
(6)	Design data submittal for detention. In addition to complete plans, the following design data shall be submitted for the director of public works' approval for all projects including temporary detention facilities: 
a.	Depth-capacity curve for the proposed detention facility showing accumulated volume of storage with varying depth of water in the proposed facility. 
b.	Discharge characteristics curve for the outlet works of the detention facility.
c.	Combined storage-outflow curve showing inflow and discharge of runoff volume starting at the beginning of the design storm. Curves shall be arranged so that the vertical distance between the accumulated storage and the accumulated discharge will indicate the net volume of storage required at any time. Curves shall be extended to include the time required for complete discharge of all runoff stored within the detention facility. 
(7)	Wet bottom basins. For basins designed with permanent pools: 
a.	Minimum depths. The minimum normal depth of water before the introduction of excess stormwater shall be four feet. 
b.	Depth for fish. If fish are to be used to help keep the basin clean, at least one-quarter of the area of the permanent pool must have a minimum of ten feet. 
c.	Facilities for emptying. For emergency purposes, cleaning or shoreline maintenance, facilities shall be provided to permit emptying and drainage. 
d.	Pollution abatement. Aeration facilities may be required, dependent on the quality of the influent and detention time. 
(8)	Dry bottom basins. For dry bottom basins: 
a.	Interior drainage. Provisions must be incorporated to facilitate interior drainage, to include the provision of natural grades to outlet structures, longitudinal and transverse grades to perimeter drainage facilities, or the installation of subsurface drains. 
b.	Minimum bottom slope. The minimum bottom slope shall be two percent, unless an approved paved concrete swale is provided in the bottom of the detention basin. 
c.	Multipurpose features. These shall be designed to serve secondary purposes for recreation, open space or other types of use which will not be adversely affected by occasional or intermittent flooding. 
(9)	Rooftop storage. Detention storage may be met in total or in part by detention on flat roofs. Details of such designs to be included in the building permit applications shall include the depth and volume of storage, details of outlet devices and downdrains, elevations of overflow scuppers, design loadings for the roof structure and emergency overflow provisions. Direct connection of roof drains to sanitary sewers or surface discharge to streets is prohibited. 
(10)	Parking lot storage. Paved parking lots may be designed to provide temporary detention storage of stormwater on all or a portion of their surfaces. Outlets will be designed so as to slowly empty the stored water, and depths of storage must be limited so as to prevent damage to parked vehicles. 
(11)	Underground detention storage. All or a portion of the detention storage may also be provided in underground detention facilities, to include pipes, tanks, or reservoirs. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 403.3; Ord. No. 1154, § 403.3, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-58. - Land requirements. 
    Permanent easements shall be dedicated to the city over all lands, structures and facilities to be used for the detention and conveyance of storm drainage. Easements shall include all necessary provisions and land necessary for the city's right of entry for purposes of inspection and/or maintenance of such facilities. All such easements and pertinent documents shall be subject to the approval of the director of public works. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 403.4; Ord. No. 1154, § 403.4, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-59. - Maintenance. 
(a)	Lot lines. Whenever the approved stormwater plan calls for the passage and/or storage of floodwaters, surface runoff or excess stormwater along lot lines, the grading of all such lots shall be prescribed on said plan and established for the passage and/or storage of stormwater. No structure, transformer enclosure, power pole fence or other facility shall be erected which will obstruct the flow of stormwater and no shrubbery or trees shall be planted, or changes made to the prescribed grades and contours of the specified floodwater or stormwater runoff channels which will obstruct or impede stormwater flow in such channels. Utility easements shall be located and platted so the utility systems, when installed, will not conflict with storm drainage easements. 
(b)	Acceptance. 
(1)	Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit on any lot, the director of public works shall make a final inspection of the grading of said lot to ascertain compliance by the developer and/or builder with lot grading requirements as shown on the approved stormwater plan. 
(2)	Upon satisfactory completion of stormwater drainage systems, including stormwater channels, detention facilities, outlet works, and related appurtenances, the director of public works shall make a final inspection of such facilities and shall recommend to the city council that such facilities be accepted subject to provisions of maintenance bonds issued in accordance with standard city policies. 
(3)	Perpetual maintenance of drainage facilities and systems, designed and constructed in accordance with provisions of this article, shall hereafter be considered as a joint responsibility of both the homeowner and the city. The homeowner whose property includes all or a portion of an open drainage swale, channel or detention basin shall be held responsible for the mowing of grass and removal of debris or obstructions to the flow of water in or through such facilities. The city shall be responsible for other maintenance work including, but not necessarily limited to, the repair and cleaning of storm drainage conduits, outlet structures, curb inlets, junction boxes and other major drainage facilities, all as determined by policies as may be adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 403.5; Ord. No. 1154, § 403.5, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-60. - Permits. 
    Building permits for projects including stormwater detention facilities may be granted by the city only after all easements have been dedicated, accepted, and recorded and all required maintenance agreements, contracts and bonds have been executed. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 403.6; Ord. No. 1154, § 403.6, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-61. - Industrial subdivisions. 
    All industrial development in the city shall conform with applicable provisions set forth in the city's zoning chapter. Additionally, where industrial developments for light manufacturing, research and office activities, trucking and warehousing, and other limited industrial developments fall within the definition of the term "subdivision" as set forth in this chapter. Such development shall also conform to provisions of this chapter, including the requirements contained in this article. Where conflicts occur between the two articles, provisions contained in this article shall apply to such industrial subdivisions. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 404.1; Ord. No. 1154, § 404.1, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-62. - Land area. 
    The land area of five acres or greater shall be subdivided and land or area less than five acres abutting an existing industrial subdivision shall be subdivided. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 404.2; Ord. No. 1154, § 404.2, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-63. - Lot dimensions. 
    Lots in industrial subdivisions shall conform with the following requirements: 
(1)	Total site coverage, defined in this section as the portion of the site occupied by an industrial building, shall not exceed 40 percent; 
(2)	Side yards of a minimum of ten feet, except in the case of a corner lot where the side yard on the street side shall not be less than 20 feet; 
(3)	Front yards of not less than 20 feet;
(4)	Rear yards of not less than 20 feet.
(Code 1994, app. B, § 404.3; Ord. No. 1154, § 404.3, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-64. - Street conformity. 
    Streets shall conform to the requirements of sections 56-34 to 56-49 herein. All streets in an industrial subdivision shall be paved, and shall have straight back curb and gutter. Lots in an industrial subdivision shall have access from subdivision frontage streets, and shall not open directly onto a parkway, thoroughfare or collector street. Streets shall be designed and constructed to adequately handle heavy truck traffic. Curbside parking and loading shall not be permitted on any street in an industrial subdivision. No backing or similar maneuvering of vehicles to enter or leave a parking or loading space shall be permitted in an industrial subdivision street; such movements shall be adequately provided for on each lot. Entry drives for the subdivisions shall be located and designed so as not to create congestion or hazardous conditions on public streets serving the subdivision. Driveways from parking and/or loading areas shall intersect subdivision streets at a distance from street intersections that is large enough to permit safe and convenient maneuvering of vehicles. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 404.4; Ord. No. 1154, § 404.4, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-65. - Other considerations pertaining to improvements. 
    Provision for streetlights, water, sewer, and drainage shall conform to this and other pertinent ordinances of the city. Landscaped buffer strips, at least 20 feet wide, shall be provided along the perimeter of an industrial subdivision where said subdivision is adjacent to a residential area. Said buffer strip may be provided within the industrial subdivision tract or on the adjacent residential property. The planning commission and city council may require provision of a fence, wall, or screen if it determines such is necessary to protect adjacent areas from litter, trespass, and other nuisances. Any intended future expansion of the development should be shown on the final plat submitted for council approval. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 404.5; Ord. No. 1154, § 404.5, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-66. - Sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks and pedestrian ways are not required in industrial subdivisions, except in unusual cases as determined by the city council. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 404.6; Ord. No. 1154, § 404.6, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-67. - Sewer and water utilities. 
    Sanitary sewer and water supply facilities shall be designed and located according to specifications and procedural requirements of the city and with requirements of the state department of health and the clean water commission. Sanitary sewerage facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with requirements set forth in the latest edition of the publication titled Sanitary Sewer Specifications and Standards, including any supplements thereto as approved by the city, prepared by the Kansas City Metropolitan Chapter of the American Public Works Association. This document is hereby made a part of this article as though expressly rewritten and incorporated herein. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 405.2; Ord. No. 1154, § 405.2, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-68. - Gas, wire or cable utilities. 
    All newly constructed lines for telephone, electrical, television, and other services distributed by wire or cable shall be placed underground throughout a subdivision. Overhead lines may be permitted upon recommendation of the planning commission and city council at the time of approval of the preliminary plat where it is determined that such lines will not impair the health, safety, general welfare, design, appearance, and character of the subdivision, and only where such overhead lines are brought to the perimeter of the subdivision. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the construction of aboveground or surface equipment associated with an underground distribution system such as, (but not limited to) surface mounted transformers, power terminal pedestals, meters and meter boxes, concealed wires, streetlights and streetlight poles. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 405.3; Ord. No. 1154, § 405.3, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-69. - Easements. 
    All underground public utility installations, including lines for streetlighting systems, which traverse privately owned property, shall be protected by easements granted by the developer to the appropriate public utility and approved by the public utility. Such easements shall be so located as to not interfere with the use of any lot or other part of the subdivision. The size of, and restrictions pertaining to, such easements shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications of the agency having jurisdiction over the utility lines and the subdivision, and shall be indicated on the preliminary plat submitted for approval. Stormwater easements and drainage right-of-way will be required by the city where necessary for proper drainage and maintenance thereof within or through a subdivision. Where a cut or fill for a street extends beyond the limits of the right-of-way, the developer shall provide a slope easement as determined by the director of public works to be of sufficient area and limits to permit the construction and maintenance of the slope. Whenever a stream or surface drainage course is located in an area proposed for a subdivision, the developer shall provide an easement, determined by the director of public works, to be adequate in area to contain facilities to control flooding or erosion along said stream or surface drainage course. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 405.4; Ord. No. 1154, § 405.4, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-70. - Soil erosion and sediment control. 
    Since considerable erosion can take place prior to the construction of houses and other building, facilities, and features in a subdivision, the stormwater plan and construction plans for a subdivision shall contain properly designed measures (as described herein) to control erosion and sediment discharge which would emanate from the subdivision area, especially within all critical drainage watershed areas, as determined by the director of public works. The measures shall be incorporated into the final construction drawings. Erosion and sediment control measures shall conform to the standards and specifications established by the council and the director of public works. The measures shall apply to all street and utility installations as well as to the protection of individual lots. Measures shall be instituted to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation during the various stages of construction of the subdivision. Erosion control for drainage systems will be required in swales, ditches, or creeks and at the discharge points of all pipes where the velocity exceeds five feet per second. Silting basins or diversion channels will be required during the construction period to ensure that mud and other debris is not washed into natural watercourses or new or previously constructed storm sewers. The director of public works may impose supplemental requirements or may delete requirements regarding sediment and erosion control measures if, in his judgment, additional or revised requirements are justified or planned measures prove to be inadequate to properly control erosion. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 405.5; Ord. No. 1154, § 405.5, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-71. - Trees. 
(a)	Trees shall be planted within designated buffer strips, greenbelts, pedestrian ways, and other landscaped areas as designated on approved plans and plats provided they are planted so as not to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic movement, stormwater conveyance, or construction and maintenance of utilities. Where required or permitted, trees shall be of ornamental, evergreen, or of the large deciduous types, such as oak, maple, ash, hickory, or thornless honey locust. 
(b)	The following trees are not permitted in buffer strips, greenbelts, pedestrian ways or any other landscaped areas required by this article: box elder, soft maple, hackberry, American elm, poplar ailanthus (tree of heaven), willow and mimosa. 
(c)	All required trees shall be sound and healthy at the time of planting; root systems shall be balled. Required trees shall be protected from damage by wind and other elements. However, guy wires and ropes, where provided, shall not damage bark or break branches. Trees shall be guaranteed by the developer for one full year after planting with dead or otherwise unacceptable trees to be replaced by the developer at his expense during the guarantee period. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 405.6; Ord. No. 1154, § 405.6, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-72. - Tree planting. 
(a)	The planting of street trees is not permitted on residential streets. No trees shall be planted closer than six feet of the property line. No shrubs shall be planted closer than four feet of the property line. The planting of street trees along major streets is optional with the subdivider, but if done, planting plans in duplicate must be submitted to the planning commission and receive its approval before planting of trees is begun. 
(b)	Required trees shall meet the following minimum size requirements:
Large deciduous, nonornamental (such as, maple,
oak, hickory)2 in. caliperOrnamental (such as, flowering cherry, flowering
crab-apple, dogwood)6-7 ft. in heightEvergreen4-5 ft. in height 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 405.7; Ord. No. 1154, § 405.7, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-73. - Streetlights. 
    Streetlights shall have underground wiring. Light standards shall meet the minimum specifications of the electric utility company serving the area of the proposed subdivision. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 405.8; Ord. No. 1154, § 405.8, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-74. - Natural features. 
    The planning commission may, wherever possible, require preservation of all natural features which add value to the proposed subdivision and to the community at large, such as large trees or groves of trees, watercourses, historic features, wildlife habitats and environmental areas, and similar irreplaceable community assets. The location, nature and extent of such features should be identified in the initial procedures and preliminary plat stages and shall be made a part of the subsequent plats to the greatest possible extent. The preservation and/or inclusion of such features may be made a condition of approval of the final plat. Adequate access to such areas shall be provided in all adjacent platting. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 405.9; Ord. No. 1154, § 405.9, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-75. - Uninhabitable areas. 
    Lands subject to flooding, or otherwise deemed uninhabitable in their natural state by the planning commission and city council shall not be platted for residential use, or for any other use that might create a danger to health, safety, or property, or which might increase the flood hazard within or outside the subdivision. Such lands shall be set aside for recreational use or shall be retained in their natural state as open space: provided, however, that such lands may be platted and developed if the features making the lands uninhabitable can reasonably be removed without destruction of adjacent or nearby property or desirable natural features of the land and if necessary approval is obtained from the city council. In all platting adjacent to such areas, adequate provisions for access to said areas, as determined by the director of public works, shall be provided. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 405.10; Ord. No. 1154, § 405.10, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-76. - Historical sites. 
    Any sites considered to have historical significance, either by the city, the developer, or federal agencies, shall be designated on any plan or plat within which said sites may be located. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 405.11; Ord. No. 1154, § 405.11, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-77. - Air quality standards. 
    The developer or builder of any project, subdivision, commercial or industrial development within the city shall in all ways comply with requirements of local, state and federal requirements or regulations pertaining to air quality and shall obtain all permits which are required at the time of project implementation. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 405.12; Ord. No. 1154, § 405.12, 7-24-1985) 
Secs. 56-78-56-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARK AND RECREATION LAND AND FUND 

Sec. 56-100. - Parks and playgrounds. 
    It shall be a condition of a final plat of a subdivision, PUD (planned unit developments) or other residential property improvement, that each subdivider, developer or owner will be required to make to and at the discretion of the city parks and recreation board either: 
(1)	Land donation;
(2)	Cash in lieu of land donation; or
(3)	Combination of both.
The method selected shall be recommended by the park board. The planning commission shall review the parkland, in accordance with the subdivision regulations and zoning regulations as well as the comprehensive plan in their regular manner of consideration. The final approval shall be by the city council prior to acceptance of the final plat of the subdivision. This provision applies to the development of all lands in the city, including all subdivisions, lots, tracts, and parcels of land regardless of intended use. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 500.1; Ord. No. 1154, § 500.1, 7-24-1985; Ord. No. 1576, § 1(500.1), 6-15-2005) 
Sec. 56-101. - Formula for the dedication of land. 
    If the dedication of land is selected, the dedication shall be by plat and deed. The amount of dedication required shall correspond to the density of the subdivision and shall be calculated off of the following formula: 
DLR = DU × D × 0.02 
where: 
DLR = Dedicated land requirement 
DU = Number of dwelling units 
D = Number of people per dwelling unit per the most recent U.S. Census figures for Cass County 
0.02 = Required acres per person based on 20 acres per 1,000 people 
*The standard utilized is that set forth by the Missouri Statewide Comprehensive Outdoor Recreation Plan. 
The projected population at full development shall be the criteria used to determine the amount of land to be donated. A formula of 20 acres per 1,000 people (projected full development) will be used.* 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 500.2; Ord. No. 1154, § 405.12, 7-24-1985; Ord. No. 1576, § 1(500.2), 6-15-2005) 
Sec. 56-102. - Suitability criteria. 
(a)	All designated open space, parks or recreational facilities shall be of suitable size, location, dimension, topography and general character and shall have proper road and/or pedestrian access, as may be appropriate, to be usable open space, as follows: 
(1)	The minimum land area for a dedicated parkland tract shall be five acres. Parkland shall be in a single parcel unless there are physical features, such as a railroad, or water, separating the proposed tracts provided that neither tract is smaller than five acres. Two or more tracts may be considered for subdivisions including at least 500 dwelling units, provided that neither tract is smaller than eight acres. 
(2)	Retention areas or detention basins which are required as part of this chapter shall not qualify as a public open space. 
(3)	Water (including streams, rivers, ponds and lakes), marsh, floodplains, and wetland acreages shall not be used to comply with the land requirement of this section, except as provided for required trail improvements listed in section 56-103 
(4)	At least 50 percent of the gross area of any active open space required to be dedicated pursuant to this section shall have a natural slope of four percent or less and shall not be located in an existing watercourse, drainage easement or water ponding area. In addition, that portion of the land must have a cover of six inches or more of topsoil suitable for the seeding and cultivation of grass. If land proposed to be dedicated has a natural slope in excess of that required by this subsection, but may be engineered to provide for a slope that meets the requirements imposed therein, the developer may, upon the favorable recommendation of the parks and recreation board, permit such land to be dedicated to satisfy the requirements of this subsection. 
(5)	Open space areas located in spillways where the spillway is greater than 25 percent of the land area shall not be used to meet the requirements of this section. 
(6)	Parkland shall be dedicated by the developer in a condition ready for full service with electrical, water, and sewer access at the property line. 
(7)	The layout of the park shall maximize street frontage on a public street. Minimum frontage shall be 200 feet. 
(b)	All land to be dedicated to the city for park purposes shall have the prior approval of the parks and recreation board and shall be shown and marked on the plat, as dedicated to the city for park purposes. All land dedicated shall transfer ownership at the time of plat recording. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 500.3; Ord. No. 1576, § 1(500.3), 6-15-2005) 
Sec. 56-103. - Community open space network/trails system required. 
(a)	Developments planned for land on which a trail segment is identified on the trail system master plan shall be required to provide such trail segment. Trail segments shall be constructed at the time of infrastructure improvement and shall be constructed to meet or exceed the standards set forth by the MetroGreen Plan adopted by the Mid-America Regional Council. A public access easement 15 feet in width shall be required over the entire length of the trail segment. The Homeowners Association established for the development shall maintain the land adjoining the trails' surface along with all other common areas in their development. 
(b)	The trail system is considered integral to the parks and recreation system and all developers required to construct a segment of a required trail shall be awarded credit against the land dedication requirement. The developer shall be awarded credit both for the property acreage within the public access easement and for the cost of the trail improvement. Trail construction cost credits shall be determined by the city engineer using AASHTO standard costs for asphalt installation for the year in which the construction takes place. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 500.4; Ord. No. 1576, § 1(500.4), 6-15-2005) 
Sec. 56-104. - Cash in lieu of land dedication. 
    If elected by the parks and recreation board, a cash payment in lieu of land may be made to satisfy park land dedication. 
(1)	Formula for cash in lieu of land:
CLL = DLR × APPA 
where: 
CLL = Cash in lieu of land 
DLR = Dedicated land requirement 
APPA = Actual purchase price per acre paid by the developer 
The greater of the fair market value per acre set annually by council or the actual purchase price per acre of the amount of land to be donated shall be paid as the fee in lieu of actual donation. The actual purchase price of the property shall be reported to the city at the time of filing application for each final plat. Such reporting shall be required on a notarized disclosure form provided by the city. If the city disputes such report of purchase price, the city may request information from the title company or bank listed on the disclosure form to establish conclusive evidence of the purchase price for the property. Failure to provide correct information on the disclosure form constitutes fraud. 
(2)	Formula for partial land donation. When a portion of land dedication requirement is accepted the remaining cash fee will be calculated and credited as follows: 
a.	Dedicated land requirement ;minus; Number of acres accepted × actual purchase price per acre; or 
b.	CLL = DLR - ALA × APPA
where: 
ALA = Accepted land acreage 
APPA = Actual purchase price per acre 
(3)	The cash in lieu payment is due to the city at the time of recording of each final plat unless the developer has not purchased the property before plat recording. In the event that the property has not been purchased before recording, then the fee-in-lieu shall be paid in full after closing on the property and before any building permits issued. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 500.5; Ord. No. 1576, § 1(500.5), 6-15-2005) 
Sec. 56-105. - Privately developed recreation space. 
    The developer may comply with the provisions of this section to furnish land for recreational purposes by privately developing recreational open space and/or preserving significant natural, cultural or historic features or landmarks under the following provisions: 
(1)	The developer must provide an area that meets the minimum standards set forth in this section related to size, suitability, and location. 
(2)	The developer must provide minimum neighborhood park improvements in a privately developed open space tract including, but not limited to: 
a.	Family picnic shelter.
b.	Children's playground.
c.	Turfed playfields.
(3)	All improvements to privately developed open space tracts shall be included in the first phase of infrastructure installation for the development's first final plat. A public access easement over the entire area shall be required and shown on the final plat of the phase of development which includes the dedicated space. 
(4)	Privately developed parkland shall be maintained by the developer or the lot owners in the subdivision under a legal agreement approved by the city as adequate to ensure its continued operation and maintenance. The developer may turn over all rights and maintenance of the completed park to the city if so agreed upon prior to platting. 
(5)	The parks and recreation board shall recommend credit against the requirements of this article for privately developing parkland upon a finding that the development would advance the goals of the parks and recreation element of the city's most recent comprehensive plan and/or would preserve a significant natural, cultural or historic feature or landmark. All requests shall be submitted to the parks and recreation department two weeks prior to appearance before the board and shall include the following information: 
a.	A site plan showing:
1.	Scale of the drawing and the boundaries, dimensions, and orientation of the site to true north. 
2.	Topography at a minimum two-foot-contour interval.
3.	Location and layout of existing physical characteristics (vegetation, natural waterways and drainageways, rock outcroppings, etc.) indicating any significant features to be removed, improved, or preserved. 
4.	Location and layout of proposed improvements including landscaping, irrigation system, pathways and trails, play areas and playground equipment, lighting, fencing, structures, etc. 
5.	Ingress, egress, and internal circulation for the site.
6.	Relationship of the proposed site and proposed improvements to adjoining property.
b.	An itemized list of the proposed improvements including a description, the quantity, and estimated per unit cost figure for the individual improvements. 
c.	A statement of the methods and/or provision for ownership, maintenance and use of the site and proposed improvements. 
d.	Any materials and/or information determined by the parks and recreation department to be necessary or appropriate for board review. 
(6)	A combination of accepted land and improvements should total the partial land/partial cash requirement for the development. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 500.6; Ord. No. 1576, § 1(500.6), 6-15-2005) 
Sec. 56-106. - Subdivision of park and open space prohibited. 
    Land designated as open space shall be maintained as open space and may not be separately sold, subdivided, or developed except to the city, an appropriate public agency, or a nonprofit entity if there is a public or nonprofit agency willing to accept the dedication and financially capable of maintaining such open space. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 500.7; Ord. No. 1576, § 1(500.7), 6-15-2005) 
Sec. 56-107. - Park fee for commercial and industrial development. 
(a)	A park land donation fee shall be paid from commercial development and shall be in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)	The city council has the authority to waive a part or the entire commercial development park land donation fee at their discretion. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 500.8; Ord. No. 1576, § 1(500.8), 6-15-2005) 
Sec. 56-108. - Certain activity prohibited. 
    Following dedication of lands as provided herein, no person shall remove trees, vegetation or topsoil therefrom, nor shall the lands be used for the purpose of stockpiling of earth or construction material, or disposal of construction debris, without the written consent of the department of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 500.9; Ord. No. 1576, § 1(500.9), 6-15-2005) 
Sec. 56-109. - Platting requirements. 
    All land to be dedicated to the city for park purposes shall have the prior approval of the parks and recreation board and shall be shown and marked on the plat as dedicated to the city for park purposes. All land dedicated shall transfer ownership at the time of plat recording. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 500.10; Ord. No. 1576, § 1(500.10), 6-15-2005) 
Secs. 56-110-56-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCEPTIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 56-132. - Rule exception. 
    The standards and procedures required herein shall be interpreted and applied literally in the case of all subdivision plats. In case, however, of hardship caused by size, location or configuration of land, topography or other factors which affect a specific tract or subdivision or portion thereof, the subdivider may request a rule exception from one or more of the requirements contained herein. A rule exception may be requested at the time of filing the preliminary or final plat. A rule exception may be approved by the governing body, provided that, in its judgment, such action will not violate the public interest, unnecessarily burden the city, or will annul the intent and purpose of these regulations. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 600.1; Ord. No. 1154, § 600.1, 7-24-1985) 
Sec. 56-133. - Penalties. 
    The violation of any provision of these regulations is a misdemeanor, and any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation convicted thereof shall be punished by a fine of $100.00 or confinement in the city jail for not more than ten days, or both a fine and confinement, and the city shall further have the authority to maintain suits or actions in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing any provisions of these regulations and to abate nuisances maintained in violation thereof; and in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use, or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land. Each day any violation of these regulations shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, app. B, § 600.2; Ord. No. 1154, § 600.2, 7-24-1985) 
Chapter 58 - ZONING 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Planning and zoning, RSMo 89.010 et seq.; municipal planning, RSMo 89.300 et seq.; community affairs, RSMo 251.010 et seq.; planning and development generally, RSMo 251.150 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of outdoor advertising, RSMo 71.288; municipal housing, housing authorities law, RSMo 99.010 et seq.; municipal industrial development, RSMo 100.010 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building or use means a subordinate building having a use customarily incident to and located on the lot occupied by the main building; or a use customarily incident to the main use of the property. A building housing an accessory use is considered an integral part of the main building when it has any part of a wall in common with the main building, or is under an extension of the main roof and designed as an integral part of the main building. 
    Alley means a minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Alteration means any addition, removal, extension, or change in the location of any exterior surface of a main building or accessory building. 
    Apartment means a room or a suite of rooms within an apartment house or two-family dwelling, arranged, intended or designed for a place of residence of a single-family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Apartment hotel means an apartment house that furnishes, for the use of its tenants, services ordinarily furnished by hotels, but the privileges of which are not primarily available to the public. 
    Apartment house means a building arranged, intended, or designed for more than two families. 
    Basement means a story below the first story as defined under the term "story," in this section, counted as a story for height regulations if subdivided and used for dwelling purposes other than by a janitor or watchman employed on the premises. 
    Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the zoning authority shall determine the outline of the block. 
    Board refers to the board of zoning adjustment. 
    Boardinghouse or lodginghouse means a building other than a hotel occupied as a single housekeeping unit where lodging or meals are provided for five or more persons for compensation, pursuant to previous arrangements, but not the public or transients. 
    Building means a structure for the purpose of housing or enclosing of persons, animals or chattels. The term "building" includes the term "structure." 
    Building line means the line between the street line or lot line, not building or other structure or portion thereof, except as provided in this chapter, may be erected above the grade level. The building line is considered a vertical surface intersecting the ground on such line. 
    Court means an unoccupied open space other than a yard on the same lot with a building which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of such building. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround. 
    Curb level means the mean level of the curb in front of the lot, or in the case of a corner lot, along the abutting street where the mean curb level is the highest. 
    Day care. 
(1)	Day care, limited, (four to six children). Limited day care uses shall be conducted in a dwelling unit that is occupied as a permanent residence by the day care provider. The use will be considered a home occupation and be subject to the home occupation provisions of the zoning chapter. An occupational license shall be required prior to the establishment of a limited day care. 
(2)	Day care, general, (seven to nine children). 
a.	State licensing. General day care uses shall be licensed by the state and shall meet all city, county and state health department requirements pertaining to facilities, equipment and other features. Overlap care for up to three persons shall be allowed if approved as a part of the license issued by the state. 
b.	Residential districts. In the residential districts, general day care uses shall be conducted in a dwelling unit that is occupied as a permanent residence by the licensed day care provider, except that an assistant may provide care during necessary absences of the regular day care provider. 
c.	Occupational license. An occupational license shall be required prior to the establishment of a general day care. 
d.	Special use permit. A special use permit is required. It shall be issued for a period of one year, at which time it must be renewed by operator. 
(3)	Day care, commercial, (ten or more children). 
a.	State licensing. Commercial day care uses shall be licensed by the state and shall meet all city, county and state health department requirements pertaining to facilities, equipment and other features. 
b.	Occupational license. Occupational license shall be required prior to the establishment of a commercial day care. 
c.	Special use permit. A special use permit is required, and shall be issued for a period of one year, at which time it must be renewed by operator. 
d.	Vehicle drop-off area. A loading zone capable of holding one car per ten licensed occupants shall be provided in addition to the required parking area, in order to provide for easy pick up and discharge of passengers. 
Any day care operated by a church or a not-for-profit basis shall be exempt from these regulations. 
    Dwelling means a building or portion thereof, designed exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family, and multiple dwellings, boardinghouses and lodginghouses, apartment houses and apartment hotels, but not hotels, house trailers or mobile homes. 
    Dwelling, multiple, means a building or portion thereof, arranged, intended or designed for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other, including apartment houses, row houses, tenements and apartment hotels. 
    Dwelling, one-family, means a detached building arranged, intended or designed for occupancy by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building arranged, intended or designed for occupancy by two families. 
    Family means one or more persons who are related by blood or marriage, including not more than two lodgers or boarders, living together and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single kitchen facilities, or a group of not more than four (excluding servants) living together by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single kitchen facilities, on a nonprofit cost-sharing basis. 
    Garage, community, means a building or portion thereof, other than a public, private, or storage garage providing storage for motor vehicles with facilities for washing, but no other services, such garage to be in lieu of private garages within a block or portion of a block. 
    Garage, private, means an accessory building for storage of passenger motor vehicles or other privately owned equipment, not for business. 
    Garage, storage, means a building or portion thereof, except those defined as a private, public, or a community garage providing storage for motor vehicles, with facilities for washing but no other services. 
    Garden apartment project means a building project consisting of three or more buildings of uniform appearance, with at least two units per building, to be constructed on a plot of ground which is not subdivided into customary streets or lots and which is under single ownership or unified control. 
    Group housing project means a building project consisting of three or more buildings, to be constructed on a plot of ground which is not subdivided into customary streets or lots. 
    Height of buildings means the vertical distance measured from the highest of the following three levels: 
(1)	From the street curb level;
(2)	From the established or mean street grade in case the curb has not been constructed;
(3)	From the average finished ground level adjoining the building where it sits back from the street line; 
to the level of the highest point of the roof beams of flat roofs or roofs inclining not more than one inch to the foot, or to the level of the top of the highest ridge for other roofs. 
    Hotel means a building occupied or used as a more or less temporary abiding place of individuals or groups of individuals who are lodged, with or without meals, and which there are more than 12 sleeping rooms, and no provision for cooking in individual rooms. 
    House trailer or mobile home means any structure used for sleeping purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses or skirting and which have been or reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place. 
    Lot means a tract of land intended as a unit of transfer of ownership or development. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. A corner lot shall be deemed to front on that street on which it has its least dimension, unless otherwise specified by the zoning authority. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance from the front line to the rear line. 
    Lot, double frontage, means an interior lot having frontage on two streets. 
    Lot, in separate ownership, means a lot whose boundary lines, along their entire length, touched lands under other ownership as shown by plat or deed recorded in the office of Recorder of Deeds of Cass County on or before the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and conforming with previous zoning ordinances of the city. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot whose sides do not abut upon any street. 
    Lot line means the lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
    Lot line, front, means the boundary between a lot and the street on which it fronts. 
    Lot line, rear, means the boundary line which is opposite and most distant from the front street line, except that in the case of uncertainty the zoning authority shall determine the rear line. 
    Lot line, side, means any lot boundary not a front or rear line thereof. A side line may be a party lot line, a line bordering on an alley or place or side street line. 
    Lot width means the mean horizontal distance between side lines measured at right angles to the depth of the lot. 
    Master city plan means the comprehensive plan made and adopted by the city council and zoning and planning commission indicating the general locations recommended for the major thoroughfares, streets, parks, public buildings, zoning districts, and other public improvements, population and building intensity standards and restrictions and the application of the same; public facilities of all types whether publicly or privately owned which relate to the transportation of persons or goods, public improvements programming based upon a determination of relative urgency; the major sources and expenditure of public revenue including long-range financial plans for the financing of public facilities and capital improvements, based upon a projection of the economic and fiscal activity of the community, both public and private; utilization and conservation of natural resources, and any other element deemed necessary to the proper development or redevelopment of the area. 
    Motel means a motorist's hotel having the following characteristics: 
(1)	Complete furnishings and bath facilities in each unit;
(2)	Available service as normally provided by hotels;
(3)	No cooking facilities in transient's units;
(4)	At least one parking space provided in adjacent private roadways or courts for each guestroom with either direct or convenient access from parking space to guestroom. 
The provision for restaurant facilities appurtenant to motels is optional. 
    Nonconforming use, building or yard, means a use, building or yard which does not, by reason or design, use or dimensions, conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. It is a legal nonconforming use if established prior to the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and an illegal nonconforming use if established after the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and not otherwise approved as provided herein. 
    Stable, private, means an accessory building for the keeping of ponies, horses or mules owned by occupants of the premises, and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
    Stable, public, means a stable other than a private or riding stable as defined herein. 
    Stable, riding, means a structure in which horses, or ponies, used exclusively for pleasure riding or driving, are housed, boarded or kept for hire; including a riding track. 
    Story means that part of a building included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there be no floor above, that part of the building which is above the surface of the next highest floor thereof. A top story attic is a half story when the main line of the eaves is not above the middle of the interior height of such story. The first story is the highest story having its interior floor surface not more than four feet above the curb level, established or mean street grade or average ground level, as mentioned in the definition of the term "height of buildings" in this section. 
    Street means a thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to property abutting thereon. The term "street" includes the public right-of-way as distinct from the roadway, which includes only the traffic surface. 
    Street line means the dividing line between the street and the abutting property. 
    Structural alteration means any alteration or addition to the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground; including, but not limited to, advertising signs, billboards, and poster panels but exclusive of customary fences or boundary or retaining walls. 
    Tourist court or trailer court means a tract or parcel of land on which two or more tourist cabins are located, or where temporary accommodations are provided for two or more automobile trailers, tents or house cars, open to the public either free or for a fee. 
    Variance means a modification or variation of the provisions of this chapter, as applied to a specific piece of property, as distinct from rezoning. 
    Yard means an open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
    Yard, front, means a yard across the full width of the lot extending from the front lines of the main building to the front line of the lot. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard between the rear lot line and the rear line of the main building and the side lot lines. 
    Yard, side, means a yard between the main building and the adjacent side line of the lot, and extending entirely from the front yard to the rear yard thereof. 
    Zoning commission refers to the commission also known as the planning and zoning commission established by separate ordinance for the purpose of promulgating orderly planning and zoning of the city. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § IV; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1463, §§ 14, 16, 5-8-2000) 
Sec. 58-2. - Enforcement. 
    The office of the zoning authority is hereby established. The authority shall be an officer designated by the city council. It shall be the duty of the zoning authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. No building or other structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or altered or repaired in such manner as to prolong the life of the building and shall the use of any land be changed without first obtaining a permit issued by the authority under the provisions of this chapter, except that no permit shall be required for ordinary repairs on conforming use structures. Such permit shall be issued only when the request therefor is in conformity with the zoning regulations. Such enforcement officer shall act as the executive secretary of the zoning commission and is charged with the administration and enforcement of zoning regulations. Such officer shall forthwith refer all violations of said regulations to the city prosecuting attorney for appropriate action. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXXV) 
Sec. 58-3. - Municipal properties. 
(a)	Streets, alleys, cemeteries, land, buildings or premises owned, rented or leased by the city are exempt from provisions of this chapter while occupied or employed for public purposes in municipal rights, obligations or pursuits, but such city land or property as may be re-leased by rental or otherwise to private individuals or corporations must comply with applicable zoning regulations. 
(b)	Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or by imprisonment for not more than ten days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c)	This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after the day of its passage.
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXXVI) 
Sec. 58-4. - Public safety exclusion. 
    None of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to prevent any measures of construction, alteration, or demolition necessary to correct or abate the unsafe or dangerous condition of any structure, other feature or part thereof, where such condition has been declared unsafe or dangerous by the building inspector, and where the proposed measures have been declared necessary, by such department, to correct the said condition; provided, however, that only such work as is reasonably necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition may be performed pursuant to this section. In the event any structure or other feature shall be damaged by fire or other calamity, or by an act of God or by the public enemy, to such an extent that in the opinion of the aforesaid department it cannot reasonably be repaired and restored, it may be removed in conformity with normal permit procedures and applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1516, § XIV, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-5. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)	Violations. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or of any ordinance or other regulation made under authority conferred hereby, the proper local authorities of the city, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to restrain, correct or abate such violation to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. Such regulations shall be enforced by the zoning authority or other officer authorized to issue building permits, who is empowered to cause any building, structure, place or premises to be inspected or examined, and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or threat in violation of any provision of the regulations under authority of this chapter. 
(b)	Persons subject to penalties. The owner or general agent of a building or premises where a violation of any provision of said regulations has been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in such violation, or who maintains any building or premises in which any violations shall exist shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not less than $10.00, and not more than $100.00 for each and every day that such violation continues, but if the offense be willful, on conviction thereof, the punishment shall be a fine of not less than $100.00, and in any case shall include court cost, or by imprisonment for ten days for each and every day the violation shall continue, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(c)	Civil penalties. Any such person, having been served with an order to remove any such violation, who shall fail to comply with said order within ten days after such service, or shall continue to violate any provisions of the regulations made under authority of this chapter in respect named in such order, shall also be subject to civil penalty of $100.00. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXXIV) 
Secs. 58-6-58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICTS AND USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 58-31. - Divisions. 
    For the purposes of regulating and restricting the use of land and the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings and the location of buildings designed for specific uses, and regulating and limiting the height of buildings hereafter erected or altered, and regulating and determining the area of yards or courts, and other open spaces in connection with buildings hereafter erected or altered, the incorporated territory of the city, is hereby divided into the following districts, as follows: 
District A-Agriculture district. 
District R-1-Small lot single-family residential district. 
District R-1A-Large lot single-family residential district. 
District R-2-Two-family residential district. 
District R-3-Multifamily dwelling district. 
District R-3A-Multifamily planned development. 
District R-S-Residential-suburban district. 
District C-O-Nonretail business district. 
District C-B-Controlled business district. 
District C-1-General business district. 
District C-2-Central business district. 
District C-P-Planned business district. 
District M-1-Light industrial district. 
District M-2-Heavy industrial district. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § II; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1463, § 4, 5-8-2000) 
Sec. 58-32. - District map adopted. 
(a)	Boundaries of the districts as enumerated in section 58-31 are hereby established as shown on the maps on file in the office of the planning and zoning commissions which maps are hereby designated as the "zoning district maps," and said maps and all notations, references, and information shown thereon are made as much a part of this article as if the same were set forth in full herein, and said maps shall be updated within a reasonable time, to conform to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived upon adoption. It shall be the duty of the zoning commission to keep on file in its office an authentic copy of said maps and all changes, amendments or additions thereto. 
(b)	When definite distances in feet are not shown on the zoning district maps, the district boundaries are intended to be along existing street, alley or platted lot lines, or extensions of the same; and if the exact location of such lines is not clear, it shall be determined by the planning and zoning commission, due consideration being given to location as indicated by the scale of the zoning district maps. 
(c)	When streets or alleys on the ground differ from the streets or alleys as shown on the zoning district maps, the zoning commission may apply the district designations on the maps to the streets or alleys on the ground in such manner as to conform to the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(d)	Whenever any street or alley is vacated, the particular district to which such street or alley are adjacent shall automatically be extended to the centerline of any such street or alley. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § III; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 58-33. - District A, agriculture district. 
(a)	Permitted uses. In district A, no building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no other building or structure shall be hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except for one or more of the following uses (for exceptions, see sections 58-149, Special classes, 58-152, Nonconforming uses, and 58-192, Powers and duties of the board): 
(1)	Agriculture, horticulture, nurseries, greenhouses, orchards and general farming, including raising of livestock, goats, hogs, etc., and raising, fattening, killing or processing of chickens, turkeys and other poultry, providing there shall be no feeding or disposal of garbage, rubbish or offal; unless a permit for such operation is issued by the board, under such restrictions as the city council may impose. 
(2)	Riding stables, riding tracts or polo fields, provided the stables shall be located not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(3)	Dairies, together with creameries, cheese factories, milk bottling or condenseries and similar enterprises which are incidental to the dairy operations. 
(4)	Fur farming for the raising of fur bearing animals, providing buildings and pens shall be located no less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(5)	Kennels, provided the buildings and pens shall be located no less than 200 feet from any property line; fish hatcheries, apiaries and aviaries. 
(6)	Accessory uses, including repair shops, sheds, garages, barns, silos, bunk houses, incidental dwellings, buildings and structures commonly required for any use of the above uses; roadside stands of not over 200 square feet in area offering for sale only products which are produced on the premises. Display of one unilluminated sign not larger than 20 square feet in area, pertaining to the sale, lease, or identification of the premises upon which it is located, or to the sale of the products raised thereon. 
(b)	Height and area regulations. In district A, the height of buildings hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot shall be as follows (for exceptions, see sections 58-150, Setback regulations and 58-154, Height and area exceptions): 
(1)	Height. Buildings or structures shall not exceed 35 feet, and shall not exceed 21/2 stories in height, except accessory agricultural equipment and structures of a fireproof nature. 
(2)	Front yards. There shall be a front yard minimum depth of which shall be at least 30 feet. 
(3)	Side yards. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building not less than 15 feet. 
(4)	Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard a minimum depth of which shall be at least 30 feet. 
(c)	Lot area per family. Every dwelling shall provide a lot area of not less than ten acres per family; provided where a lot has less area than herein provided in separate ownership at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, this regulation shall not prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § VI; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 58-34. - District R-1, small lot single-family residential district. 
(a)	Intent. The intent of this district is to provide for moderate-density residential development in urban areas including those uses which reinforce existing residential neighborhoods. The district generally consists of single-family dwellings on small lots typical to the city. In addition, other uses compatible with the moderate-density residential character of this district are permitted. 
(b)	Permitted uses. In district R-1, no building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for one or more of the uses (for exceptions, see sections 58-149, Special classes, 58-152, Nonconforming uses, and 58-192, Powers and duties of the board): 
(1)	Dwellings, one-family.
(2)	Churches.
(3)	Public parks and playgrounds, public recreation or community buildings, public museums, public administrative buildings, public libraries, police stations and fire stations. 
(4)	Public schools, elementary and high schools and private schools with curricular equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school, and institutions of higher learning, including stadiums and dormitories in conjunction, if located on the campus. 
(5)	Golf courses, not including golf course club houses, miniature golf courses, or driving ranges (golf course club houses are subject to the conditions in section 58-149). 
(6)	Railroad rights-of-way, not including railroad yards.
(7)	The use of buildings or premises for such public utility services are authorized by the public service commission or by permit of the city council, and excluded from the jurisdiction of the zoning commission under the Enabling Act, Laws of Missouri, provided the building or premises is enclosed, landscaped, and in keeping with the appearance of the neighborhood. 
(8)	Accessory uses customarily incident to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business. 
a.	The term "accessory use" shall include customary home occupation, such as the office of a physician, dentist, surgeon, lawyer, dressmaker, beauty operator, real estate salesman, musician or artist, day care (provided children do not exceed three) under the following restrictions: 
1.	That such uses are located in the dwelling used by that person as his private residence; that the residential appearance of the dwelling shall not be changed by alterations or additions for business or commercial uses; and that adequate off-street parking may be provided either in side yards or rear yards behind the front building line. 
2.	That not more than one assistant, other than a member of the immediate family, is employed; and no window display or sign, either illuminated, or more than two square feet in area, is used to advertise the same. 
3.	That no power or equipment be used that would cause objections or be offensive by reason of vibrations, noise, or the emission of odor, dust, smoke or gas when measured at the property lines. 
b.	A billboard, signboard, or advertising sign shall not be permitted as an accessory use, except that the placing of an unilluminated "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign not more than eight square feet in area may be permitted as an accessory use, and except that churches and other institutions may display signs showing names, activities, and services therein provided; and that during construction of a building one unilluminated sign showing the name of the contractors and/or architects for such buildings shall be permitted; provided that such sign shall not be more than eight square feet in area, and shall not be set more than five feet in front of the established or customary building line, and such sign shall be removed immediately upon completion of the building. 
c.	There shall be permitted one detached garage with not more than one car to each 2,500 square feet of lot areas, provided that such garage shall be located not less than 60 feet from the front line, or in shallower lots, back two-thirds the depth of the lot; but in no case shall a garage be located closer to the front than the building line of buildings on that street. A garage or accessory building may be built on the lot line on the rear one-third of the lot provided that the rear lot line has an alley or utility easement. A garage constructed as an integral part of the main building shall be subject to the regulations affecting the main building. With the exception of districts M-1 and M-2, inoperative vehicles may not be stored or repaired other than in closed garages on the premises. 
d.	A private stable will be allowed on a lot having an area of more than 40,000 square feet, provided that it is located not less than 100 feet from the front lot line nor less than 30 feet from any side or rear lot line. On such lots, there shall not be kept more than two horses, ponies, or mule for each 40,000 square feet of lot area; provided, however that where any such stable exists and/or herein provided for are kept, the owner or keeper shall cause the premises to be kept and maintained so as to comply with all state, county, and municipal sanitary and health regulations regarding same. 
e.	Temporary real estate sales offices, located on property being sold, and limited to period of sale but not exceeding two years without special permit from the board. 
f.	When swimming pools, meeting rooms, shelter houses, refreshment stands or restaurants are constructed in public parks or playgrounds, the city council shall require adequate off-street parking, sufficient screening to serve as a solid screen, that lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect away from adjoining residential properties and that proper buffer distances be provided to protect adjoining residential property. 
g.	Pools having a depth of two feet or more, provided the following conditions are met:
1.	Located behind the front building line and not less than ten feet from any rear or side line, and in the case of corner lots not less than 15 feet from a side street line and at least 20 feet from principal building on an adjoining lot. 
2.	If located in the side yard, it shall not be less than 60 feet from the front line, and not less than 15 feet from the side line. 
3.	The area in which the pool is located shall be entirely enclosed and separate from adjoining property by a protective fence or other permanent structure that conforms with the current building code adopted by the city. 
4.	Adequate pool drainage facilities shall be provided for which the plans and specifications shall be approved by the building official. 
(c)	Special uses. See section 58-149, Special classes. 
(d)	Height and area regulations. In district R-1, development designs should achieve a character and appearance comparable to the original size-lot subdivisions of the city. Extra sensitivity must be used when locating a subdivision with urban densities adjacent to existing, platted, large-lot residential subdivisions. New developments should provide an orderly and appropriate visual and physical transition between the developments with different densities. Urban residential lots adjacent to large-lot developments should be similar in size, with a gradual reduction in lot sizes as the distance from the large-lot development increases. The developments should be designed as per the residential development design guidelines of the city comprehensive plan. The height of buildings, the minimum dimension of lot and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot shall be as follows: 
(1)	Height. Buildings or structures shall not exceed 35 feet or 21/2 stories in height. 
(2)	Front yards. Any building hereafter constructed shall provide for a front yard, the minimum depth of which shall be at least 25 feet. 
(3)	Side yards. There shall be a side yard on each side of the dwelling of not less than ten percent of the lot width, not less than 71/2 feet and need not be more than ten feet. Dwellings on corner lots shall provide the following side yards on the street side of the lot: 
a.	Fifteen feet on residential, collector's streets, and secondary and primary thoroughfares.
b.	Twenty feet on all streets which are less than 50 feet in right-of-way width.
(4)	Rear yards. The depth of the rear yard shall be at least 25 feet. 
(5)	Lot area per family. Every dwelling hereafter erected, moved or altered shall provide a lot area of not less than 10,000 square feet per family. 
(6)	Lot width. The minimum lot width in this district shall be 70 feet, and no less than 65 feet at the building line. 
(7)	Parking regulations. See section 58-156, Off-street parking and loading. 
(e)	Use limitations. 
(1)	Development in the R-1 district shall be subject to the residential design guidelines as applicable for single-family and moderate-density residential development; except that no lot shall be smaller than 8,400 square feet, if said lot area reduction is approved by with a P-D, planned development overlay district. 
(2)	Minimum floor area. One thousand eighty square feet of habitable floor area shall be provided per family, exclusive of basements and open or screened porches. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § VII; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1463, § 12, 5-8-2000; Ord. No. 1528, 1-27-2003; Ord. No. 1547, 6-28-2004; Ord. No. 1574, § 1, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-35. - District R-1A, large lot single-family residential district. 
(a)	Intent. The intent of this district is to provide for low-density residential development in urban fringe and suburban areas including those uses which reinforce larger-lot residential neighborhoods. In addition, other uses which are compatible with the low-density residential character of this district are permitted. 
(b)	Permitted uses. In district R-1A, no building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for one or more of the uses (for exceptions, see sections 58-149, Special classes, 58-152, Nonconforming uses, and 58-192, Powers and duties of the board): 
(1)	Dwellings, one-family.
(2)	Churches.
(3)	Public parks and playgrounds, public recreation or community buildings, public museums, public administrative buildings, public libraries, police stations and fire stations. 
(4)	Public schools, elementary and high schools and private schools with curricular equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school, and institutions of higher learning, including stadiums and dormitories in conjunction, if located on the campus. 
(5)	Golf courses, not including golf course club houses, miniature golf courses, or driving ranges (golf course club houses are subject to the conditions in section 58-149). 
(6)	Railroad rights-of-way, not including railroad yards.
(7)	The use of buildings or premises for such public utility services are authorized by the public service commission or by permit of the city council, and excluded from the jurisdiction of the zoning commission under the Enabling Act, Laws of Missouri, provided the building or premises is enclosed, landscaped, and in keeping with the appearance of the neighborhood. 
(8)	Accessory uses customarily incident to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business. 
a.	The term "accessory use" shall include customary home occupation, such as the office of a physician, dentist, surgeon, lawyer, dressmaker, beauty operator, real estate salesman, musician or artist, day care (provided children do not exceed three) under the following restrictions: 
1.	That such uses are located in the dwelling used by that person as his private residence; that the residential appearance of the dwelling shall not be changed by alterations or additions for business or commercial uses; and that adequate off-street parking may be provided either in side yards or rear yards behind the front building line. 
2.	That not more than one assistant, other than a member of the immediate family, is employed; and no window display or sign, either illuminated, or more than two square feet in area, is used to advertise the same. 
3.	That no power or equipment be used that would cause objections or be offensive by reason of vibrations, noise, or the emission of odor, dust, smoke or gas when measured at the property lines. 
b.	A billboard, signboard, or advertising sign shall not be permitted as an accessory use, except that the placing of an unilluminated "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign not more than eight square feet in area may be permitted as an accessory use, and except that churches and other institutions may display signs showing names, activities, and services therein provided; and that during construction of a building one unilluminated sign showing the name of the contractors and/or architects for such buildings shall be permitted; provided that such sign shall not be more than eight square feet in area, and shall not be set more than five feet in front of the established or customary building line, and such sign shall be removed immediately upon completion of the building. 
c.	There shall be permitted one detached garage with not more than one car to each 2,500 square feet of lot areas, provided that such garage shall be located not less than 60 feet from the front line, or in shallower lots, back two-thirds the depth of the lot; but in no case shall a garage be located closer to the front than the building line of buildings on that street. A garage or accessory building may be built on the lot line on the rear one-third of the lot provided that the rear lot line has an alley or utility easement. A garage constructed as an integral part of the main building shall be subject to the regulations affecting the main building. With the exception of districts M-1 and M-2, inoperative vehicles may not be stored or repaired other than in closed garages on the premises. 
d.	A private stable will be allowed on a lot having an area of more than 40,000 square feet, provided that it is located not less than 100 feet from the front lot line nor less than 30 feet from any side or rear lot line. On such lots, there shall not be kept more than two horses, ponies, or mule for each 40,000 square feet of lot area; provided, however that where any such stable exists and/or herein provided for are kept, the owner or keeper shall cause the premises to be kept and maintained so as to comply with all state, county, and municipal sanitary and health regulations regarding same. 
e.	Temporary real estate sales offices, located on property being sold, and limited to period of sale but not exceeding two years without special permit from the board. 
f.	When swimming pools, meeting rooms, shelter houses, refreshment stands or restaurants are constructed in public parks or playgrounds, the city council shall require adequate off-street parking, sufficient screening to serve as a solid screen, that lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect away from adjoining residential properties and that proper buffer distances be provided to protect adjoining residential property. 
g.	Pools having a depth of two feet or more, provided the following conditions are met:
1.	Located behind the front building line and not less than ten feet from any rear or side line, and in the case of corner lots not less than 15 feet from a side street line and at least 20 feet from principal building on an adjoining lot. 
2.	If located in the side yard, it shall not be less than 60 feet from the front line, and not less than 15 feet from the side line. 
3.	The area in which the pool is located shall be entirely enclosed and separate from adjoining property by a protective fence or other permanent structure that conforms with the current building code adopted by the city. 
4.	Adequate pool drainage facilities shall be provided for which the plans and specifications shall be approved by the building official. 
(c)	Special uses. See section 58-149, Special classes. 
(d)	Height and area regulations. In district R-1A, transitional development designs should achieve a character and appearance comparable to the large-lot subdivision. Extra sensitivity must be used when locating a subdivision with urban densities adjacent to existing, platted, large-lot residential subdivisions. New developments should provide an orderly and appropriate visual and physical transition between the developments with different densities. Urban residential lots adjacent to large-lot developments should be similar in size, with a gradual reduction in lot sizes as the distance from the large-lot development increases. The developments should be designed as per the residential development design guidelines of the city comprehensive plan. The height of buildings, the minimum dimension of lot and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot shall be as follows: 
(1)	Height. Buildings or structures shall not exceed 40 feet or 21/2 stories in height. 
(2)	Front yards. Any building hereafter constructed shall provide for a front yard, the minimum depth of which shall be at least 25 feet. 
(3)	Side yards. There shall be a side yard on each side of the dwelling of not less than ten percent of the lot width, not less than 71/2 feet. Dwellings on corner lots shall provide the following side yards on the street side of the lot: 
a.	Fifteen feet on residential, collector's streets, and secondary and primary thoroughfares.
b.	Twenty feet on all streets which are less than 50 feet in right-of-way width.
(4)	Rear yards. The depth of the rear yard shall be at least 25 feet. 
(5)	Lot area per family. Every dwelling hereafter erected, moved or altered shall provide a lot area of not less than 12,000 square feet per family. 
(6)	Lot width. The minimum lot width in this district shall be 85 feet. 
(e)	Use limitations. 
(1)	Development in the R-1A, district shall be subject to the residential design guidelines as applicable for single-family residential density development; except that no lot shall be smaller than 10,000 square feet, if said lot area reduction is approved by with a P-D, planned development overlay district. 
(2)	Minimum floor area. One thousand eighty square feet of habitable floor area shall be provided per family. 
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-36. - District R-2, two-family residential district. 
(a)	Intent. The intent of this district is to provide for moderate-density residential development in urban areas including those uses which reinforce existing residential neighborhoods. The district generally consists of single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings on small lots typical to the city. In addition, other uses compatible with the moderate-density residential character of this district are permitted. 
(b)	Permitted uses. In district R-2, no building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for one or more of the uses (for exceptions, see sections 58-149, Special classes, 58-152, Nonconforming uses, and 58-192, Powers and duties of the board): 
(1)	Any use permitted in district R-1.
(2)	Dwellings, two-family.
(3)	Accessory uses as provided in district R-1. Condominiums, pursuant to the following:
a.	Any proposed development of property using the condominium form of ownership shall be treated by the city for all purposes under this chapter and the city building code, the same as a physically identical development under a different form of ownership; and 
b.	In addition to any submission requirements pursuant to the zoning chapter for either special use permits, rezoning, development or platting, the city may require an applicant using the condominium form of ownership to submit with the application the condominium declaration and proposed condominium plat prepared in conformance with RSMo ch. 448. This information may be used by the city to evaluate the application under the procedures, standards and criteria that are applicable to the proposed development pursuant to this chapter and the building code. 
(c)	Special uses. See section 58-149, Special classes. 
(d)	Height and area regulations. In district R-2, development designs should achieve a character and appearance comparable to the original size-lot subdivisions of the city. Extra sensitivity must be used when locating a subdivision with urban densities adjacent to existing, platted, large-lot residential subdivisions. New developments should provide an orderly and appropriate visual and physical transition between the developments with different densities. Urban residential lots adjacent to large-lot developments should be similar in size, with a gradual reduction in lot sizes as the distance from the large-lot development increases. The developments should be designed as per the residential development design guidelines of the city comprehensive plan. The height of buildings, the minimum dimension of lot and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot shall be as follows: 
(1)	Height. Buildings or structures shall not exceed 35 feet or 21/2 stories in height. 
(2)	Front yard. Any building hereafter constructed shall provide for a front yard, the minimum depth of which shall be at least 25 feet. 
(3)	Side yards. There shall be a side yard on each side of the dwelling of not less than ten percent of the lot width, not less than ten feet. Dwellings on corner lots shall provide the following side yards on the street side of the lot: 
a.	Fifteen feet on residential, collector's streets, and secondary and primary thoroughfares.
b.	Twenty feet on all streets which are less than 50 feet in right-of-way width.
(4)	Rear yards. The depth of the rear yard shall be at least 25 feet. 
(5)	Lot area. Every dwelling hereafter erected, moved or altered shall provide a lot area of not less than 14,000 square feet per structure (7,000 square feet per family). 
(6)	Lot width. The minimum lot width in this district shall be 80 feet, and no less than 75 feet at the building line. 
(7)	Parking regulation. See section 58-156, Off-street parking and loading. 
(e)	Use limitations. 
(1)	Development in the R-2 district shall be subject to the residential design guidelines as applicable for moderate-density and higher density development; except that no lot shall be smaller than 12,000 square feet, if said lot area reduction is approved by with a P-D, planned development overlay district. 
(2)	Minimum floor area. A minimum of 900 square feet per family for two-family dwellings, exclusive of basements and open or screened porches. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § VIII; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1574, § 1, 5-23-2005; Ord. No. 1575, § 1, 6-15-2005) 
Sec. 58-37. - District R-3, multifamily dwelling district. 
(a)	Intent and purpose of district. The R-3, multifamily dwelling district is intended for the purpose of allowing moderate-density and high-density residential land use with the co-mingling of compatible two-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings, apartment houses, home occupations, community facilities and certain uses, yet retain the basic residential quality. In addition, other uses compatible with the residential character of this district are permitted. 
(b)	Permitted uses. In district R-3, no building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for one or more of the uses (for exceptions, see sections 58-149, Special classes, 58-152, Nonconforming uses, and 58-192, Powers and duties of the board): 
(1)	Any use under section 58-36(b)(2) and (3). 
(2)	Apartment houses and multiple dwellings.
(3)	Boardinghouses and lodginghouses.
(4)	Condominiums, pursuant to the following:
a.	Any proposed development of property using the condominium form of ownership shall be treated by the city for all purposes under this chapter and the city building code, the same as a physically identical development under a different form of ownership; and 
b.	In addition to any submission requirements pursuant to this chapter for either special use permits, rezoning, development or platting, the city may require an applicant using the condominium form of ownership to submit with the application the condominium declaration and proposed condominium plat prepared in conformance with RSMo ch. 448. This information may be used by the city to evaluate the application under the procedures, standards and criteria that are applicable to the proposed development pursuant to this chapter and building code. 
(5)	Private clubs or fraternal orders, except those whose chief activity is carried on as a business. 
(6)	Philanthropic or eleemosynary institutions, other than penal or corrective institutions.
(7)	Accessory uses customarily incident to any of the above uses, and located on the same lot, not involving the conduct of a business or industry. 
(c)	Special uses. See section 58-149, Special classes. 
(d)	Intensity of use regulations. Except as hereinafter provided, all dwellings hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated, or reconstructed shall be located upon lots containing the following areas: 
(1)	A lot on which there is erected a two-family dwelling shall contain an area of not less than 14,000 square feet per unit, and shall conform to the height and area regulations of the R-2, two-family residential district. The minimum lot area may be reduced to no less than 12,000 square feet, and the height and area regulations may be modified as part of a P-D, planned development overlay district. 
(2)	A lot on which there is erected a multifamily dwelling (three-units and up) shall have a maximum density of 8.0 units per acre (approximately 5,445 square feet per unit). The maximum density may be increased to no more than 12.0 units per acre (approximately 3,360 square feet per unit) as part of a P-D, planned development overlay district if in conformance with appendix B, Residential Design Guidelines, of the city comprehensive plan. This regulation shall not apply to dormitories or roominghouses and lodginghouses where no cooking is done in individual rooms or apartments. 
(3)	Where a single lot of record, as defined in the definitions section of this regulation, has less area than herein required and was recorded prior to the effective date of this regulation, that lot may be used only for single-family dwelling purposes. 
(4)	Multifamily dwellings shall not cover more than 50 percent of the lot area.
(e)	Height requirements. No structure shall exceed 45 feet in height. 
(f)	Yard requirements. 
(1)	Two-family residences are subject to the yard provisions of the R-2, two-family residential district, unless modified with a P-D, planned development overlay district. 
(2)	Front yard.
a.	The front yard shall be a minimum of 30 feet in depth measured from the front lot line; or on collector streets 70 feet measured from the centerline of the street; or on arterial streets 80 feet measured from the centerline of the street, whichever front yard setback would be greater. 
b.	Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, there shall be a front yard on each street side of the corner lot, except the buildable width of such lot shall not be reduced to less than 35 feet. No accessory structure shall project beyond the front yard line of either street. 
(3)	Side yard.
a.	There shall be a side yard on each side of a structure 35 feet high or less having a width of not less than ten feet. 
b.	There shall be a side yard having a width of not less than 15 feet on each side of a structure in excess of 35 feet in height. 
(4)	Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard for structures in this district which shall have a depth of not less than 25 feet, or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is greater. 
(g)	Loading and unloading regulations. See the parking and loading regulations. 
(h)	Parking regulations. See section 58-156, Off-street parking and loading. 
(i)	Use limitations. 
(1)	Development in the R-3 district shall be subject to site plan review requirements and procedures, and the residential design guidelines as applicable. 
(2)	Minimum floor area. A minimum of 750 square feet of habitable floor area shall be provided per family. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § IX; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1401, § 1(exh. A), 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 1463, § 15, 5-8-2000; Ord. No. 1574, § 1, 5-23-2005; Ord. No. 1575, § 1, 6-15-2005) 
Sec. 58-38. - District R-3A, multifamily planned development. 
(a)	Permitted uses. In district R-3A no building, structure, land or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except for one or more of the following uses (for exceptions see sections 58-149, Special classes, 58-152, Nonconforming uses; and 58-192, Powers and duties of the board): 
(1)	Garden apartment project.
(2)	Condominiums, pursuant to the following:
a.	Any proposed development of property using the condominium form of ownership shall be treated by the city for all purposes under this chapter and the city building code, the same as a physically identical development under a different form of ownership; and 
b.	In addition to any submission requirements pursuant to this chapter for either special use permits, rezoning, development or platting, the city may require an applicant using the condominium form of ownership to submit with the application the condominium declaration and proposed condominium plat prepared in conformance with RSMo ch. 448. This information may be used by the city to evaluate the application under the procedures, standards and criteria that are applicable to the proposed development pursuant to this chapter and the building code. 
(b)	Height and area regulations. In district R-3A the heights of the buildings hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed and moved or altered, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards and the minimum lot per family permitted on any lot area shall be as follows (for exceptions see sections 58-150, Setback regulations and 58-154, Height and area exceptions): 
(1)	Height. Buildings or structures shall not exceed 35 feet and shall not exceed 21/2 stories in height above ground level. 
(2)	Open space. 
a.	No portion of a building or structure shall be located closer than 20 feet to a side or rear property line, except garages, which may be located within five feet of a property line which is the rear line of an abutting lot. 
b.	No portion of a building shall be located closer than 25 feet to a street line.
c.	Except for open areas required for compliance with the following requirements for clearance between buildings, no front, side or rear yards need be provided unless said district R-3A is in the same block with a use district which has yard requirements. In such cases, yard requirements shall be as follows: 
1.	Front yards. If district R-3A is on the same side of the street, the front yard requirements of said adjacent use district shall apply to that part of district R-3A within 100 feet of said adjacent district. No parking area shall be placed in such required front yard. 
2.	Side and rear yards. Where district R-3A abuts a use district which has side and/or rear yard meeting, such yard requirements shall be provided in district R-3A between said common use district line and any buildings. 
d.	No part of an off-street parking area, including stall and access driveway, shall be located closer than five feet to a property or street line. 
e.	No two buildings or opposite portions of a building around a court shall have a closer relationship than the following: 
1.	Back to back, 40 feet.
2.	Front to front, 50 feet.
3.	End to end, 20 feet.
4.	Corner to corner, 15 feet.
5.	End to back, 25 feet.
6.	End to front, 40 feet.
7.	No dwelling unit shall face directly upon the rear of a building.
8.	Service areas and vestibules, porches, balconies and canopies not extending more than ten feet from the building shall be excluded from the clearance requirements of subsections (b)(2)e.1 to 7 of this section. 
9.	Where the walls of two buildings face each other and the portions of the faces which overlap or are directly opposite each other do not exceed 15 feet in length and said overlapping portions do not contain windows, the distance between the walls may be not less than nine feet. 
(3)	Lot area per family. Every building of over four family-dwelling units shall provide a minimum lot of not less than 2,000 square feet per family unit. For two, three or four family-dwelling units there shall be a minimum lot area of 9,000 square feet. However, where a public or community sewer is not available and in use for the disposal of all sanitary sewage from the premises, each minimum lot area shall be subject to public health requirements. 
(4)	Floor area. Minimum floor area for any garden apartment dwelling building shall be 475 square feet per units. 
(5)	Parking regulations. See section 58-156, Off-street parking and loading. 
(6)	Play or park space. Suitable play or park space shall be provided which is easily accessible from the living units without encountering traffic hazards and which is so located that it will not impair the views from the fronts of the apartments. Such space shall not contain less than the following area: 
a.	One thousand square feet for the first family unit;
b.	Plus 60 square feet per unit for the next eight family units;
c.	Plus 30 square feet per unit for all units over 12.
(7)	Any means of egress into an R-3A development, excluding private parking areas, must comply with residential street standards and be dedicated to the city at the time of completion. 
(c)	Planning. A garden apartment project shall be planned and developed only on a lot or tract under single ownership or unified control. All drying yards and similar service areas shall be screened from abutting property and ample access to all parts of the premises for four-wheeled emergency vehicles shall be provided. 
(1)	All buildings shall be so arranged or grouped as to have a reasonably wide-spaced distribution over the entire premises. In addition, the buildings shall be so arranged that maximum light, air and open space shall be available to each dwelling unit. Playground and parking space shall be located as to best serve the entire project. 
(2)	Upon determination that the project as planned conforms to all regulations contained herein, and all other city ordinances, and upon approval by the city council, the applicant may apply to the proper authorities for a building permit. 
(d)	Special conditions. If in any district zoned R-3A multifamily planned development, the area is not developed in accordance with the requirements as set forth for this district, then that area shall automatically revert to district R-1 which such use regulations imposed on it as are outlined in section 58-34 
(Code 1994, app. C, § IX-A; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1463, § 3, 5-8-2000; Ord. No. 1575, § 1, 6-15-2005) 
Sec. 58-39. - District R-S, residential-suburban district. 
(a)	Intent. The intent of this district is to provide for low-density residential development generally on acreages of one to ten acres in suburban fringe areas including those uses which reinforce large-lot residential neighborhoods. In addition, other uses which are compatible with the large-lot/low-density residential character of this district are permitted. 
(b)	Permitted uses. In district R-S, no building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for one or more of the uses (for exceptions, see sections 58-149, Special classes, 58-152, Nonconforming uses and 58-192, Powers and duties of the board): 
(1)	Agriculture, horticulture, nurseries, greenhouses, orchards and general farming.
(2)	Riding stables, riding tracts or polo fields, provided the stables shall be located not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(3)	Dwellings, one-family.
(c)	Special uses. See section 58-149, Special classes. 
(d)	Height and area regulations. In district R-S, transitional development designs should achieve a character and appearance comparable to the agricultural or large-lot subdivision. Extra sensitivity must be used when locating a subdivision with urban densities adjacent to existing, platted, large-lot residential subdivisions. New developments should provide an orderly and appropriate visual and physical transition between the developments with different densities. Low-density residential lots adjacent to suburban-residential developments should be similar in size, with a gradual reduction in lot sizes as the distance from the large-lot development increases. The developments should be designed as per the residential development design guidelines of the city comprehensive plan. The height of buildings, the minimum dimension of lot and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot shall be as follows: 
(1)	Height. Buildings or structures shall not exceed 40 feet or 21/2 stories in height. 
(2)	Front yards. Any building hereafter constructed shall provide for a front yard, the minimum depth of which shall be at least 35 feet. 
(3)	Side yards. There shall be a side yard on each side of the dwelling of not less than ten percent of the lot width, not less than 15 feet. Dwellings on corner lots shall provide the following side yards on the street side of the lot: 
a.	Twenty feet on residential streets.
b.	Twenty-five feet on collectors.
c.	Twenty-five feet on secondary and primary thoroughfares.
(4)	Rear yard. The depth of the rear yard shall be at least 35 feet. 
(5)	Lot area per family. Every dwelling hereafter erected, moved or altered shall provide a lot area of not less than one acre per family. 
(6)	Lot width. The minimum lot width in this district shall be 125 feet. 
(e)	Use limitations. Development in the R-S district shall be subject to the residential design guidelines for architectural standards, only. 
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-40. - District C-O, nonretail business district. 
(a)	Permitted uses. In district C-O, no building, structure, land or premises shall be used and no building, land or structure shall be hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except for one or more of the following uses (for exceptions, see sections 58-149, Special classes, 58-152, Nonconforming uses, and 58-192, Powers and duties of the board): 
(1)	Any use listed under section 58-37(b)(4)-(6). 
(2)	Office buildings to be used only for the administrative functions of companies, corporations, social or philanthropic organizations or societies. 
(3)	Other offices limited to the following:
a.	Accountants.
b.	Architects.
c.	Brokers.
d.	Engineers.
e.	Dentists.
f.	Lawyers.
g.	Physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors.
h.	Real estate.
i.	Insurance.
(4)	Customary accessory uses, including signs. No sign shall be larger than 16 square feet in area and shall set not closer than 15 feet from the front or side of the property. 
(5)	No merchandise shall be handled or displayed, except at mortuaries and no equipment, material or vehicle other than motor passenger cars shall be stored outside a building in this district. 
(b)	Height and area regulations. In district C-O, the heights of office buildings and minimum dimensions of lots and yards shall be as follows: provided that buildings erected exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with all the requirements of district R-1, R-2 or R-3 (for exceptions, see section 58-150, Setback regulations): 
(1)	Height. Same as district R-3. 
(2)	Front yards. Same as district R-3. 
(3)	Side yards. For office buildings there shall be a side yard on each side of a building not less than 20 percent of the width of the lot, except that such side yard shall not be less than 15 feet and need not be more than 50 feet. Buildings on corner lots where interior lots have been platted or sold, fronting on the side street, may project not more than ten feet in front of the line established for the buildings by the front yard requirements for the interior lots on the side streets. 
(4)	Rear yard. Same as district R-3. 
(5)	Parking regulations. See section 58-156, Off-street parking and loading. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § X; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1401, § 1(exh. A), 8-11-1997) 
Sec. 58-41. - District C-B, controlled business district. 
(a)	Permitted uses. In district C-B, no building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except for one or more of the following uses (for exceptions, see sections 58-149, Special classes, 58-152, Nonconforming uses, and 58-192, Powers and duties of the board): 
(1)	Any use listed under section 58-40(a)(2) and (3). 
(2)	Other uses:
a.	Armories.
b.	Assembly halls.
c.	Bakeries, retail.
d.	Banks.
e.	Barbershops and beauty shops.
f.	Gymnasiums.
g.	Hospitals for small animals, provided all activities are carried on within an enclosed building. 
h.	Lodge halls.
i.	Restaurants, cafes, or cafeterias serving customers only within a closed building. All operations including purchases and consumption, must be within the closed building. 
j.	Schools operated as a business.
k.	Stores, shops and markets for retail trade provided that all operations, displays and storage be carried on within an enclosed building. 
l.	Studios.
m.	Wholesale sales offices and sample rooms provided that all operations, displays and storage be carried on within an enclosed building. 
n.	Motels.
o.	Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, including air conditioning plants, ice and refrigeration plants, purely incidental to the main activity permitted on the premises, and when operated by electricity or gas. 
(b)	Height and area regulations. In district C-B, the height of the buildings hereinafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered and the minimum dimensions of lots and yards shall be as follows, provided that buildings erected exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the front, side and rear yard lot and floor area requirements of districts R-1, R-2 or R-3 as the case may be (for exceptions, see section 58-150, Setback regulations): 
(1)	Height. Same as district R-3. 
(2)	Front yards. There shall be a front yard the minimum depth of which shall be 25 feet. 
(3)	Side yards. A yard of not less than ten feet shall be provided. 
(4)	Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard the minimum depth of which shall be at least 20 feet, except that on a corner lot no rear yard is required within 50 feet of a side street, unless the rear line adjoins a residential district. 
(5)	Parking regulations. See section 58-156, Off-street parking and loading. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § X-A; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1401, § 1(exh. A), 8-11-1997) 
Sec. 58-42. - District C-1, general business district. 
(a)	Permitted uses. In district C-1, no building, structure, land or premises shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except for one or more of the following uses (for exceptions, see sections 58-149, Special classes, 58-152, Nonconforming uses and 58-192, Powers and duties of the board): 
(1)	Any use listed under sections 58-40(a)(2), (5) and 58-41(a)(2). 
(2)	Other uses:
a.	Automobile parking lots for passenger cars or trucks.
b.	Armories.
c.	Assembly halls.
d.	Automobile or trailer (mobile homes) sales rooms or yards, other than premises where vehicles are dismantled or used parts sold, provided no vehicles shall be displayed outside the building within 30 feet of the front street line and regulations regarding repairs shall be the same as for garages (public) in this district. 
e.	Automobile washing establishments.
f.	Bakeries.
g.	Banks.
h.	Barbershops and beauty shops.
i.	Bicycle repair shops, electrical repair and fix-it shops.
j.	Billiard halls.
k.	Bus stations.
l.	Cleaning, pressing and dyeing establishments, employing not more than five persons on the premises, provided that only nonexplosive cleaning fluids shall be used. 
m.	Clinics (medical or dental).
n.	Filling stations, limited to sale of motor fuel and accessories, also lubrications and washing, provided all tanks shall be below the surface of the ground. 
o.	Frozen food lockers for individual or family use.
p.	Garages (public) except that in public garages no repair work shall be carried on outside of the building and no repairs shall be conducted on any premises within 75 feet of a residential district. 
q.	Greenhouses (commercial).
r.	Gymnasiums (commercial).
s.	Hospitals for small animals.
t.	Launderettes, washeterias or self-service laundries, provided all equipment is so installed and anchored as to eliminate vibration. No dust, lint, noise or odor generated by this operation shall be perceptible at the boundary of the premises. 
u.	Lodge halls.
v.	Newspaper publishing plants.
w.	Offices.
x.	Photo-engraving shops.
y.	Printing, letter and duplicating shops.
z.	Radio and television shops.
aa.	Restaurants, cafes or cafeterias.
bb.	Schools operated as a business.
cc.	Shoe repair shops.
dd.	Shops for custom work or the manufacture of articles, provided that in such manufacture the total mechanical power shall not exceed five horsepower for the operation of any one machine and provided further that such manufacturing use is not noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or gas and provided further that all operations, display, storage be carried on within the building. 
ee.	Sign. Freestanding, provided they do not exceed 12 feet by 24 feet in size and shall not extend more than 20 feet above the ground and shall comply with all front, side and rear yard setback requirements. 
ff.	Stores, shops and markets for retail trade.
gg.	Studios.
hh.	Taverns, bowling alleys, cafes, cafeterias, dance halls, night clubs, skating rinks, drive-in restaurants, refreshment stands, any other retail trade, where persons are served in automobiles provided, however, that the same shall not be less than 200 feet from any existing hospital, school or church and shall not be less than 200 feet from a residential district unless approved by the board under such restrictions as seem appropriate after consideration of noise and other detrimental factors incident to such use. 
ii.	Tourist cabins, courts and motels.
jj.	Wholesale sales offices and sample rooms.
kk.	Accessory uses customarily incident to any of the above uses including air conditioning plants, ice and refrigerating plants purely incidental to the main activity permitted on the premises and when operated by electricity or gas. 
ll.	Any retail business or use provided that such use is not noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or gas. 
mm.	Day care if number of children exceeds ten.
(b)	Height and area regulations. In district C-1, the height of the buildings hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered and the minimum dimensions of lots and yards shall be as follows; provided that buildings erected exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the front, side, rear yard lot and floor area requirements of district R-1, R-2, R-3 or C-B as the case may be (for exceptions, see section 58-150, Setback regulations): 
(1)	Height. Same as district R-3. 
(2)	Front yards. There shall be a front yard the minimum depth of which shall be 20 feet, except that it need be of no greater depth than the last depth established by existing buildings in this district within the same block. 
(3)	Side yards. A side yard of not less than ten feet shall be provided. 
(4)	Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard the minimum depth of which shall be at least 20 feet, except that on a corner lot no rear yard is required within 50 feet of a side street, unless the rear line adjoins a residential district. 
(5)	Parking regulations. See section 58-156, Off-street parking and loading. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XI; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1401, § 1(exh. A), 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 1463, § 13, 5-8-2000) 
Sec. 58-43. - District C-2, central business district. 
(a)	Permitted uses. In district C-2, no building, structure, land or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except for one or more of the following uses (for exceptions, see sections 58-149, Special classes, 58-152, Nonconforming uses, and 58-192, Powers and duties of the board): 
(1)	Any use listed under sections 58-40(a), 58-41(a), and 58-42(a). 
(2)	Dwelling units may be established in buildings in district C-2 provided they are incidental to its use as a commercial property. Dwelling units are limited to upper floors and the rear, nondisplay portion of the first floor. The total dwelling area shall not exceed 49 percent of the ground floor area of the building. 
(b)	Height and area regulations. In district C-2 the lot and yard requirements for dwellings shall be the same as district R-3. Commercial buildings shall not exceed 45 feet or three stories in height and may be built on street lines, lot lines or with joint ownership of common walls across lot lines as is permitted in business district regulations and fire zone ordinances in effect at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(c)	Parking regulations. See section 58-156, Off-street parking and loading. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XII; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1401, § 1(exh. A), 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 1548, § 1, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 58-44. - District C-P, planned business district. 
(a)	General conditions. 
(1)	A district C-P may be established on a tract of land in single ownership or under unified control, provided that a preliminary development plan for planned business district has been prepared and submitted to the zoning commission in compliance with the regulations and requirements of this section. 
(2)	The net area of land to be included in a district C-P and so designated, shall be at least four acres in size. The term "net area" as used herein shall not include any areas within dedicated highways, streets, alleys or any other public ways or public property. 
(3)	The location of any district C-P shall be on property which has an acceptable relationship to major thoroughfares to carry the additional traffic generated by the development. 
(4)	The plan for the proposed development must present a unified and organized arrangement of buildings and service facilities which shall have a fundamental relationship to the properties comprising the planned development and shall not adversely affect the uses of properties immediately adjacent to the proposed development. 
(5)	The zoning commission shall have power to make and adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary and proper to effectuate the purpose of this section. 
(b)	Preliminary plan. 
(1)	The proponents of a planned business district shall prepare and submit a preliminary development plan to the zoning commission for its inspection and review, upon which plan the zoning commission shall advertise and hold a public hearing. This preliminary plan of the property to be zoned as a district C-P, drawn to scale, shall show the boundaries of the property proposed to be zoned, the existing topography with contour intervals not greater than five feet, unless waived by the zoning commission and the proposed arrangement of stalls and number of cars, entrance and exit driveways, and their relationship to existing and proposed streets, alleys, and other public ways or public property, and any additional information required by the zoning commission. The plan shall show sufficient proposed control grade to interpret the intent of the developer. The preliminary plan shall also show the development of adjacent properties within 200 feet, including the location and type of buildings, structures thereon. If the planned business district is proposed in an unplatted area, the preliminary plan shall be accompanied by a plat, giving the full legal description of the boundaries of the property to be included in the areas to be zoned as a planned business district. 
(2)	It also shall be accompanied by a plan, drawn to scale, showing the general arrangement of streets within the remainder of this ownership, which plat need not include more than 1,000 feet from the boundaries of the area to be zoned as a planned district. 
(3)	The developer shall indicate on the preliminary plan the stages which will be followed in the construction of the planned center. 
(4)	If this preliminary plan is found to comply with the intent of the requirements and regulations set forth in this section the zoning commission shall, after public hearing, submit such approved preliminary plan to the city council with the recommendation for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, which amendment is to provide for and establish a district C-P for the land covered by the preliminary plan. 
(5)	Upon the approval of the zoning change by amendment to the zoning chapter, the proponent shall, within two years, submit a final development plan to the zoning commission for its review and recommendation. The final development plan may be submitted separately for the first and each successive stage of construction. 
(c)	Final plan. 
(1)	It shall be the responsibility of the zoning commission to determine that each stage, or all, of the final development plan conforms to the content of the preliminary plan for any or all stages of the development, and finding that it conforms to the intent of the preliminary plan, shall approve such plan and file it for record in the office of the zoning commission. 
(2)	If the final development plan fails to conform to the intent of the preliminary plan submitted to the zoning commission as an amended preliminary plan upon which the zoning commission shall advertise and hold a public hearing, the procedure shall be the same as the original preliminary plan. 
(3)	No building permit shall be issued for any construction in this district C-P until the zoning commission shall have approved the final development plan covering at least the first stage of development, and notified the zoning authority. 
(4)	The final development plan, planned for each succeeding stage, shall also be reviewed by the zoning commission and when approved shall be filed in that order. 
(5)	The proponents of a planned business district shall prepare and submit a schedule of construction, which construction shall begin within a period of one year following the approval of the final development plan by the zoning commission and the issuance of a building permit. Failure to begin the construction as scheduled shall void the plan as approved, unless a request for an extension of time is made by the proponents to the board of zoning adjustment and approved by said board. If, for any reason, the plan is abandoned, or if the construction is terminated after the completion of any stage, and there is ample evidence that further development is not contemplated, the order establishing such district C-P may be rescinded by the city council and the zoning of the entire tract, or the portion which is undeveloped as a district C-P, shall be changed to a suitable classification. 
(6)	After the zoning change has been made and the final development plan has been approved and when, in the course of carrying out this plan, adjustments or rearrangements of buildings, parking areas, entrances, heights, or open spaces are requested by the proponents, and such requests conform to the standards established by the approved final development plan for area to be covered by buildings, parking spaces, entrances, height, setback and other requirements, such adjustments may be approved by the board of zoning adjustments upon application and after receiving the recommendations of the zoning commission. 
(7)	The plan shall meet the following requirements as to use, height, open space, off-street parking and loading and all driveways or public access. 
(d)	Use regulations. 
(1)	Permitted uses. In district C-P no building, structure or premises shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for one or more of the following uses: 
a.	Any use permitted in district R-2 except billboards and except those permitted in district R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-3A. 
b.	Accessory uses customarily incident to any of the above uses provided that one sign only, showing the name of each place of business and the commodities or services offered there, will be permitted in a district C-P, except that in addition there shall be permitted one sign or structure to identify each planned business district. Such sign or structure shall be of permanent construction and the filling station may have one freestanding sign to be approved as part of the preliminary plan as to size and location. 
(e)	Height and area regulations. In a district C-P, the height for buildings, hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered and the minimum dimensions of open spaces shall be as follows (for exceptions, see sections 58-150, Setback regulations and 58-154, Height and area exception): 
(1)	Buildings or structures shall not exceed 45 feet and shall not exceed three stories in height. 
(2)	There shall be a setback from any street of at least 30 feet for any building, and ten feet for any parking lot. Along any other property line, with or adjoining a business district, there shall be a setback for any building or structure of at least ten feet or such distance as recommended by the planning and zoning commission and approved by the city council. 
(3)	Along any other property line abutting or adjoining a zoned dwelling house district, there shall be a setback of at least ten feet for any building or parking lot. The planned business district shall be permanently screened from such abutting or adjoining properties zoned for dwelling house use by wall, fence or other suitable enclosure. The area adjacent to such wall or fence shall be planted with trees and shrubs to form an ornamental screen and trees and shrubs shall be properly and adequately maintained by the developer. Suitable enclosures may include hedges, plantings, walls, etc. Adequacy of enclosure shall be submitted to and reviewed by staff, for planning commission approval. 
(4)	The building line along any street shall be consistent with the building line established in any neighboring residential district. The zoning commission may recommend to the city council a reduction in the above required setbacks where the situation will reasonably warrant such reductions. 
(f)	Parking and loading regulations. In any district C-P there shall be provided off-street customer parking for motor cars in the ratio prescribed below, the ratio to be based upon the square feet of floor area, exclusive of storage or warehouse space. 
First10,000 sq. ft. × 11 ____________ 1,000=Parking spaces for cars.Next20,000 sq. ft. × 9 ____________ 1,000=Parking space for cars.Balance × 7 ____________ 1,000=Parking space for cars. 
Ample off-street space for standing, loading and unloading of supplies shall be provided with the development, in accordance with requirements under section 58-156, Off-street parking and loading regulations. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XIII; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1463, § 5, 5-8-2000) 
Sec. 58-45. - District M-1, light industrial district. 
(a)	Permitted uses. In district M-1, no building, structure, land or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for one or more of the following uses (for exceptions, see sections 58-149, Special classes, 58-152, Nonconforming uses, and 58-192, Powers and duties of the board): Other uses: 
(1)	Bakeries.
(2)	Blacksmith or wagon shops.
(3)	Bottling works.
(4)	Bus barns or lots.
(5)	Canning or preserving factories.
(6)	Carpenter, cabinet or pattern shops provided that such use is not noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, odor, dust, smoke or gas. 
(7)	Carpet cleaning establishments.
(8)	Chemical laboratories not producing noxious fumes or odors.
(9)	Cleaning, pressing and dying plants.
(10)	Cold storage plants.
(11)	Creameries.
(12)	Dog pounds, if within an enclosed building.
(13)	Electroplating works.
(14)	Flour mills, feed mills and grain processing provided that such use is not noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or gas. 
(15)	Forges (hand).
(16)	Freight terminals (rail, truck or water).
(17)	Galvanized works.
(18)	Garages (public).
(19)	Grain elevators.
(20)	Ice plants.
(21)	Laundries.
(22)	Machine shops, provided that such use is not noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or gas. 
(23)	Manufacture or assembly of products, such as, artificial flowers, feathers, plumes, awnings, bags, blacking, small boats, bone products, brooms and brushes, buttons and novelties, candy, canvas products, cement products, concrete blocks, chemicals (nonoffensive), cigars, cigarettes or smoking tobacco, cleaning or polishing preparations, clothing, coffee (roasting), cosmetics, cotton seed, peanut or similar products, drugs or medicines, electric signs, extracts, food products, fruit juices, gas or electric fixtures, ice cream, leather products, light metal products, musical instruments, paper products, shell products, shoes and boots, syrup, terra cotta or tile handcraft products, textiles, toys, wooden ware. 
(24)	Milk bottling or distribution plants.
(25)	Monument or marble works.
(26)	Moving, transfer or storage plants.
(27)	Parking lots for trucks, mobile construction equipment, etc.
(28)	Planing mills, provided that such use is not noxious by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or gas. 
(29)	Plumbing and sheet metal shop, provided that such use is not noxious by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or gas. 
(30)	Poultry killing or dressing for commercial purposes.
(31)	Produce markets (wholesale).
(32)	Railroad freight cars.
(33)	Sales rooms, yards and service for farm machinery and contractors' equipment.
(34)	Stone cutting plants.
(35)	Storage in bulk of, or warehouse for such materials as: asphalt, brick building materials, cement, clothing, coal, contractors' equipment, cotton, drugs, dry goods, feed, fertilizer, food, grain, gravel, grease, hay, ice, lime, liquor, lubricating oil, machinery, metals, millinery, oil, paint, materials, pipe, plaster, roofing, rope, rubber, shop supplies, sand, stone, tar, tarred or creosoted products, terra cotta, timber, tobacco, turpentine, varnish, wine, wood, butane (less than tank car lots), gasoline (less than tank car lots), propane (less than tank car lots). 
(36)	Veterinary hospitals.
(37)	Manufacture of any similar character to that herein listed, provided such use is not noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or gas. 
(38)	Accessory uses customarily incident to any of the above uses.
(39)	Molding, casting and shaping plastic products and compounding, formulating, mixing and storage or warehousing in bulk of insecticides and pesticides provided that such use is not noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, dust, odor, smoke or gas. 
(b)	Height and area regulations. In district M-1, the height of buildings hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered and the minimum dimensions of lots and yards shall be as follows; provided that buildings erected for dwelling purposes exclusively shall comply with the front, side, rear yard, lot and floor area requirements of district R-1, R-2, or R-3 as the case may be (for exceptions, see sections 58-150, Setback regulations and 58-154, Height and area exceptions): 
(1)	Height. Buildings or structures shall not exceed 75 feet, and shall not exceed six stories in height. 
(2)	Front yards. No front yard is required except that where a portion of district M-1 lies within the block and fronts upon the same street with a portion of a residential district, and no lot within said district M-1 is occupied by a building with a front yard of less depth than required in that portion of a residential district adjoining, then in such case the front yard requirement of such adjoining residential district shall likewise be applicable to such portion of district M-1. 
(3)	Side yards. Same as district C-1. 
(4)	Rear yards. Same as district C-1. 
(c)	Parking regulations. See section 58-156, Off-street parking and loading. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XIV; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1401, § 1(exh. A), 8-11-1997) 
Sec. 58-46. - District M-2, heavy industrial district. 
(a)	Permitted uses. In district M-2, no building, structure, land or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved except for one or more of the following uses (for exceptions, see sections 58-149, Special classes; and 58-152, Nonconforming uses, and 58-192, Powers and duties of the board): 
(1)	Any use listed under section 58-45(a)(2). 
(2)	For the uses listed in this subsection or other similar uses, only upon approval of the planning commission and the city council will application for a building permit or occupational license be accepted: 
a.	Ammonia, bleaching powder, chemical plants.
b.	Assaying works (other than gold or silver).
c.	Blooming or rolling mills.
d.	Breweries or distilleries.
e.	Cider mills.
f.	Coal car dumps.
g.	Coal hoist, pockets or trestles.
h.	Coke ovens.
i.	Copperage works.
j.	Cotton ginning or bailing works.
k.	Dog pounds.
l.	Enameling works.
m.	Electric power plants.
n.	Forges (power).
o.	Foundries (iron, brass, bronze, aluminum).
p.	Hapanning works.
q.	Lumber mills.
r.	Manufacturing of such products as: alcohol, boilers, bronze, cans, carbon battery, carbon or lamp black, carriage or wagon parts, celluloid or similar materials, clay, shale or glass products, creosote, cutlery or tools, disinfectant, dyes, electrical machinery, furniture, glass, iron and steel locomotives, motor cars, bicycles, airplanes, nuts, bolts, screws, etc., oil cloth, linoleum, paint, Japan lacquer, oil, turpentine, varnish, enamel, etc., railway cars, rubber, synthetic rubber, rubber products, shoddy, soap, starch, glucose, dextrin, tar products, tobacco (chewing), tools, vinegar, wine. 
s.	Metal stamping, shearing, punching works, etc.
t.	Oil compounding and barreling plants.
u.	Planing mills.
v.	Railroad roundhouses or shops.
w.	Salt works.
x.	Steel furnaces.
y.	Structural iron or pipe works.
z.	Sugar refineries.
aa.	Welding.
bb.	Wire or rod mills.
cc.	Wooding scouring works.
dd.	Accessory uses customarily incident to any of the uses in this subsection.
(b)	Height and area regulations. In district M-2, no buildings hereafter shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered and the minimum dimensions of lots and yards, shall be as follows; provided that buildings erected for dwelling purposes exclusively shall comply with the front, side and rear yard, lot and floor area requirements of district R-1, R-2 or R-3 as the case may be (for exceptions, see sections 58-150, Setback regulations, and 58-154, Height and area exceptions): 
(1)	Height. Same as district M-1. 
(2)	Front yard. Same as district M-1. 
(3)	Side yards. Same as district C-1. 
(4)	Rear yards. Same as district C-1. 
(c)	Parking regulation. See section 58-156, Off-street parking and loading. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XV; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1401, § 1(exh. A), 8-11-1997) 
Secs. 58-47-58-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OTHER DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 58-57-58-62. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PMIX, PLANNED MIXED USE DISTRICT 

Sec. 58-63. - Intent; uses. 
(a)	Intent and purpose. It is the city council's intent, in providing for a PMIX, planned mixed use district, to 
(1)	Allow greater flexibility in development standards (lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, lot sizes, etc.) to facilitate adaptation of development to the unique conditions of a particular site; 
(2)	Permit a mixture of uses which, with proper design and planning, will be compatible with each other and with surrounding uses or zoning districts and will permit a finer grained and more comprehensive response to market demand; and 
(3)	Obtain greater economic vitality, higher standards of site and building design, a high level of environmental sensitivity, and more satisfying living and working environments that can be achieved under the standards of other zoning districts. 
(b)	Uses. 
(1)	Residential uses. 
a.	Characteristics. 
1.	A PMIX may allow for a more flexible placement, arrangement and orientation of residential structures, with accompanying flexibility in the subdivision of land and the grouping of open space and accessory facilities such as garages and parking. 
2.	The PMIX also may provide for a mixture of housing types (single-family, two-family, multifamily, etc.) according to a carefully drawn plan. 
3.	The proposed residential development shall make maximum use of natural features, and, through proper site planning measures, it shall be compatible with the existing character and development pattern of the surrounding area. 
b.	General requirements. The following special items shall be included in the final development plan application: 
1.	The proposed architectural style and siting of all duplex and multifamily structures shall be indicated and must conform with the guidelines set for in the residential design guidelines of the comprehensive plan. 
2.	If development standards (lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, lot sizes, etc.) are not specifically proposed by the applicant or specific standards are not established by the cable standards of the R-1 district shall apply. 
(2)	Office uses. 
a.	Characteristics. A PMIX may contain orderly, well-designed office and institutional uses compatible with the surrounding area. 
b.	Requirements. If development standards (lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, lot sizes, etc.) are not specifically proposed by the applicant or specific standards are not established by the city council at the time of approval, then the applicable standards of the C-O district shall apply. 
(3)	Commercial uses. 
a.	Characteristics. A PMIX may provide for maximum attainable commercial usage of property while ensuring development consistent with the city council's long-range plans. 
b.	Requirements. If development standards (lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, lot sizes, etc.) are not specifically proposed by the applicant or specific standards are not established by the city council at the time of approval, then the applicable standards of the C-1 district shall apply. 
(4)	Industrial uses. 
a.	Characteristics. A PMIX may contain land designated for a single industrial use or for multiple but compatible industrial users in an industrial park. 
b.	Requirements. If development standards (lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, lot sizes, etc.) are not specifically proposed by the applicant or specific standards are not established by the city council at the time of approval, then the applicable standards of the M-1 district shall apply. 
(5)	Special uses. Approval of a use requiring a special use permit shall be considered as an amendment to the PMIX District. In considering a "special use permit," in addition to criteria of this chapter, all rezoning considerations for a PMIX district shall be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1573, §§ A, B, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-64. - Height and area regulations. 
    Densities, lot sizes, structure heights and structure setbacks are established as part of the zoning approval for each particular PMIX zoning approval. Gross residential density shall not exceed the amounts set forth in the residential density standards set forth in the comprehensive plan. The maximum structure height requirements applicable to this district may not exceed 45 feet and shall not exceed three stories. 
(Ord. No. 1573, § C, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-65. - Performance and design standards. 
    Design standards are applicable to development in this district. The standards are established in zoning approval for the PMIX. 
(1)	Parking regulations. See section 58-157 
(2)	Sign regulations. See section 58-157 
(3)	Landscaping, buffering and tree protection. See section 58-157 
(4)	Minimum site requirements. 
a.	A site proposed for a PMIX district classification shall contain a contiguous area of 60 acres or more, unless a smaller area is specifically approved by the city council due to special and unusual circumstances. Property shall be deemed to be contiguous if all parts are under unified control, to ensure that the development plan can be executed as approved, and all parts abut or are separated by only a road, easement, or right-of-way. 
b.	The site shall abut Missouri State Route 7 for a distance of at least 1,000 feet.
(5)	Open space. 
a.	All open spaces not proposed for dedication to the city shall have the proposed maintenance and ownership agreements explained in detail. 
b.	The landowner shall establish an organization for ownership and maintenance of common open space, and that organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of any common open space, by sale or otherwise (except to an organization conceived and established to own and maintain the common open space). The conditions of any transfer shall conform to the approved final development plan. The final development plan application shall include a description (in narrative form) of the ownership and maintenance organization and copies of any covenants, restrictions, bylaws and agreements proposed. If the maintenance organization will be a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be included in the final development plan application. 
c.	The community development director may stipulate additional provisions for minimum widths and areas, interconnection, desirable features, uses of open space and access to open space. The community development director shall ensure that land counted as open space is usable by and suitable for occupants of the development and that it enhances the value of the area. 
(Ord. No. 1573, § D, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-66. - Permitted uses and related standards. 
    Permitted uses in a PMIX district include: 
(1)	Permitted uses are specified as part of the zoning approval for each development.
(2)	Any use not shown as a permitted use in a zoning district is specifically prohibited in that district. 
(3)	Uses that are allowed in the PMIX district pursuant to the zoning regulations may be modified by the city council when it is determined that a better overall plan can be achieved. 
(Ord. No. 1573, § E, 5-23-2005) 
Secs. 58-67-58-72. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT 

Sec. 58-73. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the community by: 
(1)	Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the distinctive historic, archaeological and architectural characteristics of the city which represent elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural history; 
(2)	Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past as represented in city landmarks and historic districts; 
(3)	Conserving and improving the value of property designated as landmarks or within historic districts; 
(4)	Providing for economic benefits to encourage business and residential owners to locate and invest in historically significant properties; 
(5)	Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the city to home buyers, tourists, visitors, and shoppers, and thereby supporting and promoting business, commerce and industry, and providing economic benefit to the city; 
(6)	Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation of the historic structures, areas and neighborhoods, and thereby preventing future urban blight; 
(7)	Promoting the use of historic districts and landmarks for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the city; 
(8)	Promoting the identification, evaluation, protection and interpretation of the prehistoric and historic archaeological resources within the incorporated limits of the city. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXXVII(HA)1; Ord. No. 1516, § I, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-74. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Alteration means any act or process that changes one or more historic, architectural or physical features of an area, site, landscape, place and/or structure, including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any structure; the expansion or significant modification of agricultural activities; and clearing, grading or other modification of an area, site, or landscape that changes its current condition. 
    Area means a specific geographic division of the city. 
    Board of adjustment means the board established pursuant to article V of this chapter. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a certificate issued by the historic preservation commission (HPC) indicating its approval of plans for alteration, construction, removal or demolition of a landmark or of a structure within a historic district. 
    Certificate of economic hardship means a certificate issued by the HPC authorizing an alteration, construction, removal or demolition, even though a certificate of appropriateness has previously been denied. 
    Construction means the act of adding an addition to an existing structure or the erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or property. 
    Cultural resources means districts, buildings, sites, structures, objects and evidence of some importance to a culture, a subculture, or a community for scientific, engineering, art tradition, religious or other reasons, significant in providing resource and environmental data necessary for the study and interpretation of past life ways and for interpreting human behavior. 
    Demolition means any act or process which destroys in part or in whole a landmark or a structure within a historic district, or which threatens to destroy a landmark or a structure within a historic district, or which destroys or threatens to destroy a potentially significant property or structure by failure to maintain it in a condition of good repair and maintenance. 
    Design guideline means a standard of appropriate activity that will preserve the historic, prehistoric, architectural, scenic or aesthetic character of a landmark or historic district. 
    Exterior architectural appearance means the architectural character and general composition of the exterior of a structure, including but not limited to the kind, color and texture of the building material and the type, design and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and appurtenant elements. 
    Historic district means an area designated as an historic district by ordinance of the city council which may include individual landmarks, as well as other properties or structures which, while not of such historic and/or architectural significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics and historical significance of the historic district. 
    HPC means members of the historic preservation commission. 
    Historic significance means character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage, or culture of the community, county, state or country; as the location of an important local, county, state or national event; or through identification with a person who made an important contribution to the development of the community, county, state or country. 
    Landmark means a property or structure designated as a landmark by ordinance of the city council, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein, which is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, interpretation and preservation because of its historic, architectural or archaeological significance to the city. 
    Minimum maintenance means the minimum regulations governing the conditions and maintenance of all existing structures, as set out in the BOCA Basic National Existing Structures Code, First Edition (1984), as published by the BOCA Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., and adopted by reference, with certain amendments thereto by the city council of the city, as such existing structures code shall be amended from time to time by the city. 
    Ordinary maintenance means any work for which a building permit is not required by municipal ordinance, where the purpose and effect of such work is to correct any deterioration or decay of, or damage to, a structure or any part thereof and to restore the same, as nearly as may be practical, to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay or damage, and does not involve change of materials nor of form. 
    Owner of record means the person, corporation or other legal entity listed as owner on the records of the county recorder of deeds. 
    Public improvement project means an action by the city or any of its departments or agencies involving major modification or replacement of streets, sidewalks, curbs, street lights, street or sidewalk furniture, landscaping, parking, or other portions of the public infrastructure servicing commercial, residential, recreational or industrial development; or any undertakings affecting city parks or city owned structures. 
    Removal means any relocation of a structure, object or artifact on its site or to another site. 
    Repair means any change that is not construction, alteration, demolition or removal and is necessary or useful for continuing normal maintenance and upkeep. 
    Secretary of the Interior's Standards means the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties are sets of treatment standards intended to assist users in making sound historic preservation decisions for the preservation, rehabilitation, restoration or reconstruction of historic properties. The standards are codified as 36 CFR 68 in the July 12, 1995, Federal Register (Vol. 60, No. 133). 
    Site means the traditional, documented or legendary location of an event, occurrence, action or structure significant in the life or lives of a person, group, or tribe, or any place with evidence of past human activity. The term "site" includes, but are not limited to, cemeteries, burial grounds, occupation and work areas, evidence of farming or hunting and gathering, battlefields, settlements, estates, gardens, groves, river crossings, routes and trails, caves, quarries, mines or significant trees or other plant life. 
    Stop work order means an order directing an owner, occupant, contractor or subcontractor to halt an action for which a certificate of appropriateness is required, and notifying the owner, occupant, contractor or subcontractor of the application process for a certificate of appropriateness. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, buildings, fences, gazebos, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts, radio and television antennae and towers, and swimming pools. 
    Survey means the systematic gathering of information on the architectural, historic, scenic, and archaeological significance of buildings, sites, structures, areas, or landscapes, through visual assessment in the field and historical research for the purpose of identifying landmarks or districts worthy of preservation. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXXVII(HA); Ord. No. 1516, § I, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-75. - Commission established. 
(a)	Composition of historic preservation commission. The historic preservation commission (HPC) shall consist of five members who are city residents and/or property owners, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the council. Every effort shall be made to appoint persons with a demonstrated interest or expertise in historical preservation. A quorum shall consist of four members. 
(b)	Terms. The terms of office of the members shall be for two years, except that the terms of the first appointed commission shall be two commissioners to serve for one year, and three for two years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. The terms set forth herein shall not be construed as preventing a member from serving more than one consecutive term. Vacancies, to include expired terms, shall be filled in the manner stated herein, within 60 days. 
(c)	Officers. Officers shall consist of a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and a secretary elected by the preservation commission and shall serve a term of one year and shall be eligible for re-election. The chairperson shall preside over meetings. The secretary of the HPC shall be elected by those present and shall have the following duties: 
(1)	Take minutes of each HPC meeting;
(2)	Be responsible for publication and distribution of copies of the minutes, reports, and decisions to the members of the HPC; 
(3)	Give notice as provided herein by law for all public hearings conducted by the HPC;
(4)	Advise the mayor of vacancies on the HPC and expiring terms of members; and
(5)	Prepare to submit to the council a complete record of the proceedings before the HPC on any matter requiring council consideration. 
(d)	Meetings. A quorum shall consist of four of the members. All decisions or actions of the HPC shall be made by a majority vote of those members present and voting at any meeting where a quorum exists. Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times to be established by resolution of the HPC at the beginning of each calendar year or at any time upon the call of the chairperson, but no less than once each quarter. Public notice of all meetings shall be posted in conformance with standard city policy and RSMo 610.020. No member of the HPC shall vote on any matter that may materially or apparently affect the property, income, or business interest of that member. No action shall be taken by the HPC that could in any manner deprive or restrict the owner of property in its use, modification, maintenance, disposition, or demolition until such owner shall first have had the opportunity to be heard at public meeting of the HPC, as provided herein. The chairperson, and in his absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and require the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the HPC shall be open to the public except as allowed by state law. The HPC shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be public record. All HPC rules of procedure, designation criteria, design guidelines and forms shall be available to the public at the office of the city clerk. 
(e)	Funding. The city council shall annually appropriate funds, within the budget limitations, for the operation of the HPC. The HPC may, with the consent of the city council, apply for, receive, or expend any federal, state or private grant, grant-in-aid, gift or bequest, in furtherance of the general purposes of this division. 
(f)	Compensation. The members shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for expenses they incur while on commission business. 
(g)	Powers and duties. The HPC shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	To request the building inspector to issue stop work orders for any construction, alteration, removal or demolition undertaken without a certificate of appropriateness or to stop work that violates the conditions of a certificate; 
(2)	To review all applications for demolition permits within the corporate limits of the city to determine impact to significant cultural resources, including those not yet nominated as landmarks or as contributing properties within an historic district; 
(3)	To consider applications for certificates of economic hardship that would allow the performance of work for which a certificate of appropriateness has been denied; 
(4)	To develop specific design guidelines based on the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation for the alteration, construction, or removal of landmarks or property and structures within historic districts; 
(5)	To review proposed zoning amendments, applications for special use permits, or applications for zoning variances that affect proposed or designated landmarks or historic districts; 
(6)	To administer on behalf of the city any property of historical significance or full or partial interest in real property, including easements, that the city may have or accept as a gift or otherwise, upon approval by the city council; 
(7)	To accept and administer on behalf of the city, upon approval of the council, such gifts, grants, and money as may be appropriate for the purposes of this division. Such money may be expended for publishing maps and brochures or for hiring staff persons or consultants or performing other functions for the purpose of carrying out the duties and powers of the HPC and the purposes of this division; 
(8)	To call upon available city staff members as well as other experts for technical advice;
(9)	To retain such specialists or consultants or to appoint such citizen advisory committees as may be required from time to time; 
(10)	To testify before all boards and commissions, including the planning and zoning commission and the board of adjustment, on any matter affecting historically, archaeologically, culturally and architecturally significant property, structures, sites and areas; 
(11)	To make recommendations to the city council concerning budgetary appropriations to further the general purposes of this division; 
(12)	To develop a preservation component in the master plan of the city and to recommend it to the planning and zoning commission and to the city council; 
(13)	To periodically review the zoning chapter and to recommend to the planning and zoning commission and the city council any amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use of landmarks or property, sites and structures within historic districts; and 
(14)	To undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to the implementation of its powers and duties or to implementation of the purpose of this division. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXXVII(HB); Ord. No. 1516, § II, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-76. - Surveys and research. 
    The HPC shall undertake an ongoing survey and research effort in the city to identify neighborhoods, areas, sites, structures, and objects that have historic, cultural, archaeological, architectural or aesthetic importance, interest or value, and shall maintain an inventory of that information. Before the HPC shall on its own initiative nominate any landmark or district for designation, it shall develop a plan and schedule for conducting a comprehensive survey of the city to identify significant resources. As part of the survey, the HPC shall review and evaluate any prior surveys and studies by any unit of government or private organization and compile appropriate descriptions, facts, and photographs. The HPC shall systematically identify potential landmarks and historic districts and adopt procedures to nominate them based upon the following criteria: 
(1)	The potential landmarks and historic districts in one identifiable neighborhood or distinct geographical area of the city; 
(2)	The potential landmarks and historic districts associated with a particular person, event, or historical period; 
(3)	The potential landmarks and historic districts of a particular architectural style or school, or of a particular architect, engineer, builder, designer, or craftsman; 
(4)	The potential landmarks and historic districts containing historic and prehistoric archaeological resources with the potential to contribute to the understanding of historic and prehistoric cultures; 
(5)	Such other criteria as may be adopted by the HPC to assure systematic survey and nomination of all potential landmarks and historic districts within the city. 
All inventory material shall be in conformance with standards and guidelines for cultural resource inventory as established by the state historic preservation office. 
(Ord. No. 1516, § III, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-77. - Nomination of landmarks and historic districts. 
(a)	Requirements. Nominations shall be made to the HPC on a form prepared by it and may be submitted by a member of the HPC, owner of record of the nominated property or structure, or the city council. Nominations shall be turned in to the city clerk, who will within seven days of receipt mail a notification of intent to nominate to the owner of record of the nominated property. Forms and criteria for nomination will be available at the office of the city clerk. 
(b)	Criteria for consideration of nomination. The HPC shall, upon such investigation as it deems necessary, make a determination as to whether a nominated property, structure, site, area or district meets one or more of the following criteria, based on criteria for evaluation for the National Register of Historic Places: 
(1)	Its character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the community, county, state or country; 
(2)	Its overall setting and harmony as a collection of buildings, structures, objects where the overall collection forms a unit; 
(3)	Its potential to be returned to an accurate historic appearance regardless of alterations or insensitive treatment that can be demonstrated to be reversible; 
(4)	Its location as a site of a significant local, county, state, or national event;
(5)	Its identification with a person who significantly contributed to the development of the community, county, state, or country; 
(6)	Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction, or use of indigenous materials; 
(7)	Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer, architect, or landscape architect whose individual work has influenced the development of the community, county, state, or country; 
(8)	Its embodiment of elements of design, detailing, materials, or craftsmanship that render it architecturally significant; 
(9)	Its embodiment of design elements that make it structurally or architecturally innovative;
(10)	Its unique location or singular physical characteristic that make it an established or familiar visual feature of the neighborhood, community, or city; 
(11)	Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian structure, including, but not limited to farmhouses, gas stations, or other commercial structures, with a high level of integrity or architectural significance; 
(12)	Its suitability for preservation or restoration; and
(13)	Its potential to yield information important to history and prehistory.
Any structure, property, or area that meets one or more of the above criteria shall also have sufficient integrity of location, design, materials, and workmanship to make it worthy of preservation or restoration. 
(c)	Public hearing on landmarks and historic districts. Upon receipt of a completed nomination of a landmark or historic district, the HPC shall schedule a public hearing to solicit input and comment on the proposed nomination and guidelines for certificates of appropriateness. 
(d)	Report and recommendation of HPC. The HPC shall within 45 calendar days from receipt of a completed nomination in proper form adopt by resolution a recommendation that the nominated landmark or historic district does or does not meet the criteria for designation in this section. The resolution shall be accompanied by a report to the planning and zoning commission containing the following information: 
(1)	Explanation of the significance or lack of significance of the nominated landmark or historic district as it relates to the criteria for designation; 
(2)	Explanation of the integrity or lack of integrity of the nominated landmark or historic district. 
(e)	Landmarks meeting criteria. 
(1)	In the case of a nominated landmark found to meet the criteria for designation: 
a.	The significant exterior architectural features of the nominated landmark that should be protected; 
b.	The types of construction, alteration, demolition, and removal, other than those requiring a building or demolition permit, that should be reviewed for appropriateness pursuant to the provisions of this division; 
c.	Archaeological significance and recommendations for interpretation and protection.
(2)	In the case of a nominated historic district found to meet the criteria for designation:
a.	The types of significant exterior architectural features of the structures within the nominated historic district that should be protected; 
b.	The types of alterations and demolitions that should be reviewed for appropriateness pursuant to the provisions of this division; 
c.	The type and significance of historic and prehistoric archaeological sites within the nominated historic district; 
d.	Proposals for design guidelines of HPC review of certificates of appropriateness within the nominated landmark or historic district; 
e.	The relationship of the nominated landmark or historic district to the ongoing effort of the HPC to identify and nominate all potential cultural resources that meet the criteria for designation; 
f.	Recommendations as to appropriate permitted uses, special uses, height and area regulations, minimum dwelling size, floor area, sign regulations, lot size, and parking regulations necessary or appropriate to the preservation of the nominated landmark or historic district, including recommendations for buffer zones to protect and preserve visual integrity; 
g	A map showing the location of the nominated landmark and/or the boundaries of the nominated historic district. 
The recommendations and report of the HPC shall be sent to the planning and zoning commission within seven days following the vote on the resolution and shall be available to the public in the office of the city clerk. 
(f)	Notification of nomination. The planning and zoning commission shall schedule and hold a hearing on the nomination following receipt of a report and recommendation from the HPC that a nominated landmark or historic district does or does not meet the criteria for designation. The meeting shall be scheduled, held and conducted in the same manner as other meetings to consider applications for zoning map amendments or ordinance amendments. Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting and a copy of the completed nomination form shall be sent by regular mail to the owner of record and to the nominators. 
(g)	Public hearing. Oral or written testimony concerning the significance of the nominated landmark or historic district shall be taken at the public hearing from any person concerning the nomination. The HPC may present expert testimony or present its own evidence regarding the compliance of the nominated landmark or historic district with the criteria for consideration of a nomination set forth in this section. The owner of any nominated landmark or of any property within a nominated historic district shall be allowed reasonable opportunity to present evidence regarding significance and shall be afforded the right of representation by counsel and reasonable opportunity to cross examine expert witnesses. The hearing shall be closed upon completion of testimony. 
(h)	Determination by planning and zoning commission. Within 60 calendar days following close of the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall make a determination upon the evidence whether the nominated landmark or historic district does or does not meet the criteria for designation. Such a determination shall be made upon a motion and vote of the planning and zoning commission and shall be accompanied by a report stating the findings of the planning and zoning commission concerning the relationship between the criteria for designation in this section and the nominated landmark or historic district and all other information required by section 58-76 
(i)	Notification of determination. Notice of the determination of the planning and zoning commission, including a copy of the report, shall be sent by regular mail to the owner of record of a nominated landmark and of all property within a nominated historic district and to the nominator within seven days following adoption of the resolution. Within seven days following a determination by the planning and zoning commission that the nominated landmark or historic district does meet the criteria for designation, a copy of the resolution and report accompanied by a recommendation that the nominated landmark or historic district be designated shall be sent to the city council. 
(j)	Appeal. A determination by the planning and zoning commission that the nominated landmark or historic district does not meet the criteria for designation shall be a final administrative decision reviewable under the Missouri Administrative Procedure and Review Act; provided, however, that the nominator or any owner of the nominated landmark or of property within the nominated historic district, may within 30 days after the postmarked date of the notice of the determination file with the city clerk a written appeal to the city council. 
(k)	Action by city council. The city council shall, within 60 calendar days after receiving the recommendation that the nominated landmark or historic district be designated or receiving a written appeal, either reject the recommendation or written appeal by formal resolution or designate the landmark or historic district by an ordinance. The city council shall hold a public hearing before enacting the resolution or ordinance and provide notice and take testimony in the same manner as provided in this section. Any resolution or ordinance shall be accompanied by a written statement explaining the reasons for the action of the city council. The city clerk shall provide written notification of the action of the city council by regular mail to the nominator, the appellant, and the owner of record of the nominated landmark or of all property within a nominated historic district. The notice shall include a copy of the designation ordinance or resolution passed by the city council and shall be sent within seven days of the city council action. A copy of each designation ordinance shall be sent to the HPC, planning and zoning commission and building inspector. 
(l)	The designation ordinance. Upon designation, the landmark or historic district shall be classified as a district H, historic, and the designating ordinance shall prescribe the significant features; the types of construction, alteration, demolition, and removal, other than those requiring a building or demolition permit that should be reviewed for appropriateness; the design guidelines for applying the criteria for review of appropriateness; permitted uses; special uses; height and area regulation; minimum dwelling size; floor area; lot size; sign regulation; and parking regulations. The official zoning map of the city shall be amended to show the location of the district H, historic, as an overlay zone. 
(m)	Interim control. No building permit shall be issued by the building inspector for alteration, construction, demolition, or removal of a nominated landmark or of any property or structure within a nominated historic district from the date of the meeting of the HPC at which a nomination form is first presented until the final disposition of the nomination by the city council unless such alteration, removal, or demolition is authorized by formal resolution of the city council as necessary for public health, welfare, or safety. In no event shall the delay be for more than 180 days. 
(n)	Amendment and rescission of designation. Designation may be amended or rescinded upon petition to the HPC and compliance with the same procedure and according to the same criteria set forth herein for designation. 
(Ord. No. 1516, § IV, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-78. - Applications for certificates of appropriateness. 
(a)	When required. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required before the following actions affecting the significance of any landmark or any structure within a historic district may be undertaken: 
(1)	Any construction, alteration, or removal requiring a building permit from the city;
(2)	Any demolition in whole or in part requiring a demolition permit from the city;
(3)	Any construction, alteration, demolition, or removal affecting a significant exterior architectural feature or appearance as specified in the ordinance designating the landmark or historic district; 
(4)	Any construction, alteration or removal involving earth disturbing activities that might affect archaeological resources; 
(5)	Any actions to correct a violation of a minimum maintenance standard.
(b)	Applications. Applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall include accompanying plans and specifications affecting the significance of a designated landmark or of a property within a designated historic district; and applications for demolition permits shall include plans and specifications for the contemplated use of the property. Applications for building and demolition permits shall be forwarded by the building inspector to the HPC within seven days following receipt of the application. A building or demolition permit shall not be issued until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued by the HPC. Any applicant may request a meeting with the HPC before the application is reviewed by the HPC or during the review of the application. Application for review of construction, alteration, demolition, or removal not requiring a building permit for which a certificate of appropriateness is required shall be made on a form prepared by the HPC and available at the office of the city clerk. The HPC shall consider the completed application at its next regular meeting. 
(c)	Stop work order. Whenever the HPC has reason to believe that an action for which a certificate of appropriateness is required has been initiated, or is about to be initiated, or that a violation of the conditions of a permit has occurred, it shall request that the building inspector make every reasonable effort to contact the owners, occupants, contractors or subcontractors and inform them of proper procedures. If the HPC determines that a stop work order is necessary to halt an action, it shall request the building inspector to send a copy of the stop work order by certified mail return receipt requested to the owners, occupants, contractors and subcontractors, and notify them of the process of applying for a certificate of appropriateness. A copy of the proper application form shall be included in the notice. If necessary, a second or subsequent stop work order may be issued for the same project. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXXVII(HD); Ord. No. 1516, § V, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-79. - Determination by the historic preservation commission. 
(a)	The HPC shall review the application for a building or demolition permit or for a certificate of appropriateness and issue or deny the permit within 14 days of receipt of the application. Written notice of the approval or denial of the application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be provided the applicant and the building inspector within seven days following the determination and shall be accompanied by a certificate of appropriateness in the case of an approval. 
(b)	A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. If the project is not completed according to the guidelines provided in the certificate of appropriateness, the project shall be deemed in violation of this division. 
(c)	Denial of a certificate of appropriateness. A denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for the denial. The HPC shall make recommendations to the applicant concerning changes, if any, in the proposed action that would cause the HPC to reconsider its denial and shall confer with the applicant and attempt to resolve as quickly as possible the differences between the owner and the HPC. The applicant may resubmit an amended application or reapply for a building or demolition permit that takes into consideration the recommendation of the HPC. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXXVII(HF); Ord. No. 1516, § VI, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-80. - Fees and penalties. 
(a)	The board shall establish an appropriate system of processing fees for the review of nominations and certificates of appropriateness. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake or cause an alteration, construction, demolition or removal of any nominated or designated landmark or structure within a nominated or designated historic district without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful to not maintain designated landmarks or structures within designated historic districts within the minimum maintenance requirements of the Uniform Housing Code, Issue 1997, published by the International Conference of Building Officials. 
(Ord. No. 1516, § XV, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-81. - Review of public improvement and land acquisition projects. 
    Public improvement and land acquisition projects by the city or any of its departments or agencies shall be reviewed by the HPC in the following manner: 
(1)	The HPC shall review and comment upon any public improvement project proposed by the city or any of its agencies or departments within any historic district, on the site of or within 200 feet of any landmarks, or within 200 feet of any boundary of a historic district. The department of public works shall send a completed preliminary design for a public improvement project to the HPC simultaneously with its submission to the city council for approval. The HPC shall have at least 30 days to complete its review and report to the city council, except when the department of public works, if necessary to accelerate the design review process, may specify a time less than 30 days within which the HPC shall complete its review and report to the council. 
(2)	The HPC shall review and comment upon any proposed acquisition of a landmark or of land or buildings within a historic district by the city or any of its agencies or departments. The city council or the department of public works shall, at the earliest possible date that will not interfere with acquisition negotiations, send the HPC information concerning the location, size, purchase price, current use, and proposed use of the land or building to be acquired, and specify the date by which the HPC shall report to the city council. 
(3)	The HPC shall review the public improvement or land acquisition projects to determine its effect upon the historic, archaeological or architectural character of the landmark or historic district and report to the city council within any time specified by the city council or planning department but not to exceed 45 days. The report by the HPC shall include any recommendations for changes to the preliminary design or land acquisition that will lessen or alleviate any adverse effect of the proposed project upon the historic, archaeological or architectural character of the landmark or historic district. The city council shall take no final action on the preliminary design or land acquisition until it has received and reviewed the report of the HPC. 
(Ord. No. 1516, § VII, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-82. - Standards for review. 
    In considering an application for a building or demolition permit or for a certificate of appropriateness, the HPC shall be guided in principal by the Secretary of the Interior's Standards, as follows, in addition to any design guidelines in the ordinance designating the landmark or historic district. Applications, standards for review and design guidelines shall be available in the office of the city clerk for distribution to the public. 
(1)	A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment. 
(2)	The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided. 
(3)	Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved. 
(4)	Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a historic property shall be preserved. 
(5)	Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence. 
(6)	Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. 
(7)	Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken. 
(8)	New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment. 
(9)	New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXXVII(HE); Ord. No. 1516, § VIII, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-83. - Design guidelines. 
    Design guidelines for applying the criteria for review of certificates of appropriateness shall, at a minimum, consider the following architectural criteria: 
(1)	Height. The height of any proposed alteration or construction should be compatible with the style and character of the landmark and with surrounding structures in a historic district. 
(2)	Proportions of windows and doors. The proportions and relationships between doors and windows should be compatible with the architectural style and character of the landmark and with surrounding structures within a historic district. 
(3)	Relationship of building masses and spaces. The set back and relationship of a structure within a historic district to the open space between it and adjoining structures should be compatible. 
(4)	Roof shape. The design of the roof should be compatible with the architectural style and character of the landmark, and with surrounding structures in a historic district. 
(5)	Landscaping. Landscaping should be compatible with the architectural character and appearance of the landmark and of surrounding structures and landscapes in historic districts. 
(6)	Scale. The scale of the structure after alteration, construction, or partial demolition should be compatible with its architectural style and character and with surrounding structures in a historic district. 
(7)	Directional expression. Facades in historic districts should blend with other structures with regard to directional expression. Structures in a historic district should be compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical expression of surrounding structures. The directional expression of a landmark after alteration, construction, or partial demolition should be compatible with its original architectural style and character. 
(8)	Architectural details. Architectural details including materials, colors, and textures should be treated so as to make a landmark compatible with its original architectural style and character and to preserve and enhance the architectural style or character of a landmark or historic district. 
(9)	Signage. The character of signs should be in keeping with the historic architectural character of a landmark or historic district. Character of a sign includes the number, size, area, scale, location, type (e.g., off-site advertising signs and on-site business signs), letter size or style, and intensity and type of illumination. 
(10)	Minimum maintenance. Significant features should be kept in a condition of good repair and maintenance. All structural and mechanical systems should be maintained in a condition and state of repair that will prevent decay, deterioration or damage to significant features, or otherwise adversely affect the historic or architectural character of structures within a historic district. 
(Ord. No. 1516, § IX, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-84. - Certificate of economic hardship. 
    Application for a certificate of economic hardship shall be made on a form prepared by the HPC only after a certificate of appropriateness has been denied. The HPC shall schedule a public hearing concerning the application and provide public notice and individual notice to the applicant, owners of record, and owners adjacent to the property in the same manner as in section 58-77, and any person may testify at the hearing concerning economic hardship. All testimony, objections thereto and rulings at such public hearing shall be taken down by a reporter employed by the city for that purpose, or, if electronic tape recording equipment is available, by such electronic means. The HPC may solicit expert testimony or require that the applicant for a certificate of economic hardship make submissions concerning any or all of the following information before it makes a determination on the application. 
(1)	Estimate of the cost of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition or removal and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to comply with the recommendations of the HPC for changes necessary for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness; 
(2)	A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any structures on the property and their suitability for rehabilitation; 
(3)	Estimated market value of the property in its current condition; after completion of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition or removal; after any changes recommended by the HPC, and, in the case of a proposed demolition, after renovation of the existing property for continued use; 
(4)	In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser, or other real estate professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure. 
(Ord. No. 1516, § X, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-85. - Maintenance of historic properties. 
(a)	Ordinary maintenance exclusion. Nothing in the section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior elements of any building or structure described in section 58-74 
(b)	Definition of ordinary maintenance. Any work, for which a building permit is not required by law, where the purpose and effect of such work is to correct any deterioration or decay of or damage to a structure or any part thereof and to restore the same, as nearly as may be practicable, to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay or damage. 
(c)	Minimum maintenance requirement. All buildings and structures designated by city ordinance as "H" shall be preserved against decay and deterioration and free from certain structural defects in the following manner, by the owner thereof or such other person who may have the legal custody and control thereof shall repair such building if it is found to have any of the following defects: 
(1)	The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;
(2)	The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
(3)	The deterioration of external chimneys;
(4)	The deterioration or crumbling of plasters or mortar;
(5)	The deterioration or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, and foundations, including broken windows or doors; 
(6)	The peeling of paint, rotting, holes, and other forms of decay;
(7)	The lack of maintenance of surrounding environment (e.g., fences, gates, sidewalks, steps, signs, accessory structures, and landscaping); 
(8)	The deterioration of any feature so as to create or permit the creation of any hazardous or unsafe condition. 
If minimum maintenance is not being maintained, the owner of the property or other person having legal custody thereof shall be notified by the building inspector. The notice shall be by certified mail and shall specify each item in the property or landmark that fails to meet minimum maintenance requirements. The owner or other person having legal custody of the property shall have 30 days from the receipt of notice to comply with the minimum maintenance requirements. The HPC, for good cause shown, may extend the 30-day period. If after the original 30-day period or any extension granted by the building inspector the owner or person having legal custody of the property should fail to meet the minimum maintenance requirements, the owner or person having legal custody of the property shall be in violation of this section and punished in accordance with section 52-9. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXXVII(HH); Ord. No. 1516, § XI, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-86. - Review of applications for zoning amendments, special use permits and variances. 
    Applications for zoning amendments, special use permits, or variances for a landmark or structures within a historic district shall be referred to the HPC by the planning department at least 30 days prior to the date of the public hearing set by the planning and zoning commission or the board of adjustment. The HPC may review these applications using any format which it deems appropriate provided, however, that the applicant shall be notified of the time and place of such review and shall be given the opportunity to appear and be heard. Within 15 days after receipt of said application, the HPC shall forward its comments to the planning department for presentation to the planning and zoning commission for their consideration in reviewing the application. 
(Ord. No. 1516, § XII, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 58-87. - Appeals. 
    If the HPC denies an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the HPC shall work with the applicant to arrive at a mutually satisfactory alternative to the proposed activities. If agreement cannot be reached within six months, the applicant may file with the city clerk a written appeal to the board of adjustment. In acting upon the appeal, the board may grant a variance from the strict interpretation of this division when such will not materially affect the health or safety of the applicant and general public. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXXVII(HI); Ord. No. 1516, § XIII, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 58-88-58-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 58-106. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)	The intent of this section should apply only to subdivisions for 40 acres or more.
(b)	The purpose of the planned development overlay district (P-D) is to encourage diversification and innovation in residential, commercial and industrial development and the relationship of uses to their sites. The P-D, overlay district permits more flexibility of site design, and greater variety in type, design, and layout of buildings on a quality level generally equal to or exceeding that which prevails in the city, but permitting certain deviations from the city's zoning district regulations. The P-D, overlay district encourages more efficient use of land reflecting changes in the technology of land development; encourages the expansion of urban areas incorporating the best features of modern design while conserving the value of land; and provides a procedure which relates the type, design, and layout of development to the particular site and the particular demand at the time of development in a manner consistent with the preservation of property values within established neighborhoods. This district is intended for areas served by publicly provided sanitary sewer. 
(c)	Although the specific conditions within the P-D, overlay district shall be predetermined, the location of a proposed overlay district must be carefully reviewed to ensure that these conditions can be met. As such, each application for P-D, overlay district shall include a development plan in accordance with the provisions and conditions that follow. The following items are specific objectives of this section: 
(1)	A proposal to rezone land to a planned development overlay district shall be subject to the same criteria relative to compliance with the city's comprehensive plan, zoning chapter, subdivision regulations, neighborhood compatibility, adequacy of streets and utilities, and other elements, which are established and customary development techniques in the city. 
(2)	The submittal by the developer and approval by the city of site plans represents a firm commitment by the developers that the development will indeed follow the approved plans in such areas as concept, intensity of use, architectural design and continuity and aesthetic levels and quantities of open space. 
(3)	Deviations in lot sizes, yard requirements, setbacks and relationship between buildings, may be approved by the planning commission and city council if it is deemed that other amenities or conditions will be gained to the extent that an equal or higher quality development will be produced. 
(4)	All developments are to be planned and developed in a manner that will produce more usable open space, better recreation opportunities and safer, more attractive neighborhoods than under standard zoning and development techniques. 
(Ord. No. 1574, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-107. - Application and uses. 
(a)	Application. The P-D, overlay district may apply to any residential or nonresidential development, with the exception of agricultural and large-lot residential developments. 
(b)	Permitted uses. Planned developments are generally limited to those uses or combinations of uses permitted in the underlying zoning district. However, an applicant may petition for consideration of a use or combination of uses not specifically allowed, if the city council finds that the conditions, procedures and standards of this division are met and that such use or combination of uses is shown to be beneficial to the city. Limitations may be placed on the occupancy of certain premises within the P-D, overlay district, if such limitation is deemed essential to the health, safety or general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 1574, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-108. - Standards of development. 
    All planned developments shall comply with the procedures and requirements of this division as well as the following standards: 
(1)	The maximum height of buildings and structures shall be as set out in the standard requirements of the underlying district, unless increases are specifically granted with approval of the overlay district. 
(2)	Building setbacks shall be as set out by the standard requirements of the underlying district, unless modifications to the setbacks are specifically granted with approval of the overlay district. 
(3)	The intensity of land use, density of residential dwelling units, bulk of buildings, the concentration of population, the amount of open space, light and sound, shall be generally equal to that required in the underlying district, unless modifications are specifically granted with approval of the overlay district. 
(4)	The signage, parking, landscaping and performance standards shall generally be the same as in the underlying district, unless modifications to these standards are specifically granted with approval of the overlay district. 
(5)	In order to meet the recreational needs of the residents of the city, all developments in planned zoning districts shall contribute either common ground, open space, park land or fees in lieu of open space. 
(6)	The development shall be under unified ownership at the time of application or the subject of an application filed jointly by all owners of the property and all open space around or adjacent to building lots shall be under unified control through the establishment of covenants. The covenants shall include, but are not limited to, homeowners association documents, agreements and/or covenants that clearly define the shared maintenance responsibilities of common open spaces and detention/retention areas and other utilities within each of the zoning lots and/or phases comprising the proposed development, shared access and parking arrangements, common design elements including integration of common architectural themes and active and passive open space and landscaped areas. 
(Ord. No. 1574, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-109. - Modifications to underlying zoning district regulations. 
    Modifications in the applicable underlying zoning district's lot area, setbacks and lot coverage requirements, maximum residential density, and/or other standards of said zoning district may be granted by the city council. Such modifications must be based on: 
(1)	The quality of the features offered;
(2)	The extent to which the development exceeds the minimum level which qualifies for a bonus; 
(3)	The extent to which the public will benefit from the offered option;
(4)	Compliance with local, state and federal regulations; and
(5)	Other considerations based on the recommendations of the comprehensive plan. The city council may impose conditions to ensure a public benefit of approved bonuses. 
(Ord. No. 1574, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-110. - Application for overlay district. 
    A petition for a P-D, planned development overlay district shall be filed with the city, along with the filing fee, as set forth by separate ordinance. A preliminary development plan shall be attached and shall include the elements set forth in these regulations. The public hearing and public notice requirements shall be the same as for any rezoning application as provided by these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1574, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-111. - Preliminary development plan. 
(a)	Approval procedure. 
(1)	Action by planning commission. After a preliminary development plan is filed with the city as per the requirements of this chapter and has been reviewed by staff and found to contain all of the required information as set out within these regulations, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on said development after giving public notice. Said public hearing may be adjourned from time to time and, within a reasonable period of time after the conclusion of said public hearing, the planning commission shall prepare and transmit to the city council and the applicant a report with respect to the extent which the preliminary development plan complies with these regulations and the recommendations of the comprehensive plan, together with the commission's recommendations in respect to the action to be taken on the preliminary development plan. The planning commission may recommend disapproval, approval, or approval with amendments, conditions, or restrictions. 
(2)	Action by city council. The city council shall either approve, disapprove, or approve with amendments, conditions or restrictions the preliminary development plan and authorize the submitting of the final development plan. 
(3)	Plan changes. Substantial or significant changes in the preliminary development plan shall only be made after rehearing and reapproval as required for the initial approval of the preliminary development plan. 
(4)	Unplatted tracts being replatted. For unplatted tracts being replatted, the approval of the preliminary development plan shall be considered as the approval of a preliminary plat. To complete the platting process, the applicant need only submit a final plat. Said final plat shall be in accordance with the subdivision regulations and may be submitted with or incorporated with the final development plan. The planning commission may review the final development plan and the final plat concurrently. 
(b)	Plan contents. Copies of the preliminary development plan shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the city's application and review schedule at a scale dimension of not more than one inch = 100 feet. In addition to all data required for preliminary plats per the city subdivision regulations, plans shall include: 
(1)	Name of the project, address, boundaries, date, north arrow and scale of the plan.
(2)	Name and address of the owner of record, developer, and seal of the engineer, architect or landscape architect. 
(3)	Name and address of all owners of record of abutting parcels.
(4)	All existing lot lines, easements, and rights-of-way. Include area in acres or square feet, abutting land uses and structures. 
(5)	The location and use of all existing and proposed buildings and structures within the development, including all dimensions of height and floor area, exterior entrances and anticipated future additions and alterations, and typical elevations and building materials, as applicable. 
(6)	The location of required parking areas including parking stalls, setbacks and loading and service areas, as applicable. 
(7)	The location, height, intensity, and bulb type (e.g., fluorescent, sodium incandescent) of all external lighting fixtures, as applicable. The direction of illumination and methods to eliminate glare onto adjoining properties. 
(8)	The location, height, size, materials, and design of all proposed signage, if applicable.
(9)	A landscape plan showing all existing open space, trees forest cover and water sources, and all proposed changes to these features including the size and type of plant material, water sources will include ponds, lakes, brooks, streams, wetlands, floodplains, and drainage retention areas. 
(10)	The location of all existing and proposed utility systems including:
a.	Sewer lines and manholes;
b.	Water lines and fire hydrants;
c.	Telephone, cable and electrical systems; and
d.	Storm drainage system including existing and proposed drain lines, culverts, catchbasins, head walls, end walls, hydrants, manholes, and drainage swales. 
(11)	Plans to prevent the pollution of surface water or groundwater, the erosion of soil both during and after construction, excessive runoff, excessive raising or lowering of the water table, and flooding of other properties, as applicable. 
(12)	Existing and proposed topography shown at not more than two-foot contour intervals. All elevation shall refer to United States Geodetic Survey (USGS) datum. 
(13)	A description of any limitations to be placed on the range of permitted uses, the hours of operation, the structure and landscape materials to be used and other similar development requirements and/or restrictions in the form of the conditions of the planned development overlay district zoning; and 
(14)	A description of any deviations from any other provision of these regulations and the reason for such. 
(Ord. No. 1574, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-112. - Final development plan. 
(a)	Approval procedure. 
(1)	After approval of a preliminary development plan by the city council, the landowner shall file with the register of deeds a statement that such a plan has been filed with the city council and has been approved and that such planned development is applicable to certain specified legally-described land and that copies of said plan are on file with the city. Such statement recorded with the register of deeds shall also specify the nature of the plan, the proposed density or intensity of land uses and other pertinent information sufficient to notify any prospective purchasers or users of land of the existence of such a plan. The recorded statement shall specify that the preliminary development plan shall become binding upon all successors and assigns unless amended in conformance with this act. 
(2)	Prior to the issuance of any building permit or zoning certificate for construction on or use of the property the applicant shall submit an application for final approval. The final application may include the entire planned development or may be for a phase thereof as set forth in the approval of the preliminary development plan. The application shall include copies of such drawings, specifications, covenants, easements, conditions and form of performance bond as set forth in the approval of the preliminary development plan and in accordance with the conditions established in the zoning regulations for planned development. 
(3)	The planning commission shall approve the final development plan if such plan meets the requirements of this division and is in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary development plan. Final development plans shall be deemed to be in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary development plan provided any modification to the plan does not: 
a.	Vary the proposed gross residential density or intensity of use by more than five percent or involve a reduction in the area set aside for common open space, nor the substantial relocation of such area; nor 
b.	Substantially change the design of plan so as to significantly alter, as determined by the planning commission: 
1.	Pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow.
2.	The juxtaposition of different land uses.
3.	The relation of open space to residential development.
4.	The proposed phasing of construction.
5.	The exterior appearance of buildings and/or structures.
(4)	In the event that the final development plan submitted contains substantial changes from the approved preliminary development plan, the applicant shall submit a revised preliminary development plan for approval per the preliminary development plan approval procedure requirements. This resubmittal shall require a new public hearing in the same manner prescribed in this section for original preliminary development plan approval. 
(b)	Plan contents. Following preliminary development plan approval and platting, if necessary, copies of the final development plan shall be submitted in accordance with the city's application and review schedule and shall include the following information: 
(1)	All information deeded necessary and appropriate based on the approved preliminary development plan; 
(2)	All requirements of the preliminary development plan (updated to show final sizes, dimensions and arrangement); 
(3)	Contour lines showing finished grading only;
(4)	A landscaping plan in addition to any additional requirements of the preliminary development plan approval; 
(5)	The location, height, size, materials and design of all proposed signage, if applicable; and 
(6)	Conceptual exterior building elevations including materials and color palettes to be used, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1574, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-113. - Amendments. 
    A planned development overlay district ordinance or an approved preliminary or final development plan may be amended in the same manner prescribed in this division for approval of a preliminary or final development plan. 
(Ord. No. 1574, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-114. - Building permits. 
    On final approval by the planning commission, the owner shall provide copies of the approved final development plan to the city. Building permits shall be issued only in accordance with the approved final development plan. 
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1, 5-23-2005) 
Secs. 58-115-58-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 58-146. - Requirements must be observed. 
    Except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)	No building or structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or altered, nor shall any building, structure or land be used for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which such building, structure or land is situated. 
(2)	No building or structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered to exceed the height or area limit herein established for the district in which such building or structure is situated. 
(3)	No lot area shall be reduced or diminished so that the yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this order, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner, except in conformity with the area regulations established herein. 
(4)	Architectural plans and specifications for any improvements, except improvements in an R-1 or R-2 district, shall be submitted for review and approval by the planning commission and recommended to the proper city authority before the issuance of a building permit. Submission of plans and specifications on transmittal shall include such information as is necessary to evidence compliance with all requirements of the applicable section of this chapter. The applicant will be required to furnish evidence establishing that there is adequate capacity in the sanitary sewer system for the sewage which will originate in the proposed project, or if there is a deficiency in the local sewer capacity that such needed additional capacity will be provided by the applicant, and stormwater plan per the subdivision chapter. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § V; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1463, § 10, 5-8-2000; Ord. No. 1559, § 1, 12-13-2004) 
Sec. 58-147. - Protective buffer and screen requirements. 
    Along any property line abutting or adjoining a zoned dwelling house district, there shall be a setback of at least ten feet for any buildings or parking lots. Commercial or industrial business districts C-B, C-1, C-2, C-P, M-1, and M-2 shall be permanently screened from such abutting or adjoining properties zoned for dwelling house use by wall, fence or other suitable enclosure at least six feet in height. Screens shall be constructed of suitable material and in such manner as to present a pleasing appearance. All construction plans and specifications for screen installations shall be submitted for approval by the zoning authority prior to construction. The area adjacent to such wall or fence may be required to be planted with trees and shrubs to form an ornamental screen and trees and shrubs shall be properly and adequately maintained by the industrial or commercial user. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XVI) 
Sec. 58-148. - Additional controls. 
    Any use permitted in districts C-O, C-B, C-1, C-2, M-1, or M-2 shall be subject to such controls as may be imposed by the council if such uses are or become noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke, gas, glare or heat perceptible at the property lines. With the exception of districts M-1 and M-2, inoperative vehicles may not be stored or repaired (other than in closed garages) on the premises. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XVII) 
Sec. 58-149. - Special classes. 
(a)	Specified uses. Any of the following uses may be located in any district by special permission of the city council under such conditions as to operation and off-street parking requirements as the city council may impose, and after public hearing by the zoning board and the city council provided that in their judgment such use will not seriously injure the appropriate use of the neighboring property and will conform to the general intent and purpose of this article and shall comply with the height and area regulations of the district in which they may be located, unless otherwise granted and providing further that such permission shall be for a limited period of time, transferable and renewable by the city council upon termination and subject to the rules and restrictions prescribed by the city council. Specified uses are as follows: 
(1)	Amusement parks, commercial baseball or athletic fields, racetracks, circuses, carnivals or fairgrounds. 
(2)	Aviation fields or airports under such restrictions as the city council may impose on land, buildings or structures within an approach or transition plan or turning zone, as defined in section 58-154 to promote safety of navigation and prevent undue danger from confusing lights, electrical interference or other hazards. 
(3)	Cemeteries, mausoleums or crematories for the disposal of the human dead.
(4)	Miniature golf courses.
(5)	Swimming pools.
(6)	Radio and television stations.
(7)	Clubs, private, and the primary activities of which are athletic or recreational, provided the area shall be at least ten acres in extent and no building shall be closer than 100 feet from any property line. 
(8)	Drive-in theatres.
(9)	Golf driving ranges, commercial and illuminated.
(10)	Gun clubs, skeet shoots or target archery ranges.
(11)	Hospitals, sanitariums or homes for the convalescents or aged, including insane or feeble minded, alcoholics, or drug addicts subject to such health and sanitation requirements as may be imposed by the city council or the health authorities of the city or state and provided there shall be at least 300 square feet of lot area for each patient or guest with the minimum of 20,000 square feet. 
(12)	Mines, other than strip or cut mines, including the removing, screening, crushing, washing or storage of ore, sand, clay, stone, gravel or similar materials, concrete batching plants, asphalt plants and related industries provided, however, that no permit shall be issued until and unless the location site plan and method of operation including necessary structures, have been submitted to and approved in writing by the city council, which permit shall be for a limited period of time not to exceed ten years, subject to regulations and restrictions prescribed by the city council. 
(13)	Except in districts R-1, R-2 and R-3, penal or correctional institutions.
(14)	Picnic groves and fishing or swimming lakes, including minor and incidental concession facilities for patrons only. 
(15)	Radio, television, and microwave towers.
(16)	Sanitary landfills.
(17)	Reservoirs, wells, towers, filter beds or water supply plants.
(18)	Community sewage or garbage processing or disposal plants.
(19)	Trailer courts subject to such rules as may be adopted by the city council.
(20)	Automobile wrecking yards if enclosed within a solid fence or wall at least ten feet high. 
(21)	Junkyards, if enclosed within a solid fence or wall at least ten feet high.
(22)	Acid manufacture.
(23)	Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture.
(24)	Coal distillation and byproducts plants.
(25)	Distillation of bones.
(26)	Explosive manufacture or storage.
(27)	Fertilizer manufacture or storage.
(28)	Gas manufacture.
(29)	Garbage, offal or dead animal reduction or dumping.
(30)	Hides and skins (storage, curing or tanning).
(31)	Meat or fish packing or storage plants.
(32)	Meat processing.
(33)	Petroleum or its products (refining of).
(34)	Smelting of tin, copper mine or iron ores.
(35)	Stock yards of slaughtering.
(36)	Tar distillation or manufacture.
(37)	Wholesale storage of gasoline, butane or propane.
(38)	Wood distillation plants (charcoal, tar, turpentine, etc.).
(39)	Operation of private equipment yards for storage purposes, exclusive of retail sales yards. 
(40)	Retail garden centers and nurseries.
(41)	Signs, in excess of the limits provided for under a specific zoning classification, shall be subject to whatever term, regulations or restrictions as may be prescribed by the city council. 
(42)	Day care limited, day care general, day care commercial.
(43)	Bed and breakfast.
(44)	Mortuaries.
(b)	Preexisting uses. Any use or operation permitted within this section and operating at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be deemed zoned under special classes, with permissive use granted for a period of ten years, from the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XVIII; Ord. No. 1401, § 1(exh. A), 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 1463, § 11, 5-8-2000) 
Sec. 58-150. - Setback regulations on state-maintained roads. 
(a)	Single lane non-divided pavements. Where single lane non-divided pavements are involved a minimum building setback distance of 95 feet from the centerline of the highway shall be maintained, except 7 Highway between Wright Street and the 58 Highway overpass which shall be 70 feet from the centerline. 
(b)	Service road facilities. Where service road facilities on controlled or limited access pavements are involved, a minimum building setback distance of 95 feet from the centerline of the service road pavement shall be maintained. 
(c)	Pumps and pump islands, temporary, movable uses. All pumps and pump islands erected in connection with filling stations or businesses incidental thereto, including auto and machinery displays and all other uses of a temporary, movable nature, on a highway as recited above, shall be a setback at least 84 feet from the centerline of a highway and 60 feet from the centerline of a service road. 
(d)	Billboards and signs. All billboards and signboards, or all signs erected along any highway as in this section referred to shall be set back a distance of 30 feet from the edge of the pavement of the highway or service road. 
(e)	Uses hazardous to traffic prohibited. No building, use, signboard, or other obstruction of visibility shall be located in such manner as to be hazardous to highway traffic. 
(f)	Barriers, etc., to be used to restrict parking. Use of barriers and clearly defined driveways to prevent parking on highway shoulders or right-of-way and to prevent off-pavement traffic along shoulder, medial strips or between adjacent business establishments shall be maintained. Plot plans and proposed usage shall show ample off-the-highway parking facilities for residents, employees or customers. Parking areas shall allow ample turn-around space so vehicles need not back out onto the highway property. All access and egress to the highway must be in compliance with highway department regulations. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XIX; Ord. No. 1463, § 2, 5-8-2000) 
Sec. 58-151. - Accessory uses. 
(a)	Private driveways or walks. A private driveway or walk to provide access to premises in district C-O, C-B, C-1, C-2, M-1 or M-2 shall not be permitted in district A, R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-3A. 
(b)	Higher classification. Buildings or structures or uses which are accessory to the use permitted in one district shall not be permitted in a district of a higher classification. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XX) 
Sec. 58-152. - Nonconforming uses. 
    Preexisting uses. A nonconforming use of land, building or structure existing lawfully at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be continued, except as hereafter provided: 
(1)	The use of land, except agricultural, which does not conform to the provisions of this article shall be discontinued after one year from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and the use of land which becomes nonconforming by reason of a subsequent change in this article shall also be discontinued within one year of the change, unless in either case such land be wholly or partially occupied by a permanent enclosed building, the design or use of which is nonconforming. 
(2)	The lawful use of a building or structure, at the time of the effective date the ordinance from which this article is derived, which is designed for a conforming dwelling use, but is being used in a nonconforming manner for business or industry, may be continued for a period of five years from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Within that time, it shall be removed or converted to a conforming use. The lawful use of a building or structure which becomes nonconforming use by reason of a subsequent change in the ordinance from which this article is derived shall also be removed or converted to a conforming use within five years from the effective date of such change. 
(3)	Any nonconforming building or structure at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be removed or converted to conforming use within 20 years. 
(4)	Any signs or billboards which become nonconforming by reason of subsequent changes in this article shall also be removed within two years from the effective date of such change. 
(5)	The extension of a legal nonconforming use to any portion of a building, which portion was arranged or designed for such legal, nonconforming use at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be permitted. Repairs and alterations may be made to a legal nonconforming building provided that no structural alterations or extensions shall be made except by permit from the zoning board in case of evident hardship. Extensions shall not exceed 25 percent of the ground area of the building. The legal status of such extensions shall terminate with the removal of conversions of such nonconforming building. A legal nonconforming use of a building may not be changed to a nonconforming use. When such legal nonconforming building is removed, every future use of land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(6)	A legal nonconforming use if changed to a conforming use may not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXI) 
Sec. 58-153. - Completion and restoration of existing buildings. 
(a)	Requirement. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been heretofore issued and plans for which are on file with the city clerk at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived and the construction of which in either case shall have been diligently executed within one year of the date of such permit and the ground story framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall have been completed within such year and which entire building shall be completed, according to such plans as filed within two years from the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)	Buildings destroyed by fire, etc. Nothing in this article shall be taken to prevent the restoration within 12 months of a legal nonconforming building destroyed or partially destroyed by fire, explosion or other casualty or act of God or the public enemy provided that when such restoration becomes involved in litigation, the time required for such litigation shall not be counted as a part of the 12 months allowed for construction and further provided that upon restoration of a legal nonconforming use of the building may not be changed unless changed to a conforming use, and nothing in this article shall be taken to prevent the continued occupancy or use of such building or part thereof which existed at the time of such partial destruction, but any building so damaged more than 50 percent of its reasonable value may not be rebuilt, repaired or used unless it is made to conform to all regulations for all buildings in the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXII) 
Sec. 58-154. - Height and area exceptions. 
    The regulations and requirements as to height of buildings and area of lots which may be occupied by buildings, yards and other regulations and requirements in the foregoing sections of this article, shall be subject to the following exceptions and additional regulations: 
(1)	Height exceptions. 
a.	In any district, public or semi-public buildings, such as hospitals, churches, hotels, sanitariums, or schools, either public or private, where permitted may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, provided that such buildings shall have yards the depth and width of which shall be increased one foot on all sides for each additional foot that such buildings exceed the specified height limit as established by the regulations in which such buildings are situated. 
b.	Dwellings in districts A, R-1 and R-2 may be increased in height not exceeding ten feet in addition to the limitations of 21/2 stories or 35 feet, as prescribed in such districts, provided that two side yards of not less than 15 feet in width each are provided. In no case shall such dwellings, however, exceed three stories in height. 
c.	Parapet walls and false mansards shall not extend more than six feet above the height in limit. Flagpoles, chimneys, cooling towers, electric display signs, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, finials, gas tanks, grain elevators, stacks, storage towers, radio, television or microwave towers, ornamental towers, monuments, cupolas, domes, spires, standpipes and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected as to height in accordance with the existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the city. 
d.	On through lots 125 feet or less in depth, the height of a building may be measured from the curb level of either street. On through lots of more than 125 feet in depth, the height regulations for the street permitting the greater height shall apply to a depth of not more than 125 feet from that street. 
e.	The establishment of an airport or heliport within the city shall be a conformity with the regulations and procedures set forth by the Federal Aviation Agency as required by law and reviewed by the zoning commission. 
(2)	Area per family exceptions. For any building used jointly for business and dwelling purposes or industry and dwelling purposes, the lot requirements per family shall be reduced in the same proportion as the floor area devoted to business or industry bears to the entire floor area of the building, provided that floor area below the first floor of such building shall not be included in any calculation under this provision. 
(3)	Yard exceptions. 
a.	Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed except for the ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, canopies, cornices, chimneys, buttresses, ornamental features and eaves, provided, however, that none of the above projections shall extend into the court more than six inches not into a minimum yard more than 36 inches; and provided further that canopies or open porches having a roof area not exceeding 60 square feet may project a minimum of six feet into the required front or rear yard, open paved terraces may project not more than ten feet into a front yard and existing open porches extending into the required yard shall not be enclosed. 
b.	An open fire escape may project into a required side yard not more than half the width of such yard, but not more than four feet. Fire escapes, solid floored balconies and enclosed outside stairways may project not more than four feet into a required rear yard. 
c.	A terrace garage in districts A to R-1, inclusive, may be located in a front or side yard, provided that it is completely recessed into the terrace and that the height of the terrace is sufficient to cover and conceal the structures from above and further provided that the doors, when open, shall not project beyond any property line, and that the structure be set back at least four feet from the front property line. 
d.	In any district a detached accessory building, not exceeding 24 feet, or two stories in height, or in any case not higher than the main building, may occupy not more than 30 percent of a rear yard, except that in district M-1 or M-2, if such building is not more than one story or 16 feet high, it may occupy 40 percent of a rear yard. A detached accessory building may be connected with the main building by a lightly constructed, covered passage, open on each side, not more than six feet wide inside, the roof of which is not more than ten feet high at its highest point and is not an extension of the roof of the main building. 
e.	No rear yard shall be required in districts C-O to M-2 inclusive, on any lot for business or industrial purposes, the rear line of which adjoins a railway right-of-way or which has a rear railway track connection. 
f.	In computing the depth of a rear yard for any building where such yard abuts an alley, one-half of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of the rear yard. However such portion of alley shall not be fenced in. 
g.	The zoning authority is authorized to deviate from yard measurements up to ten percent of the requirements in hardship cases without the referral to the board of zoning adjustment. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXIII) 
Sec. 58-155. - Group housing projects. 
(a)	Net area required. The net area of land to be included in a group housing project shall be at least three acres. Developers of a group housing project must submit their plans to the zoning commission for study. The commission shall hold a public hearing and shall make recommendations to the city council for their consideration and determination. 
(b)	Application. The zoning commission shall apply the requirements of the ordinance from which this article is derived to the housing project as a whole in such manner that will ensure substantially the same character of occupancy, maximum intensity of use, and minimum standard open spaces as permitted by this article in the district in which the proposed project is to be located. 
(c)	Specific prohibitions. In considering the project, the zoning commission shall in no case authorize a use prohibited in the district in which the housing project is to be located, except that buildings for administration and maintenance of the project may be included; not a building height in excess of that permitted. The minimum distance between a building and a street line shall comply with the front yard requirement of the district. No point of any building shall be nearer than 20 feet to an adjacent building except that ten feet minimum clearance will be permitted where there is a corner relationship, not less than 25 feet from any boundary line of the project. The board may require such additional restrictions and safeguards as they deem necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(d)	Open space. Ample open space shall be provided for recreational space, outdoor drying yards, arrangement of lawns and planting, etc., in addition to that required for off-street parking. 
(e)	Parking regulations. See section 58-156, Off-street parking and loading. 
(f)	Permit. A permit for a group housing project shall be issued by the zoning authority upon approval of the project by the city council. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXIV) 
Sec. 58-156. - Off-street parking and loading regulations. 
(a)	Parking-One- or two-family dwellings. 
(1)	For all one- and two-family dwellings hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, provision in the form of garages or open parking areas shall be made for parking of motor passenger vehicles for the use of occupants, either on the premises in the rear or side yard, or in a community garage in the same block. Such parking shall provide space for at least two vehicles for each family unit with adequate driveway space thereto. 
(2)	No trucks in excess of one-ton capacity shall be parked on a lot in a residential zone except for deliveries. 
(3)	With the exception of districts M-1 and M-2 inoperative vehicles may not be stored or repaired (other than in closed garages) on the premises. 
(b)	Same-Apartment houses, multiple dwellings. For all apartment houses, multiple dwellings hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, provision in the form of garages or open parking areas shall be made for the storage or parking of motor passenger vehicles for the use of occupants, either on the premises in the rear or side yards, or on a site approved by the city council after public hearing. Two and one-half parking spaces of 500 square feet shall be provided for each dwelling unit. 
(c)	Same-Hotels and motels. For all hotels and motels hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, provision in the form of garages or open parking areas shall be made for the storage or parking of motor passenger vehicles for the use of occupants or members. Number of parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with this article. 
(d)	Same-Hospitals or institutions. For all hospitals and philanthropic or eleemosynary institutions hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, provision made for the storage or parking of motor passenger vehicles. Such parking shall be either on the premises or on a site approved by the city council after public hearing. Number of parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with this article. 
(e)	Same-Places of assembly. For every structure or part thereof hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered to be used as a theatre, auditorium, church, stadium or other place of public assembly, there shall be provided and maintained accessible off-street parking space for motor passenger vehicles as indicated in this article. Such parking shall be located on the same lot with such building, structure or part thereof, or on a site approved by the city council after public hearing. Each parking space shall provide at least 180 square feet of area. 
(f)	Same-Business or industrial buildings. 
(1)	Any business building hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered in districts C-O to C-2, inclusive, shall provide accessible off-street parking at the rate specified in this article. Areas that have been designated as H-1 shall be exempt from providing new off-street parking. 
(2)	For all industrial buildings hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered in districts M-1 and M-2, provisions shall be made for off-street parking. The number of parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with this article. 
(3)	Such parking spaces shall be on the same lot with the main buildings or within 750 feet therefrom on land zoned for business or industry. In cases where parking facilities are permitted on land other than the zoning lot on which the building or use served is located, such facilities shall be in the same possession as the zoned lot occupied by the building or use to which the parking facilities are accessories. Such possession may be either by deed or long term lease, the term of such lease to be determined by the city council. 
(4)	Each required off-street parking space shall be at least nine feet in width and at least 20 feet in length, exclusive of access drives, aisles, ramps or columns. 
(5)	When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by the formulas result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded, while a fraction in excess of one-half shall be counted as one parking space. 
(g)	Improvement of parking areas. All open parking areas shall be surfaced with a permanent dust-free surface. However, district A areas, zoned agricultural, may use well-maintained gravel or chip and seal in lieu of a dust-free surface. Ingress and egress shall be by means of paved driveways not exceeding 35 feet in width at points of connection with public streets. Driveways affording access to double bays or parking spaces shall not be less than 27 feet wide for right angle parking and not less than 16 feet wide for parking at an angle of 55 degrees to curbline, provided that such drive widths may be reduced to 20 feet and 12 feet respectively where one-way traffic is established in the driveways. Required drive widths may be determined proportionately for other angles of parking. Any lights used to illuminate said parking area shall be so arranged as to direct light away from any adjacent premises in a residential district. The following additional regulations shall apply: 
(1)	When abutting residential districts, off-street parking and loading facilities shall be set-back at least five feet from each property line. 
(2)	In order to limit the points of ingress and egress and to prevent encroachment of parked cars upon the public sidewalk and to improve the general appearance, there shall be a solid wall or fence or approved suitable screen planting at least three feet high in districts R-1 to R-3A, inclusive and 21/2 feet high in districts C-O to C-2, inclusive, along the street side of the parking area and along any side or portion of a street line which is the boundary of an adjacent higher use in district. 
(3)	The portions of the area where parking is prohibited shall be suitably planted and maintained with grass, trees and shrubs. 
(4)	Where such parking area is located in districts A to R-1, inclusive, no fee shall be charged for parking thereon and no signs of any kind shall be erected except those necessary for the orderly parking thereon. 
(h)	Loading space for business and industry. 
(1)	Any business or industrial building, hospital, institution or hotel hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered in any district, shall provide adequate off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise and goods within or adjacent to the building, in such a manner as not to obstruct freedom of traffic movement on the public streets or alleys. 
(2)	Off-street loading berths for nonresidential uses, namely commercial and industrial, shall be provided in accordance with the following: 
BerthsSize of Establishment
(gross area sq. ft.)Required No.Size
(in feet)1,000-20,0001(10 × 25)20,000-25,0002(10 × 25)25,000-40,0002(10 × 50)40,000-100,0003(10 × 50)100,000-250,0004(10 × 50) 
For each additional 200,000 square feet or fraction thereof, one additional berth shall be added at the size of ten feet × 50 feet. 
(i)	Off-street parking and loading regulations. 
(1)	Residential driveway approaches shall be four inches of reinforced concrete with impregnated felt expansion joints at the property line where the approach connects to the public way and at points of abutment with curbing, sidewalks, and the continuation of the driveway." 
(2)	Commercial and industrial approaches shall be of eight inch reinforced concrete with impregnated felt expansion joints or a saw cut at least one-eighth inch wide and one inch deep at the property line where the approach connects to the public way and at points of abutment with curbing, sidewalks and the continuation of the drive or parking areas. 
(j)	Commercial parking requirements. 
Residential Single-family residences2Dwelling unitDuplexes2Dwelling unitMultifamily residencesEfficiency or studio1Dwelling unit1-2 bedroom1.5Dwelling unit3 or more bedroom2Dwelling unitHotels and motels1 plus number required for restaurant, if anyRoomFraternity and sorority houses5MemberDormitories5ResidentCommercial (excluding garages) Banks51,000 sf of gfaOffices41,000 sf of gfaOffices, medical and dental1Employee4Plus doctorRestaurant13 seatsBowling alley5 plus number required for restaurant, if anyLanePersonal services51,000 sf of gfaRetail stores51,000 sf of gfaService stations, gas stations, auto repair shop or garage51,000 sf of gfa with a min. required of 4 spaces regardless of size of buildingIndustrial including storage, wholesale and manufacturing Brick or lumberyard or similar area11 per employee, plus required for retail and office spaceOpen storage of sand, gravel and petroleum11 per employee, plus required for retail and office spaceWarehouse and enclosed storage-private11 per employeeWarehouse and enclosed commercial11 per employee, plus storage: 3,000 sf of gfaManufacturing operations multishift11 per employee, plus required for retail and office spaceManufacturing operations multishift11 per employee on largest shift plus 1 per employee second shift required for retail and/or office space Institutional and other Hospitals12 beds, plus 1 per employeeNursing homes14 beds, plus 1 per employeeAuditoriums, churches, theatres, stadiums, and other places of assembly13 seatsColleges12 students, plus dorm requirement, if anySenior high schools11 per employee, plus 1 for every 4 studentsElementary and junior high schools11 per employee, plus 1 per every 4 studentsDay care facilities18 children, plus 1 per employee 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXV; Ord. No. 1465, §§ 1, 3, 6-12-2000; Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 7-23-2001; Ord. No. 1550, 7-12-2004; Ord. No. 1683, § 1, 3-8-2010) 
Sec. 58-157. - Other applicable regulations. 
(a)	Application. These sections further regulate uses within each zoning district, the requirements of which shall be satisfied as applicable to any proposed development. 
(b)	Airports, floodplains, historic districts and transportation corridors. Applicable standards regulating development in or near airports, floodplains, historical districts or major transportation corridors shall be governed by the current zoning regulations for those areas and the standards set forth in the comprehensive plan. 
(c)	Design standards. Applicable standards regarding design requirements for residential development are contained in the residential design guidelines of the comprehensive plan. 
(d)	Accessory uses and uses permitted with conditions. Applicable standards regulating accessory uses and uses permitted with conditions are contained in section 58-151 
(e)	Special use permits. For any use listed as a special use in section 58-149, applicable standards regulating subjects to special use permits are contained in section 58-149 
(f)	Parking requirements. Applicable standards regulating parking are contained in section 58-156, Off-street parking and loading regulations of the zoning regulations. 
(g)	Sign regulations. Applicable standards regulating signs are contained in chapter 36 
(h)	Landscaping, buffering and tree protection. Applicable regulations regulating landscaping, buffering and tree protection are contained in the subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1573, § F, 5-23-2005) 
Sec. 58-158. - Interpretation and purpose. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this article, they shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety, morals or general welfare. Whenever this article requires greater width or size of yards, or other open spaces, or requires a lower height of buildings, or a less number of stories, or requires greater percentage of lot to be unoccupied, or requires a lower density of population, or requires a more restricted use of land, or imposes other higher standards than are required in any other statute, local order or regulation, private deed restrictions, or private covenants, the regulations made under authority of this article shall govern. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXVI) 
Sec. 58-159. - Amendments. 
    The regulations, restrictions and boundaries contained in this article may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed, by the city council, either on its own motion or an application or a petition thereto, in writing, filed with the city council of the city. Before taking any action upon any proposed amendment, supplementation, change, modification, or appeal, the same shall be referred to by the city council to the zoning commission for report and recommendation. The zoning commission shall then hold a public hearing on said application or petition after public notice thereof, duly published according to law as provided by RSMo ch. 89. After public hearing is held, the zoning commission shall thereupon make its final report to the city council of the city, either favorably or unfavorably recommending said application or petition, which recommendation shall be filed with the city clerk. Thereupon a city council shall hold public hearing thereon after public notice thereof, duly according to laws provided in RSMo ch. 89 said city council may then approve any such application or petition by ordinance amending, supplementing, changing, modifying, or appealing, as may be required in the premises. In case, however, of a protest against such change duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of ten percent or more, either of the areas of land (exclusive of streets and alleys) included in such proposed change or within an area determined by lines drawn parallel to and 185 feet distant from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed, such amendment shall not become effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the city council of the city. The fee for zoning amendment application shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXVII; Ord. of 3-17-1977; Ord. No. 1120, § 2, 7-28-1981; Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 58-160. - Resubmission of application. 
    Whenever any application or petition presented under section 58-159 has been finally acted upon by the city council under the provisions of this article and the decision of the city council has been adverse to the applicant, said city council shall not, for a period of six months from the date of its decision, receive or entertain, nor shall it refer to the zoning commission for consideration, an identical or similar application seeking the same or similar relief as prayed for in the application first denied. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXVIII) 
Sec. 58-161. - Annexed territory. 
    Whenever any land shall be annexed to the municipality after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, said land so annexed shall automatically be subject to provisions of this article and shall be classified as district A until the zoning authority of the municipality has had reasonable opportunity to classify it properly after its annexation. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXIX) 
Secs. 58-162-58-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARD OF ZONING AND ADJUSTMENT 

Sec. 58-191. - Appointment; term; vacancies; organization. 
    There is hereby created a board of zoning and adjustment for the city. The board of zoning and adjustment shall consist of five members, who shall be freeholders. The membership of the first board appointed shall serve respectively for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years and one for five years. Thereafter members shall be appointed for terms of five years each. All members shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. The board shall elect its own chairperson, who shall serve for one year. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not inconsistent with this article. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine, but not less than quarterly. Such chairperson, or in his absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board will be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be a public record. All testimony, objections thereto and rulings thereon, shall be taken down by a reporter employed by the board for that purpose. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXX) 
Sec. 58-192. - Powers and duties. 
    The board of zoning and adjustment shall have the following powers: 
(1)	To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administration official in the enforcement of these sections or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(2)	To hear and decide all matters referred to it, or upon which it is required to pass under such ordinances. 
(3)	In passing upon appeals, where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of such ordinance, to vary or modify the application of any of the regulations or provisions of such ordinance relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. 
(4)	In exercising the above-mentioned powers, such board may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance or to effect any variation in such ordinance. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXXI) 
Sec. 58-193. - Appeals and procedures. 
    Appeals to the board of zoning and adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of zoning and adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of zoning and adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of zoning and adjustment or by a court of record on application or notice to the officer from which the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. The board of zoning and adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The fee for a zoning variance application shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXXII; Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 58-194. - Decisions subject to review; procedure. 
    Any person, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning and adjustment, or any office, department, board or bureau of the city, may present to the circuit court of the county petition duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the city clerk. Upon presentation of such petition the court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the board of zoning and adjustment to review such decision of the board of zoning and adjustment and shall ascribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made and served upon the realtor's attorney, which will not be less than ten days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from but the court may, on application, on notice to the board and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. The board of zoning and adjustment shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for such writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from that shall be verified. If, upon the hearings, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take additional evidence or appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct, and report the same to the court with his findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which a determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse, or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review. Costs shall not be allowed against the board unless it shall appear to the court that it acted with gross negligence, or in bad faith, or with malice in making the decision appealed from. All issues in any proceedings under sections 58-159 and 58-193 shall have preference over all other civil actions and proceedings. 
(Code 1994, app. C, § XXXIII) 
APPENDIX A. - RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is appendix A to Ordinance No. 1556, Residential Design Standards, an appendix to the zoning ordinance, as adopted by the city council on September 27, 2004. The absence of a history note indicates the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, and citation to state statutes in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
PART 1. - RESIDENTIAL DENSITY STANDARDS AND INCENTIVES 

[Sec. 1.] - Introduction. 
    The neighborhood is a key element in the structure of the city. It is where people live and raise their families. Neighborhoods combine to weave the fabric of the community and establish a need for employment, commercial, and recreational activities. 
[Sec. 2.] - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this set of density standards and design guidelines is to clearly define and communicate those features that combine to establish strong neighborhood environments. It is intended that these guidelines will serve as an educational tool for the public, as a planning and design guide for the development sector, and as a policy guide for the review of proposed developments. 
    The information provided here is specific to residential developments. This information is supplemental to the City of Pleasant Hill Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, and the Subdivision Regulations, all available at the office of the City Clerk in Pleasant Hill City Hall. 
    This design guide is neither a project file nor a simple recipe for success. Rather, it is an expression of community expectations regarding the importance of providing quality residential neighborhoods. The purpose is to encourage applicants to use these guidelines and to seek innovative and sensitive design solutions most appropriate to the needs of the immediate and surrounding neighborhoods. 
[Sec. 3.] - Process. 
    Although considerations should be given to the overall development process, including zoning district change, platting and site plan procedures this program is specifically geared to address the development of residential site planning/platting. For more specific rezoning, platting, and site planning information see the City of Pleasant Hill Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations. 
    This program encourages an analytical and conceptual planning and design process. Applicants should use the recommended site analysis required site plan criteria (see City of Pleasant Hill Zoning Ordinance) as a basis in developing a conceptual plan. The site analysis and conceptual plans are extremely useful in pre-application meetings. Probably the most important step in the development process is obtaining correct and clear information in the initial stages of design. As such, applicants are required to meet with staff and the Planning Commission prior to application submittal. This affords the applicant an ability to discuss initial concept plans, necessary approvals, and design and development criteria prior to submitting an application. Table A-1, Residential Lot Area and Density Regulations outlines the minimum lot area (size) allowed in the City's various zoning districts, as well as the maximum density allowed for multifamily dwellings in the R-3 District. Reductions in the minimum lot sizes, or increases in the development density, can be granted with approval of a "P-D" Planned Development Overlay District to reward projects offering amenities and design enhancements. 
Table A-1. Residential Lot Area and Density RegulationsDescriptionLand Use CategoryZoning
ClassificationMinimum Lot
AreaMinimum Lot
Area in a 'P-D'
Overlay DistrictTargeted
Development
Percentage*Single-Family Residential Ag-densityAg10-acresN/A100% of rural areas onlyLarge-lotR-S1-acreN/ALow-Density Residential (One-family). Public uses, such as schools, libraries, churches, fire stations, parks and open space are allowed. R-1 A12,000 sq. ft.10,000 sq. ft.Up to 75% of the City's densityR-110,000 sq. ft.8,400 sq. ft.Other Residential Moderate-Density Residential (One- and Two-family)R-210,000 sq. ft. (one-family)8,400 sq. ft. (one-family)Up to 25% of the City's density14,000 sq. ft. (two-family)12,000 sq. ft. (two-family)High-Density Residential (One- and Two-family, Multifamily, and Apartment House). Public uses and accessory uses subordinate to apartment complexes are allowed. R-314,000 sq. ft. (two-family)12,000 sq. ft. (two-family)Maximum density of 8-units per acre, or approximately 5,445 sq. ft. per unit. (3 units and up) Maximum density of 12-units per acre, or approximately 3,360 sq. ft. per unit. (3 units and up)  
*Targeted Development Percentage indicates the community's desired mix of residential density within the entire City. Each development should strive to provide a mix residential uses that help the community achieve this mix. 
    Conceptual plans, the site analysis, and discussions with staff and the Planning Commission should then be used to generate site plans. Site plan application may then be submitted according to the approved Application Submittal and Review Schedule of the Planning Commission available at the office of the City Clerk in Pleasant Hill City Hall. Each development proposal should be evaluated by the Evaluation Forms in this appendix, and bonus density awarded on that basis. 
[Sec. 4.] - Earning density bonuses through design incentives. 
    Each residential development, whether single-family, two-family or multifamily, entails different site characteristics, impacts, and opportunities. It is the responsibility of the planner, architect, and developer to provide the highest quality neighborhood environment. However, the City recognizes that developing high-quality residential uses comes at an added cost. In order to help offset these added costs and encourage high-quality residential development this document provides for density bonuses through the use of design incentives. This is a mechanism to recognize unique and innovative developments and reward good design. This approach acknowledges the value and potential costs of incorporating certain design elements within a neighborhood, and is subject to "caps" as expressed in minimum lot sizes. 
    Within each residential zoning district a range of densities (dwelling units per acre) are permitted. By meeting the minimum requirements of the residential district, the lowest project density for that district is achieved. By meeting the minimum requirements of the district and applicable design objectives (listed on the following pages) project densities may reach the upper end of the density range. For example, in the R-1 zoning district, single-family development which meets only the minimum requirements of the district should be rewarded only with a maximum density of one- to three-units per acre. Single-family development that meets the intent of the design objectives listed herein should be allowed to reach a maximum density of five units per acre (see Table A-1: Residential Lot Area and Density Regulations). Units-per-acre are expressed as "gross density" which includes rights-of-way and easements for streets and utilities, which-as a rule of thumb-comprise between 25 percent and 30 percent of the land in a typical subdivision. Gross density does not include common areas dedicated to public or private use, such as areas or "reserves" for storm detention and recreation. 
    If higher densities are desired, they may be achieved through the successful incorporation of the design incentives and bonuses listed herein. To earn design incentives, the applicant must apply for each specific incentive as part of the site plan or planned development application. In doing so, the applicant must supply the necessary information to represent the requested design incentives. Once received, the Planning Commission will review each incentive and will approve or deny the requested incentive. When considering each of the incentives, it should be clear that bonuses are not a right. 
    The use of the design requirements, design objectives, and design incentives outlined within this document do not insure that applications will receive the maximum density permitted. Rather, permitted density and density bonuses will also be greatly influenced by considerations such as compliance with the Future Land Use projections, land use compatibility, zoning patterns, environmental impacts, traffic impacts, and other relevant considerations. As a result, the Planning Commission may require proposed densities to be reduced as part of their deliberations during the Site Plan Review process. This may occur even if the application has implemented some or all of the standards set forth in this document. 
    The amount of density bonus awarded for the successful incorporation of a design incentive is entirely at the city's discretion, based on consideration of the development's compliance with these regulations, the Comprehensive Plan, land use compatibility, zoning patterns, environmental impacts, and traffic impacts. It is the intent of the guidelines to require the maximum possible density be achieved through the application of bonus incentives from more than one category of the guidelines. 
[Sec. 5.] - Design objectives and density standards/incentives. 
    The following density and design standards and incentives articulate design principles common to strong neighborhoods. These criteria should be applied throughout the design process and will be applied in review of all residential projects. 
    Design standards and incentives are organized into design objectives, and density incentives. Design requirements represent minimum standards and are codified into other sections of the Zoning Regulations. Design objectives (listed herein) reflect community design expectations and are policies to be followed in project review. Density incentives (listed herein) are design strategies that may be incorporated to achieve higher unit densities. 
[Sec. 6.] - Transitions between large-lot and urban subdivisions. 
    The planning and design of areas adjacent to large-lot residential developments is important in providing an orderly and appropriate transition to higher density developments and differing lot sizes. Transitional development designs should achieve a character and appearance comparable to the large-lot subdivision. Extra sensitivity must be used when locating a subdivision with urban densities adjacent to existing, platted, large-lot residential subdivisions. 
    New developments should provide an orderly and appropriate visual and physical transition between the developments with different densities. Urban residential lots adjacent to large-lot developments should be similar in size, with a gradual reduction in lot sizes as the distance from the large-lot development increases. The developments should be designed to create a seamless visual transition. A strong visual divider between the two types of development is highly discouraged. New lots in the first tier adjacent to an existing, platted, large-lot subdivision should be similar in total area and have a comparable width at the building line. The area differential should be no greater than one-quarter (1/4), but may not be required to exceed a lot area of more than one (1) acre. The width and depth of lots adjacent to existing platted large lots significantly greater than an average of one (1) acre will be reviewed with appropriate standards determined on an individual basis. 
    As lots transition beyond the first tier adjacent to a large-lot subdivision, the area differential of lots in the second tier should be no less than fifty (50) percent of the typical lot area in the adjacent large-lot subdivision. The width of the lot at the building line should continue to remain comparable in appearance. Lots beyond the second tier may transition to smaller lot sizes at higher densities as typically found in conventional urban subdivisions. 
    Existing natural features, tree areas, and/or hedgerows should be preserved and incorporated as buffers whenever possible. Utility easements must not be placed within the drip area of trees to be preserved. Planned zoning districts should be used in all areas adjacent to large-lot subdivisions. 
[Sec. 7.] - Single-family residential density standards. 
    The zoning ordinance references the Comprehensive Plan as a guide for future zoning decisions. The land use categories of the Future Land Use Map are defined in Table 6.2 of the plan and are replicated in Table A-1 to indicate zoning bonus density available to be awarded developments that meet the intent of the Residential Density Standards and Design Guidelines. The bonus densities would be allowed based on Site Plan Review approval by the City, given amenities provided by the developer to meet, good urban design to accommodate: 
Neighborhood Infill; 
Natural features; 
Open space; 
Building orientation; 
Pedestrian circulation; 
Landscaping; 
Grading; 
Architectural design; and 
Appropriate transitions between neighborhoods. 
[Sec. 8.] - Neighborhood infill. 
    Existing residential neighborhoods in Pleasant Hill have strong patterns of form, activity, and character. Infill development should strive to strengthen these characteristics and enhance the positive elements of neighborhoods. For the purpose of these standards, infill residential projects shall be any development proposed within an existing, established residential area. 
A.	Design objectives.
1.	The physical form and pattern of existing, established residential neighborhoods should be maintained to the greatest extent possible. Infill design should incorporate the following principles: 
a.	Building orientation should reflect the predominant neighborhood pattern. The front-to-front, back-to-back relationship of typical residential neighborhoods establishes security, privacy, and a very identifiable streetscape that should be maintained. 
b.	Vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns should be maintained by infill projects.
c.	Neighborhood open space patterns, and side, front, and rear yards should be visually preserved. The spacing of infill units (front, rear, and side yards) should generally reflect the spacing of existing homes in the neighborhood. 
d.	Building heights should be compatible with the average height of homes in the neighborhood. Each project should be particularly sensitive to planning and design of contiguous parcels. 
e.	The streetscape and landscaping should be designed to reflect existing neighborhood forms, rhythm and spacing. 
2.	The visual character of a neighborhood is, in part, formed through residential architecture and various activities, such as parking. Infill development should: 
a.	Provide parking and garages in a matter and scale similar to the surrounding neighborhood. Parking should be screened from view to minimize its negative visual impact. Infill development should maintain consistent placement and orientation of garages as those within the neighborhood. 
b.	The architectural design of infill development should strengthen the existing forms of the neighborhood. Architecturally, project design should represent compatible building form; roof types, slope, and overhand; horizontal and vertical proportions; exterior materials, finishes, and details. 
c.	The style and image of the neighborhood should be reinforced by infill development. Where style and image may be lacking, infill design has more latitude and should strive to achieve a stronger neighborhood image. 
[Sec. 9.] - Natural features. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	The following elements should be used to strengthen the neighborhood recreation areas, internal and external focal points, and provide physical separations and buffers. Natural site features should be used to create neighborhood amenities and may include: 
a.	Floodplains and surface drainage channels;
b.	Bodies of water;
c.	Prominent ridges, bluffs, or valleys; and
d.	Existing vegetation;
e.	Implement stream buffer standards as presented in the Comprehensive Plan.
2.	Every reasonable effort should be made to preserve existing tree cover including tree masses, wind rows, and significant individual trees. These features should be incorporated as neighborhood amenities. 
3.	In most cases, excessive cut and fill, and similar changes to the site's natural topography are not acceptable. Site planning and building orientation should work with natural slopes and grades to create individual neighborhoods. 
B.	Design incentives. 
1.	Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a two percent (2%) increase in density may be approved, if existing significant natural features in unimproved common area are preserved, and stream buffer standards are met if applicable. (Unimproved common area does not include private patios, narrow strips of land around and between units, areas reserved for the exclusive use of an individual tenant, and setbacks at site perimeters.) 
[Sec. 10.] - Open space. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	Sufficient neighborhood open space should be provided to meet active and passive use requirements of the neighborhood. 
a.	Open space is any parcel or area of land or water set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space. Open space may include common, active and landscaped areas, as well as, areas of passive/natural preservation. Unpaved land areas within private or public street rights-of-way are not considered as open space unless such areas are in excess of minimum right-of-way standards. 
b.	Common areas should be centrally located within, and highly accessible to the neighborhood. Such areas should be of adequate size, and designed to reduce impacts of various functions and activities. Common areas may include pools and larger recreational paths. 
c.	"Active" or "landscaped" open space is that part of the net site area of a development that may be improved or set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for recreational use such as swimming pools, play equipment, ball fields, picnic tables, sports courts, etc. Such open space may also include turf/lawn areas, shrubs and trees, walkways, paved terraces, sitting areas and outdoor recreational areas. 
d.	"Passive" or "natural" open space is essentially unimproved land or water area, not individually owned, that is part of the net site area of a development and is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of a development. Such open space may include natural features which are physical characteristics of properties that are not man-made (e.g. soil types, geology, slopes, vegetation, surface water, drainage patterns, aquifers, recharge areas, climate, floodplains, aquatic life, and wildlife). 
2.	In some instances it may be appropriate to use open space (common and semi-common areas) to buffer negative impacts. 
3.	Where possible, open space should be designed to provide linkages with larger community open space systems. 
4.	Pedestrian access to open space should be provided using sidewalks or recreation trails that link sidewalks along area streets with the open space areas. 
5.	Every attempt should be made to minimize the amount of unusable and unassigned open space. 
B.	Density incentives. 
1.	Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a four percent (4%) density increase may be allowed for developments that provide outstanding open space, which may include one of the following: 
a.	The dedication of acceptable public park land which significantly exceeds the City's minimum land area dedication requirements. 
b.	A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the open space area is improved as "active" open space for recreational use by all persons who reside in the subdivision. Such area does not include common areas for storm detention or retention. 
[Sec. 11.] - Pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	Pedestrian access should be designed to provide reasonable linkages of dwelling units to neighborhood facilities such as parks and open space, recreation, services, mail, and neighborhood retail services. 
2.	Pedestrian systems should incorporate landscaping details to increase the visual interest and character of the neighborhood. 
3.	The design of pedestrian facilities should respond to their intended use and meet the following design standards: 
a.	Sidewalks along streets and drives shall be a minimum five (5) feet in width.
b.	Recreational and bike paths shall be a minimum ten (10) feet in width.
4.	The design of streets should respond to topography, intended traffic speed, and views. The following points apply: 
a.	Streets should not fight the topography or ignore local conditions for purposes of maximizing the number of units in a development. Align the street with local conditions such as topography, watercourses, greenways, and existing street systems of neighboring developments. 
b.	Excessively straight and wide streets encourage high speed traffic and do not have a residential scale. Streets should be laid out such that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. However, the street network must consist of interconnecting streets with alternative routes through the neighborhood to diffuse automobile traffic and shorten walking distances. 
c.	As streets serve as primary open space, the views along and within streets are important. Views along residential streets should be clearly defined. Street trees, building orientation and street layout should create a residential scale and character. 
B.	Density incentives. 
1.	Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a four percent (4%) density increase may be allowed for neighborhood circulation systems which provide outstanding design and which may include: 
a.	Pedestrian paths within the development and to the development edge that link with amenities, open spaces, parks, and other destinations. 
b.	Pedestrian path linkages to regional walking path improvements.
[Sec. 12.] - Landscaping. 
    Landscaping should be designed in sufficient form, quantity, and location to reduce to the greatest extent possible negative impacts affecting the site and adjacent properties, and to increase the sense of neighborhood scale, character, and identity. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	Landscaping is an important element of the site plan. A diversity of plant materials including overstory and understory trees (deciduous and coniferous), shrubbery, ground cover and turf should be used. A successful landscaping plan should include: 
a.	Overstory and understory trees which can be used to provide enclosure through the tree canopy. Larger trees can reduce the perceived scale of larger structures. 
b.	Understory trees and shrubbery provide eye-level vegetation. Typically these materials should be used as foundation plantings, which tie the structure to the ground and soften hard edges, create visual focal points to frame desirable views, and provide privacy screens. 
2.	Landscaping should define the neighborhood by providing:
a.	Scale and enclosure of open space (streets, parks, and recreation areas).
b.	Visual separation and screening of interior and exterior private areas.
c.	Gateways and defined entries to the neighborhood.
d.	A minimum of two (2) trees for every single-family lot. The trees shall be no less than two (2)-inch caliper deciduous shade trees, as measured six inches (6") above the ground and conifers, six to eight feet in height; as specified by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
e.	Attractive streets by the use of street trees. Such trees when placed along a street provide shade for streets and sidewalks, improve aesthetics, and generally encourage pedestrian use of sidewalks. Street trees also maintain a ceiling or canopy that further imbues a pedestrian scale to the streetscape. 
f.	Well landscaped perimeters of the development through the installation of a master landscape buffer plan. Well-landscaped areas along a neighborhood's perimeter have a tremendous impact on the perception and impression of resident's experience in their daily lives. 
3.	Environmental and site impacts should be minimized through landscaping by:
a.	Buffering adjacent higher and lower intensity uses such as commercial and single-family residential. 
b.	Addressing regional and micro-climatic factors which include reducing radiant heat and heat gain, providing solar access and wind protection. 
c.	Reducing perceived density through establishing view corridors, providing visual focal points, and softening and enhancing pedestrian paths and open areas. 
4.	Berms and walls, or a combination thereof, can be used with landscaping to increase neighborhood privacy, security and to reduce negative impacts along adjacent major roadways and adjacent properties. Walls should be designed to be compatible with neighborhood materials and forms. 
B.	Density incentives. Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a maximum five percent (5%) density increase may be permitted for site landscaping in addition to the required minimum landscaping standards set forth in The City of Pleasant Hill Zoning Ordinance. 
a.	Installation of street trees, in addition to the required number of trees per single-family lot. Street trees shall be placed a maximum average of forty (40)-feet on-center along the street. The trees shall be no less than (21/2)-inch caliper deciduous shade trees, as measured six (6)-inches above the ground and conifers, six to eight (6-8) feet in height; as specified by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
b.	Installation of a master landscape/buffer plan around the perimeter of the development adjacent to major roadways. Perimeter landscapes shall include a mixture of shade, coniferous/evergreen and ornamental trees to provide a variety of foliage, shade and seasonal interest. Earth berms and shrubbery should be used to accentuate the landscape improvements. 
[Sec. 13.] - Grading. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	Berms, channels, swales, etc., should be designed and graded to be an integral part of the landscape. 
2.	The maximum slope of any grade should not exceed three feet in the horizontal to one foot in the vertical (3':1'). Grade changes in excess of 3':1' should be made by natural or constructed retaining walls. 
3.	Where retaining walls are required, they should be of a material compatible with the primary building architecture. The extensive use of railroad ties and gabion type retaining walls should be avoided. 
4.	Grading should occur in a manner to preserve existing trees, vegetation, and natural topographic features as much as possible. 
[Sec. 14.] - Architectural design. 
    The architecture of residential development is a key element in determining the character and function of a neighborhood. The character of a neighborhood should create a strong feeling of identity. The function of housing should meet the needs of the occupants and be specifically tuned to regional and site features. 
    Building designs that create variety and do not look monotonous if replicated throughout the development are required. Such designs should include the following: 
1.	Side and rear building elevations, garages, carports, and all accessory structures with the same level of design, aesthetic quality, and architectural detailing. 
2.	Porches, varied rooflines, and varied facade depths to create variety and individuality of each dwelling within the building. 
3.	Windows and projecting wall surfaces to break up larger wall surfaces and establish visual interest and to provide visibility of the street and other public spaces to encourage social interaction. 
4.	Garages designed to be integrated with the building design, rather than projecting in front of the habitable living space, so as to avoid monotonous rows of garage doors. Garages shall be oriented so that they do not visually dominate the building facade or the streetscape. 
5.	40 year laminated composition shingles or equivalent.
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	The architectural design of each unit or building should be designed to a residential neighborhood scale. Specifically, architecture should respond to perceived density, building mess, and details. 
a.	A strong sense of neighborhood should be created by reducing the perceived density of a project. 
b.	Use porches, railings, fascia boards, and trim to enhance buildings' character.
c.	Locate and orient garages so they are de-emphasized and do not visually dominate the building facade or the streetscape. Alternative garage orientations may include access from the side or rear of the structure, or setback a minimum two (2)-feet from the front wall of the habitable living space for front-oriented garages. 
d.	Decorative durable building materials on the front facade, and all other facades visible from the street. 
e.	A useable covered front entry porch, with a minimum depth of seven (7) feet and a minimum area of seventy (70) square feet. 
f.	Heavy textured dimensional roofing material.
g.	The sense of scale is another factor in establishing a strong sense of neighborhood. Architecturally, the massing of individual building should reinforce a neighborhood scale providing vertical and horizontal offsets in units. This serves to break up rooflines, define private outdoor areas, allow greater views, light, and air to unit interiors. 
B.	Density incentives. Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a five percent (5%) density increase may be allowed for enhanced architectural design for homes within the development that meets the stated objectives of these regulations, or by including other architectural design elements determined by the Commission to represent enhanced design quality above and beyond the quality that is otherwise found in a typical Pleasant Hill single-family residential subdivision. 
[Sec. 15.] - Neighborhood transitions. 
A.	Design objective. 
    New developments should provide an orderly and appropriate visual and physical transition between the developments with different densities. Urban residential lots adjacent to large-lot developments should be similar in size, with a gradual reduction in lot sizes as the distance from the large-lot development increases. The developments should be designed to create a seamless visual transition. A strong visual divider between the two types of development is highly discouraged. 
    New lots in the first tier adjacent to an existing, platted, large-lot subdivision should be similar in total area and have a comparable width at the building line. The area differential should be no greater than one-quarter (1/4), but may not be required to exceed a lot area of more than one (1) acre. The width and depth of lots adjacent to existing platted large lots significantly greater than an average of one (1) acre will be reviewed with appropriate standards determined on an individual basis. 
    As lots transition beyond the first tier adjacent to a large-lot subdivision, the area differential of lots in the second tier should be no less than fifty (50) percent of the typical lot area in the adjacent large-lot subdivision. The width of the lot at the building line should continue to remain comparable in appearance. Lots beyond the second tier may transition to smaller lot sizes at higher densities as typically found in conventional urban subdivisions. 
B.	Design incentive. Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a five percent (5%) density increase may be allowed for the effective transition of subdivision density from one subdivision development to the next that meets the stated objectives of these regulations. 
CategoryHave Appropriate
Design Objectives
Been MetHave Sufficient
Steps Been Taken
To Achieve
ObjectivesPossible
IncentiveDensity BonusYesNoYesNoNumberTotalNeighborhood InfillN/A--Natural Features2%Open Space4%Pedestrian and Vehicular Circulation4%Landscaping5%GradingN/A--Architectural Design5%Transition between Subdivisions (if applicable)5%Minimum Dwelling SizesN/ATotal Bonus (if applicable) 
[Sec. 16.] - Moderate-density and multifamily residential density standards. 
    The zoning ordinance references the Comprehensive Plan as a guide for future zoning decisions. The land use categories of the Future Land Use Map are defined in Table 6.2 of the plan and are replicated in Table A-1 to indicate zoning bonus density available to be awarded developments that meet the intent of the Residential Density Standards and Design Guidelines. The bonus densities would be allowed based on Site Plan Review approval by the City-which should be conducted at the same time the preliminary plat is considered. The developer should propose amenities to meet good urban design, which is meant to accommodate: 
Neighborhood Infill; 
Natural features; 
Open space; 
Building orientation; 
Vehicle circulation and parking (including access management); 
Pedestrian circulation; 
Landscaping; 
Grading; 
Noise; 
Architectural design; and 
Appropriate subdivision transitions. 
Each development proposal should be evaluated by the Evaluation Forms in this appendix, and bonus density awarded on that basis. 
[Sec. 17.] - Neighborhood infill. 
    Existing residential neighborhoods in Pleasant Hill have strong patterns of form, activity, and character. Infill development should strive to strengthen these characteristics and enhance the positive elements of neighborhoods. For the purpose of these standards, infill residential projects shall be any development proposed within an existing, established residential area. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	The physical form and pattern of existing, established residential neighborhoods should be maintained to the greatest extent possible. Infill design should incorporate the following principles: 
a.	Building orientation should reflect the predominant neighborhood pattern. The front-to-front, back-to-back relationship of typical residential neighborhoods establishes security, privacy, and a very identifiable streetscape that should be maintained. 
b.	Vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns should be maintained by infill projects.
c.	Neighborhood open space patterns, and side, front, and rear yards should be visually preserved. The spacing of infill units (front, rear, and side yards) should generally reflect the spacing of existing homes in the neighborhood. 
d.	Building heights should be compatible with the average height of homes in the neighborhood. Each project should be particularly sensitive to planning and design of contiguous parcels. 
e.	The streetscape and landscaping should be designed to reflect existing neighborhood forms, rhythm and spacing. 
2.	The visual character of a neighborhood is, in part, formed through residential architecture and various activities, such as parking. Infill development should: 
a.	Provide parking in a matter and scale similar to the surrounding neighborhood. Parking should be screened from view to minimize its negative visual impact. 
b.	The architectural design of infill development should strengthen the existing forms of the neighborhood. Architecturally, project design should represent compatible building form; roof types, slope, and overhand; horizontal and vertical proportions; exterior materials, finishes, and details. 
c.	The style and image of the neighborhood should be reinforced by infill development. Where style and image may be lacking, infill design has more latitude and should strive to achieve a stronger neighborhood image. 
[Sec. 18.] - Natural features. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	The following elements should be used to strengthen the neighborhood recreation areas, internal and external focal points, and provide physical separations and buffers. Natural site features should be used to create neighborhood amenities and may include: 
a.	Floodplains and surface drainage channels;
b.	Bodies of water;
c.	Prominent ridges, bluffs, or valleys; and
d.	Existing vegetation.
e.	Implement stream buffer standards as presented in the Comprehensive Plan.
2.	Every reasonable effort should be made to preserve existing tree cover including tree masses, wind rows, and significant individual trees. These features should be incorporated as neighborhood amenities. 
3.	In most cases, excessive cut and fill, and similar changes to the site's natural topography are not acceptable. Site planning and building orientation should work with natural slopes and grades to create individual neighborhoods. 
B.	Design incentives. 
1.	Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a two percent (2%) increase in density may be approved, if existing significant natural features in unimproved common area are preserved; and stream buffer standards are met if applicable. (Unimproved common area does not include private patios, narrow strips of land around and between units, areas reserved for the exclusive use of an individual tenant, and setbacks at site perimeters.) 
[Sec. 19.] - Open space. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	Sufficient neighborhood open space should be provided to meet active and passive use requirements of the neighborhood. 
a.	Open space is any parcel or area of land or water set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space. Open space may include common, active and landscaped areas, as well as, areas of passive/natural preservation. Unpaved land areas within private or public street rights-of-way are not considered as open space unless such areas are in excess of minimum right-of-way standards. 
b.	Common areas should be centrally located within, and highly accessible to the neighborhood. Such areas should be of adequate size, and designed to reduce impacts of various functions and activities. Common areas may include pools and larger recreational paths. 
c.	"Active" or "landscaped" open space is that part of the net site area of a development that may be improved or set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for recreational use such as swimming pools, play equipment, ball fields, picnic tables, sports courts, etc. Such open space may also include turf/lawn areas, shrubs and trees, walkways, paved terraces, sitting areas and outdoor recreational areas. 
d.	"Passive" or "natural" open space is essentially unimproved land or water area, not individually owned, that is part of the net site area of a development and is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of a development. Such open space may include natural features which are physical characteristics of properties that are not man-made (e.g., soil types, geology, slopes, vegetation, surface water, drainage patterns, aquifers, recharge areas, climate, floodplains, aquatic life, and wildlife). 
2.	Pedestrian access should be provided using sidewalks or recreation trails linking sidewalks along the street or private drive with open space areas. 
3.	Private areas should be provided for multifamily dwellings and be screened and enclosed to insure privacy. Private areas typically include yards, balconies and patios. 
4.	In some instances it may be appropriate to use open space (common and semi-common areas) to buffer negative impacts. 
5.	Wherever possible, open space should be designed to provide linkages with larger community open space systems. 
6.	Every attempt should be made to minimize the amount of unusable and unassigned open space surrounding buildings, including small narrow strips in front of and between units. 
B.	Density incentives. 
1.	Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a five percent (5%) density increase may be allowed for the effective use of open space in the development that meets the stated objectives of these regulations. 
a.	The dedication of acceptable public park land which significantly exceeds the City's minimum land area dedication requirements. 
b.	A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the open space area is improved as "active" open space for recreational use by all persons who reside in the subdivision. Such area does not include common areas between buildings, or areas for storm detention or retention. 
[Sec. 20.] - Building and land use variety. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	The siting of individual buildings should help to establish neighborhoods and sub-neighborhood clusters. High quality residential areas include a variety of housing styles and land uses. 
a.	A variety of multifamily housing types, including duplex and multiplex, townhomes, condominiums, and apartment buildings should be intermixed throughout moderate-density and high-density neighborhoods. Such neighborhoods should not consist of only one housing type. 
b.	Individual identity should be reflected through architectural design within each sub-neighborhood. Architectural details should be used consistently throughout the community but should reflect a unique character within each sub-neighborhood. 
2.	Within moderate-density and high-density neighborhoods, buildings should be oriented to: 
a.	Minimize unusable and unassigned open spaces. Open space can be "assigned" through the use of low walls, landscaping, and window and entry orientation. 
b.	Ensure privacy of interior and outdoor areas and provide a sense of neighborhood security.
c.	Define open space including common areas, semi-common areas, and pedestrian areas; i.e., clustering of buildings around a central common area. 
d.	Primary orientation to parking areas should be avoided. Each unit should allow a "front yard" and a "rear yard." 
3.	Site topography should be addressed in building design and orientation. Every attempt should be made to incorporate architectural designs and orientations which work with the site; i.e., buildings which step down with the grade, two- and three-story units, integrated garages, etc. 
B.	Density incentives. No bonus density increase may be allowed for the effective use of building orientation; rather, it should be a site plan review consideration to meet the stated objectives of these regulations. 
[Sec. 21.] - Vehicular circulation and parking. 
    Paved areas, both street and parking, should be designed with the objectives of ensuring (1) safe operation of vehicles within the neighborhood, (2) sufficient and convenient parking of vehicles, (3) protection and sheltering of vehicles, and (4) reduction of negative environmental and visual impacts. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	The organization of the street system of the neighborhood should provide a hierarchy of (a) quiet residential (local) streets feeding into (b) collector which then access (c) arterial streets (see Comprehensive Plan). Collector streets should not feed into lower intensity residential (local) streets. 
2.	The design of streets should respond to topography, intended traffic speed, and views. The following points apply: 
a.	Streets should not fight the topography or ignore local conditions for purposes of maximizing the number of units in a development. Instead, streets should align with local conditions such as topography, watercourses, greenways, and existing street systems of neighboring developments. 
b.	Excessively straight and wide streets encourage high speed traffic and do not have a residential scale. Streets should be laid out such that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. However, the street network must consist of interconnecting streets with alternative routes through the neighborhood to diffuse automobile traffic and shorten walking distances. 
c.	As streets serve as primary open space, the views along and within streets are important. Views along residential streets should be clearly defined. Street trees, building orientation and street layout should create a residential scale and character. 
3.	The design of open parking areas needs to respond to specific site features, functional requirements, and visual/aesthetic considerations. Parking areas should be designed to provide convenient access to the residents they serve. Generally, the parking should be located within 200 feet of the respective dwelling units. The overall layout and configuration of parking areas should be designed to control excessive amounts of paved area. The following points apply: 
a.	Double-loaded parking areas along private streets or drives are generally not acceptable. Every attempt should be made to cluster and separate parking areas from the street. Landscaping, changes in grade, etc. should be used to break up these spaces. 
b.	Clustered parking spaces should not exceed 100 spaces in total. Any area consisting of two double-loaded parking aisles should have a landscaped area separating each aisle. Perimeter areas should be substantially screened from view (see Landscaping). 
4.	The location and design of covered parking dramatically affects the character of the site. It is important to plan for the covered parking requirements at an early stage to avoid structures that detract from the neighborhood image. 
a.	The location and grouping of parking enclosures should compliment the primary building arrangement and design. In clustered parking areas, carports should be used to provide enclosure. The larger the parking area, the greater the need to break it up with carports and landscaping. 
b.	Carports can also be used to reduce negative off-site impacts such as noise. In this manner, carports can form a visual enclosure which increases the security of the neighborhood. 
c.	On sloping sites, carports can be integrated into the site. This can be used to accommodate changes in grade, minimize the visual appearance of the carport, and buffer negative impacts. 
d.	The materials and structural members of the carport should be of a dimension that ties the structure to the ground. Some carports appear spindly due to the proportion of the materials to the height of the structure. 
B.	Density incentives. 
1.	Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a five percent (5%) density increase may be available for parking design and layout which provides additional physical structure, berming, screening, or landscaping to significantly reduce negative impacts. 
2.	Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a one percent (1%) density increase may be provided for the provision of each two percent (2%) of the required parking spaces in the form of attached garages. Attached garages shall reduce the total impermeable surface area and negative visual impact of parking by providing covered parking spaces as an attached structure to the dwelling unit. 
3.	Landscaping (See Landscaping).
[Sec. 22.] - Pedestrian circulation. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	Pedestrian access should be designed to provide reasonable linkages of dwelling units to neighborhood facilities such as recreation, services, mail, and parking. 
2.	Pedestrian systems should incorporate landscaping details to increase the visual interest and character of the neighborhood. 
3.	The design of pedestrian facilities should respond to their intended use and meet the following design standards: 
a.	Sidewalks along streets and drives shall be a minimum for five (5) feet in width.
b.	Interior and private walkways along parking areas shall be a minimum of three (3) unobstructed feet in width. 
c.	Recreational and bike paths shall be a minimum ten (10) feet in width.
d.	The maximum slope of any walkway shall not exceed eight (8) percent.
e.	Exterior steps should have a rise between four and six inches (4" to 6"), and a tread between 13 inches and five feet (13" to 5'). 
B.	Density incentives. 
[1.]	Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a four percent (4%) density increase may be allowed for neighborhood circulation systems which provide outstanding design and which may include: 
a.	Pedestrian paths within the development and to the development edge that link with amenities, open spaces, parks, and other destinations. 
c.	Pedestrian path linkages to regional walking path improvements.
[Sec. 23.] - Landscaping. 
    Landscaping should be designed in sufficient form, quantity, and location to reduce to the greatest extent possible negative impacts affecting the site and adjacent properties, and to increase the sense of neighborhood scale, character, and identity. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	Landscaping is an important element of the site plan. A diversity of plant materials including overstory and understory trees (deciduous and coniferous), shrubbery, ground cover and turf should be used. A successful landscaping plan should include: 
a.	Overstory and understory trees which can be used to provide enclosure through the tree canopy. Larger trees can reduce the perceived scale of larger structures. 
b.	Understory trees and shrubbery provide eye-level vegetation. Typically these materials should be used as foundation plantings, which tie the structure to the ground and soften hard edges, create visual focal points to frame desirable views, and provide privacy screens. 
c.	Ground cover and turf should be used to reduce unnecessary paved area(s) and to control erosion and surface drainage. 
2.	Landscaping should define the neighborhood by providing:
a.	Scale and enclosure of open space (streets, parking areas, and recreation areas).
b.	Separation of neighborhoods and building clusters.
c.	Gateways and defined entries to the neighborhood.
d.	Attractive streets by the use of street trees. Such trees when placed along a street provide shade for streets and sidewalks, improve aesthetics, and generally encourage pedestrian use of sidewalks. Street trees also maintain a ceiling or canopy that further imbues a pedestrian scale to the streetscape. 
e.	Well landscaped perimeters of the development through the installation of a master landscape buffer plan. Well-landscaped areas along a neighborhood's perimeter have a tremendous impact on the perception and impression of resident's experience in their daily lives. 
f.	Visual separation and screening of interior and exterior private areas.
3.	Environmental and site impacts should be minimized through landscaping by:
a.	Buffering adjacent higher and lower intensity uses such as commercial and single-family residential. 
b.	Addressing regional and micro-climatic factors which include reducing radiant heat and heat gain, providing solar access and wind protection. 
c.	Reducing perceived density through establishing view corridors, providing visual focal points, and softening and enhancing pedestrian paths and open areas. 
4.	Berms and walls, or a combination thereof, can be used with landscaping to increase neighborhood privacy, security and to reduce negative impacts along adjacent major roadways and adjacent properties. Walls should be designed to be compatible with neighborhood materials and forms. 
B.	Density incentives. 
1.	Landscaping that exceeds minimum landscape design objectives may include paved area landscaping and site landscaping. 
a.	Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a five percent (5%) density increase may be permitted for paved area landscaping within multifamily developments, which meets the following criteria. 
(1)	Parking areas must be screened from street view to a minimum height of three (3) feet (maximum 6'0") above the highest finished grade of the parking area. Berms, walls, or a suitable combination thereof may be used. 
(2)	A ten (10)-foot minimum landscaped perimeter shall be provided to separate parking areas from any public or private street, and any building. 
(3)	A landscaped area shall separate, on average, each 85 feet or ten contiguous parking spaces in any parking area. The landscaped area shall be a minimum of 150 square feet in area. 
(4)	Double-loaded parking aisles shall be separated by a minimum seven-(7) foot wide landscaped area (except where carports are used). 
(5)	Two trees shall be provided within the parking lot for every required parking space. Credit may be received for other parking lot landscaping required, per the zoning Ordinance. 
b.	Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a maximum five percent (5%) density increase may be permitted for site landscaping in addition to the required minimum landscaping standards set forth in The City of Pleasant Hill Zoning Ordinance. 
(1)	Installation of street trees, in addition to the required number of trees per dwelling unit. Street trees shall be placed a maximum average of forty (40)-feet on-center along the street or private drive. The trees shall be no less than (21/2)-inch caliper deciduous shade trees, as measured six (6)-inches above the ground and conifers, six to eight (6-8) feet in height; as specified by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
(2)	Installation of a master landscape/buffer plan around the perimeter of the development adjacent to major roadways. Perimeter landscapes shall include a mixture of shade, coniferous/evergreen and ornamental trees to provide a variety of foliage, shade and seasonal interest. Earth berms and shrubbery should be used to accentuate the landscape improvements. 
[Sec. 24.] - Grading. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	Berms, channels, swales, etc., should be designed and graded to be an integral part of the landscape. 
2.	The maximum slope of any grade should not exceed three feet in the horizontal to one foot in the vertical (3':1'). Grade changes in excess of 3':1' should be made by natural or constructed retaining walls. 
3.	Where retaining walls are required, they should be of a material compatible with the primary building architecture. The extensive use of railroad ties and gabion type retaining walls should be avoided. 
4.	Buildings should be located above adjacent street and parking areas. The average grade adjacent to a structure should slope away from the structure for a minimum of ten feet (10') at a five percent (5%) slope. 
5.	Grading should occur in a manner to preserve existing trees, vegetation, and natural topographic features as much as possible. 
[Sec. 25.] - Noise. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	Site planning should be sensitive to off-site noise sources affecting the neighborhood. Every attempt should be made to reduce off-site noise impacts such as interstate highways by: 
a.	Increasing the distance from the noise source.
b.	Planting dense overstory and understory landscaping.
c.	Building solid walls between the noise source and receiver.
d.	Constructing berms between the noise source and receiver.
B.	Density incentives. 
1.	Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a two percent (2%) density increase may be allowed for the effective reduction of off-site noise. 
To qualify for incentives, the off-site noise affecting the site should be greater than 75 dBA (typically a thoroughfare or interstate highway). To reduce exterior noise the applicant may use perimeter screening blocking the line of sigh between the noise source and the receiver. Walls, berms, or a combination thereof may be used. If walls are used, they must be of heavy construction and without cracks or breaks. 
[Sec. 26.] - Architectural design. 
    The architecture of residential development is a key element in determining the character and function of a neighborhood. The character of a neighborhood should create a strong feeling of identity. The function of housing should meet the needs of the occupants and be specifically tuned to regional and site features. 
    Building designs that create variety and do not look monotonous if replicated throughout the development are required. Such designs should include the following: 
1.	Side and rear building elevations, garages, carports, and all accessory structures with the same level of design, aesthetic quality, and architectural detailing. 
2.	Porches, varied rooflines, and varied facade depths to create variety and individuality of each dwelling within the building. 
3.	Windows and projecting wall surfaces to break up larger wall surfaces and establish visual interest and to provide visibility of the street and other public spaces to encourage social interaction. 
4.	Protective entry courts, common vestibules, covered breeze ways, or enclosed stair halls to reduce the number of visible doors, unless designed in a row house or townhouse manner oriented toward the street. 
5.	Garages designed to be integrated with the building design or sites so as to avoid long monotonous rows of garage doors and building walls. Locate and orient garages so they are de-emphasized and do not visually dominate the building facade or the streetscape. 
A.	Design objectives. 
1.	The architectural design of housing units should be designed to meet the regional climate and specific site characteristics. The regional climate is temperate and requires protection from wind, rain and snow. Although there is a significant number of heating and cooling days, there are moderate temperatures. As a result, the following architectural elements should be provided. 
a.	Protective entry courts, covered breeze ways, or enclosed stair halls;
b.	Sufficient roof overhang to shield summer sun and still allow winter sun penetration, where applicable; and 
c.	Individual units with adequate outside air ventilation. Double-loaded units typically do not offer adequate natural air flow. 
2.	Specific site characteristics such as topography and amenities should help determine the building footprint. 
a.	Steep sloping sites may require variations of two or three-story units and attached garages. 
b.	Elongated sites with linear amenities may require linear building footprints.
c.	Clustered units are well suited for both flat and sloping sites. Clustering offers greater site efficiency and well-defined common areas. 
d.	The rectangular, double-loaded building configuration should be avoided. These designs typically lack interest and fail to create a strong sense of neighborhood. 
3.	The architectural design of each unit or building should be designed to a residential neighborhood scale. Specifically, architecture should respond to perceived density, building mess, and details. 
a.	A strong sense of neighborhood should be created by reducing the perceived density of a project. Common vestibules and enclosed breeze ways can reduce the number of visible doors. 
b.	The sense of scale is another factor in establishing a strong sense of neighborhood. Architecturally, the massing of individual building should reinforce a neighborhood scale by: 
(1)	Providing vertical and horizontal offsets in units. This serves to break up rooflines, define private outdoor areas, allow greater views, light, and air to unit interiors. If horizontal/vertical offsets are to be used, they should be of sufficient dimension to achieve the desired effect. 
c.	Use porches, railings, fascia boards, and trim to enhance buildings' character.
d.	Locate and orient garages so they are de-emphasized and do not visually dominate the building facade or the streetscape. Alternative garage orientations may include access from the side or rear of the structure, or setback a minimum two (2)-feet from the front wall of the habitable living space for front-oriented garages. 
e.	Decorative building materials on the front facade, and all other facades visible from the street. 
f.	A useable covered front entry porch, with a minimum depth of seven (7) feet and a minimum area of seventy (70) square feet. 
g.	Heavy textured dimensional roofing material.
B.	Density incentives. Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, a fifteen percent (15%) density increase may be allowed for enhanced architectural design in the development that meets the stated objectives of these regulations, or by including other architectural design elements determined by the Commission to represent enhanced design quality above and beyond the quality that is otherwise found in a typical Pleasant Hill moderate-density and multifamily residential development. 
Table A-3 Project Evaluation Form-Moderate-density and Multifamily DevelopmentsCategoryHave Appropriate
Design Objectives
Been MetHave Sufficient
Design Objectives
Been MetAvailable
IncentiveDensity BonusYesNoYesNoNumberTotalNeighborhood InfillN/A--Natural Features2%Open Space5%Building and Land Use VarietyN/A--Vehicular Circulation & Parking Parking Buffers4% Attached Parking1% for each 2%Pedestrian Circulation4%Landscaping  Paved Area5%  Additional Materials5%GradingN/A--Noise2%Architectural Design15%Total Bonus (if applicable) 
Note: The maximum total density bonus shall allow for a reduction in the minimum lot area (or an increase in density for High-density Residential). However, the minimum lot area (or density) shall comply with Table A-1: Residential Lot Area and Density Regulations. 
APPENDIX B. - RESIDENTIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is appendix B to Ordinance No. 1556, Residential Design Guidelines, an appendix to the zoning ordinance, as adopted by the city council on September 27, 2004. The absence of a history note indicates the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, and citation to state statutes in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
[Sec. 1.] - Design guidelines. 
    In the site plan review process, the Residential and Infill Design Criteria will be applied in addition to existing City ordinances and policies. 
[Sec. 2a.] - Residential design guidelines. 
    The intent of these guidelines is to increase the livability and the appearance of single-family and moderate-density and multifamily complexes. The design of such development contributes to the overall image of the city and is a significant component of the community's residential mix. Where multifamily buildings are clustered into complexes rather than integrated into mixed-use "Traditional Neighborhoods", it is expected that such complexes will be designed to establish strong "neighborhood" environments. 
A.	As much as possible, developments should include a mix of housing styles such as townhomes, condominiums, garden apartments, duplexes, and single-family residential units to create a mixed-use community with housing options for residents of all ages and incomes. 
B.	When located adjacent to single-family dwellings, the design and appearance of multifamily dwellings shall incorporate similar massing, height, roof pitch, and architectural features - including front porches; cornice lines; horizontal lines of windows; and architectural embellishments such as shutters, dormers, belvederes, chimneys, etc. to create the appearance of single family dwellings. 
C.	Site designs should create a sense of "neighborhood" which includes:
1.	An internal vehicular circulation system reflective of a single-family residential street system, as opposed to looped systems which may appear disjointed and confusing. 
2.	Buildings sited with front entrances and porches oriented toward streets, drives, and plazas, rather than clustered around parking lots. 
3.	Parking lots located behind buildings or screened from view from internal streets, unless it is deemed appropriate to use a parking lot as a buffer from an arterial street. 
4.	Walkways that connect all buildings with parking areas, play areas, club houses, and sidewalks along adjoining streets, as well as neighboring stores, offices, and transit stops. 
5.	Centrally located plazas, clubhouses, pools, and recreational facilities.
6.	Access to transit stops and neighborhood retail centers, whenever possible.
[Sec. 2b.] - Residential design guidelines. 
    For Residential (single-family residential, moderate-density residential and apartments) development, the following design guidelines are recommended. During Site Plan review of moderate-density and multifamily development proposals and/or in R-2 and R-3 PD reviews, the City should implement the following residential design guidelines. In plat reviews of single-family subdivision, and R-1 PD proposals, the City should refer to the guidelines to the extent applicable. 
[Sec. 3.] - Site planning. 
1.	Respect the street and locate buildings on the site so that they reinforce street frontages. 
2.	Respond to existing and planned adjacent uses.
3.	Respond to traffic, parking, circulation, and safety issues, light and glare, noise, odors, dust control and security. 
4.	Provide as many private, ground level entries to individual units as possible.
5.	Ensure that all building entries are prominent and visible.
6.	Provide each unit with its own visual identity and individual address whenever possible.
7.	Maintain existing setback patterns. Projects should not be located in front or behind the average setback line of the neighborhood. 
8.	Provide pedestrian accessibility to adjacent uses with gates, pedestrian walkways, crossings, etc. 
9.	Locate common facilities - such as community rooms and laundries - centrally and link them to common outdoor space. 
10.	Locate buildings and landscaping to maximize solar access during cooler months and to control it during warmer months. Maximize natural ventilation, sunlight and views for each unit. 
11.	Adopt lot coverage limitations:
[a.]	Limit lot coverage for Moderate-density developments to no more than 50 percent for principal and accessory structures, and 60 percent including off-street parking. 
[b.]	Limit lot coverage for moderate-density and multifamily developments to no more than 40 percent for principal and structures, and 70 percent including off-street parking. 
[Sec. 4.] - Parking - Multifamily. 
1.	Parking does not dominate the site, the building or the street.
2.	Place parking lots at rear or side of the site to allow a majority of dwelling units to front on the street. 
3.	Build multiple small parking lots in lieu of one large lot.
4.	Plant trees and shrubs to soften the overall impact of parking areas and to provide shade and noise reduction. 
5.	Avoid blank walls facing the street on buildings with parking garages.
6.	If blank walls are unavoidable, decorate with artwork, display cases, vines, and good quality durable materials. 
7.	Place parking lot in proximity to dwelling units to allow for casual surveillance and to minimize walking distance. 
8.	Separate bicycle and pedestrian paths from vehicular traffic.
9.	Designate "vehicle free areas" for bicycle and pedestrian safety and enjoyment.
[Sec. 5.] - Public open space-Multifamily. 
1.	Design outdoor open space as "outdoor rooms" and avoid undifferentiated, empty spaces.
2.	Provide public open space for social or cultural activities.
3.	Provide direct access to open space for each dwelling unit while controlling nonresident access. 
4.	Locate public open spaces so that they can be viewed from individual units, preferably from the kitchen, living room or dining room. 
5.	Locate play area(s) centrally and to allow for adult supervision from dwelling units and/or from a central facility such as a laundry. 
6.	Provide lighting from a variety of sources at appropriate intensities and qualities for safety. 
7.	Provide energy-efficient lighting.
[Sec. 6.] - Private open space. 
1.	Provide each household with some form of private open space, including patio, porch, deck, balcony, yard, or shared entry porches or balconies. 
2.	Private open space should be easily accessible - physically and visually - from individual units. 
3.	Screen balconies for privacy but avoid solid walls that prevent residents, particularly small children, from looking out. 
4.	Provide fencing to insure privacy and to help define boundaries between public and private open space. 
[Sec. 7.] - Landscaping 
1.	Design landscaping as an integral part of the project.
2.	Provide a variety of hardy, native plant species - trees, shrubs, groundcover - that are easy to water and maintain. 
3.	Avoid large, empty paved areas.
4.	Provide a variety of seating in landscaped areas.
5.	Include paths to accommodate children, adults, bicycles, skate boards, shopping carts, walkers, pets, furniture moving, etc. 
6.	Provide appropriate lighting to insure that paths are safe.
[Sec. 8.] - Architecture. 
1.	Maintain overall height of structure(s) to that of other buildings in the neighborhood except where the local plan calls for redeveloping the area at much greater height and density. 
2.	Relate first floor to the street and insure that it is consistent with the first floors in neighboring buildings. 
3.	Relate size and bulk of project so that it is consistent with buildings in the immediate neighborhood. 
4.	Eliminate box-like forms with large, unvaried roofs by using a variety of building forms and roof shapes (This may be accomplished by creating clusters of units, variations in height, setback, and roof shape). 
5.	Give the building visual and architectural complexity by varying the height, color, setback, materials, texture, landscaping, trim and roof shape. 
6.	Enhance views and make spaces feel larger by maximizing the number of windows.
7.	Screen ground floor windows from walkways to provide privacy.
8.	Respect the placement and quality of front doors in neighboring homes.
9.	Break up the facade of horizontal buildings into smaller components by utilizing vertical adjacent structures. 
10.	Ensure that rhythm, size and proportion of openings (windows, doors) are similar to good quality buildings in the neighborhood. 
11.	Use porches, stairs, railings, fascia boards, and trim to enhance buildings' character.
12.	Select building materials and color that are complementary to the surrounding area and have high levels of recycled content whenever possible. 
[Sec. 9.] - Moderate-density examples. 

 
Recommended. 
The design creates visual relief from concrete and driveways in duplex and four-plex site plan. Also, interest through the use of varying roof planes, materials. 
Recommended 
Landscaping softens the density. Public and private open space adds to the residential feel. 
Recommended 
Grass and landscaped areas provided separation between drives, and soften the main entrances. These additional pervious surfaces define private space and help create a residential character. Combined with the side yards and rear private areas, density is controlled. 
[Sec. 10.] - Multifamily examples. 
Recommended 
The design of multifamily housing can make high density development more acceptable, such as use of brick and similar materials. Private access to the outdoors makes the housing livable. Undulating facades and use of a variety of architectural details create interest. (Graphic from City of Overland Park, Kansas design guidelines manual) 

Recommended-Elderly Housing 
Design standards for elderly housing can allow for greater density while protecting appearance and use values, such as private open space. 

Not Recommended 
The main entrances are varied, but grass areas are not sufficient. Extensive concrete areas compromise the livability-unless softened by greater side yards and rear yards. 

[Sec. 11.] - Neo-traditional planning guidelines. 
    The following neo-traditional planning guidelines should serve as guidelines when reviewing proposals for new residential development. The purpose is to make varieties of residential density more acceptable in Pleasant Hill in order to diminish local resistance to higher density rezoning requests. They could also be applied to infill residential development; and the second set of standards is geared specifically to infill housing. 
1. Encourage the development of logical, interconnected street grids, and avoid "jigsaw" street systems. 
Interconnected, grid-like street systems allow for a more dispersed traffic pattern because there are multiple routes to move from one place to another within the city. A grid configuration of streets helps to minimize peak hour traffic flows. In addition, these interconnected systems are more comprehensible and, thus, easier for visitors and residents alike to find their way around the city. On the contrary, "jigsaw" street systems, with no apparent repetition or order, can be disorienting and tend to funnel traffic to collector-type roads, even for short distance travel. This situation contributes to unnecessarily heavy traffic on main roads at peak traffic periods. It should be noted that a gridded street pattern does not necessarily require all streets to be straight. The design of the roadway system should work with the land. The basic goal for the city's overall road layout is a system of north-south roads that regularly intersect with east-west roads. 
2. Promote the development of tree-lined streets. 
Pleasant Hill should adopt an ambitious street tree program for new development. Street trees provide shade for streets and sidewalks, improve aesthetics, and generally encourage pedestrian use of sidewalks. Street trees also maintain a ceiling or canopy that further imbues a pedestrian scale to the streetscape. 
3. Require landscaping, primarily through preservation of mature trees and existing vegetation. 
Trees, shrubs, flowers, and other elements of the surrounding environment of a housing area greatly contribute to the quality of life within that area. Shade, wind breaks, beautification, and attraction of songbirds and other wildlife are all benefits of substantial plant communities within housing areas. 
4. Require grass or planting strips between curbs and sidewalks. 
This space provides safety for pedestrians on the sidewalks and creates an area suitable for street-tree plantings. 
5. Encourage front porches and other private areas in multifamily town homes. 
Front porches allow homeowners to comfortably spend more time near the front yard and street. This creates a greater opportunity to know ones neighbors, maintain a casual surveillance of the area, and thereby maintain a safe residential neighborhood. This also reinforces a small-town village ambiance. 
6. Require sidewalks on both sides of public streets. 
One of the most significant elements of pedestrian atmosphere and function is that residents can easily walk to other places within the community. By placing sidewalks and/or bike lanes on each side of all streets, pedestrian use is indicated as a priority in the community because of a prominent, safe, and accessible system. 
7. Promote flexible standards to allow differing setback requirements. 
Encourage more green space within a residential community by providing room for more backyard shade trees, landscaping, and in instances where existing vegetation is nearby, more beneficial wildlife habitat. 
8. Encourage visually appealing, points of beautification within subdivisions. 
The development of points of beautification within new subdivisions can enhance the perception of neighborhood, a characteristic that is important in the development and maintenance of small-town atmosphere. Beautification areas should be encouraged particularly at entrances, but should not encourage the inclusion of subdivision identification monument signs. 
9. Develop fence specifications to control type of fencing used along arterial and collector roads in residential areas. 
Privacy fences prohibit visual access to residential property and make casual surveillance by law enforcement and neighbors more difficult. Therefore, they should be allowed as partial screens around small, private areas, only, not as perimeter fending. Visual surveillance is an important part of creating a safe residential neighborhood environment. 
[Sec. 12.] - Infill housing development guidelines. 
    Without direction from adopted standards, infill development may damage the existing neighborhood fabric. Figure B.1: Inappropriate Infill Housing shows how typical infill housing with little consideration of surrounding development meets the goal of filling a vacant lot, but detracts from rather than complements or enhances the existing character. In this example a moderate sized, single story house (center) is shown in relation to two houses with historical features (ends). Although the infill house has an appropriate orientation and similar scale, the mass, proportion, rooflines, pitch and architectural features are inconsistent with the character of the established neighborhood. 
Figure B.1: Inappropriate Infill Housing 

The infill house (center) has little relation to existing houses. 
With little or no change in the footprint and square footage, a "functional" house can be complementary to the surrounding development and an asset to the neighborhood. Figure B.2: Appropriate Infill Housing shows how additions such as a stoop, dormers, window treatments and a steeper roof pitch can substantially change the character of a house. 
Figure B.2: Appropriate Infill Housing 

With a few additions and no change in square footage, the infill house center blends with existing houses. Massing, proportion, rooflines, pitch and character are similar to surrounding development. 
Additional considerations should include building setbacks, entry features and orientation, garage locations and dominance, landscaping and screening of mechanical equipment. Figure B.3: Inappropriate Infill Lot Development shows common mistakes made by infill development. The lot to the furthest left illustrate show the garage often becomes the dominant feature. This lot also shows how the entry is recessed and shielded from view by the rest of the house, which is inconsistent with the traditional development patterns. Although greatly reduced in dominance, the second lot from the left illustrates a prominent garage with no variation in the front facade. The second lot from the right shows no variation in rooflines and no architectural detailing. Finally, the lot to the furthest right shows an inappropriate setback that disrupts the rhythm of the existing pattern of the block. 
Figure B.3: Inappropriate Infill Lot Development 

Inappropriate infill development disrupts the rhythms and patterns established by the existing development. 
Figure B.4: Appropriate Infill Lot Development shows how simple modifications to site plans can improve infill housing. This figure shows how garages can be located to the rear or side of the lot to be accessed from the street or alley and reduce their dominance. The second lot from the left shows how an attached garage can be recessed to reduce its dominance and provide variation in the front facade. This figure also illustrates how the addition stoops, dormers, porches and variation in rooflines can be used to substantially change appearance without substantially changing the building footprints or square footage. Consistent setbacks and dominant entries as shown below help retain the block's streetscape and rhythm. 
Figure B.4: Appropriate Infill Lot Development 

Appropriate infill development complements and continues the rhythm and patterns of the neighborhood. 
In addition to providing general housing opportunities, infill housing development is recommended to fill the need for smaller single-family housing. Although smaller housing can help fill the need for entry-level housing, development considerations do not have to be put aside. Figure B.5: Sample Plans for 1,000 Square Foot House provides an example of how a house with modest floor plans can be designed to provide traditional character. 
To address infill development, additional consideration should be given through the use infill development guidelines for residential neighborhoods. These guidelines should be promoted to preserve and perpetuate the character of the Pleasant Hill's existing residential development and ensure compatibility between new and existing development. In order to help ensure that guidelines do not hamper development, these guidelines should be promoted by staff when advising developers and builders on infill development projects. 
Figure B.5: Appropriate Infill Housing 

Although modest in size, exterior details such as dormers, a porch and multiple rooflines provide character and emulate traditional development styles. 
To achieve the above objectives, the following guidelines are recommended: 
1. Applicability: Prior to the issuance of a building permit, all infill residential projects shall be reviewed by the City Staff as applicable according to the following standards. For the purpose of these standards, infill residential projects shall be any new development or redevelopment proposed within an existing, established residential area, unless otherwise approved as part of a restricted overlay, historic overlay or planned residential overlay district. 
2. Guidelines: The physical form and pattern of existing, established residential neighborhoods should be maintained to the greatest extent possible. Infill design should incorporate the following principles: 
Building orientation should reflect the predominant neighborhood pattern. The front-to-front, back-to-back relationship of typical residential neighborhoods establishes security, privacy, and a very identifiable streetscape that should be maintained. New construction should address the street in a manner consistent with surrounding buildings. In most cases, building facades should be parallel to the street. Front entries and walkways should address the street directly or in a manner consistent with the adjacent properties. 
Vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns should be maintained by infill projects. 
Neighborhood open space patterns, and side, front, and rear yards should be visually preserved. The spacing of infill units (front, rear, and side yards) should generally reflect the spacing of existing homes in the neighborhood. 
Building heights should be compatible with the average height of homes in the neighborhood. Each project should be particularly sensitive to planning and design of contiguous parcels. 
The streetscape and landscaping should be designed to reflect existing neighborhood forms, rhythm and spacing. 
Architecturally, project design should represent: compatible building form; roof types, slope, and overhang; horizontal and vertical proportions; exterior materials, finishes, and details. Architectural details such as gables, porches, windows, shutters and awnings should be used to create interest in the street facade and minimize monotony. 
The style and image of the neighborhood should be reinforced by infill development. Where an established style and image cannot be established, infill design has more latitude and should strive to achieve a stronger neighborhood image. 
Garages should be visual or physically secondary to the primary residential structure to maintain the residential and pedestrian character of the street. Where possible, garages should be recessed. Garages for corner lot development are encouraged to be located and accessed at the rear or side of the primary structure. In no case should the garage dominate the street facade. 
Heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment should be located at the rear of the structure and screened from adjacent properties. 
APPENDIX C. - MODERATE-DENSITY AND MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is appendix C to Ordinance No. 1556, Moderate-Density and Multifamily Development Procedures, an appendix to the zoning ordinance, as adopted by the city council on September 27, 2004. The absence of a history note indicates the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, and citation to state statutes in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
[Sec. 1.] - Site planning moderate-density and multifamily developments. 
    The following process should be followed in site plan review applications. 
    All moderate- and high-density residential applications are subject to Site Plan Review; as well as applications for redevelopments in the following circumstances: if the redevelopment enlarges the size of the original structure by more than 50 percent in the case of a renovation or alteration. Developments shall be encouraged to implement the objectives of the Future Land Use Plan in preserving natural resources along the stream buffers setbacks, and to foster compatibility among land uses in the City of Pleasant Hill. Site Plan Reviews shall be performed by the City Staff and submitted to the Planning Commission for approval. 
1.	The applicant shall first meet with the Community Development Director and staff to schedule a pre-application conference, receive an explanation of the site plan procedure and its requirements, information on the current zoning, and an application form. 
2.	The applicant shall meet with City Staff and the Planning Commission in a pre-application conference to discuss the site plan requirements and other potential site-specific requirements prior to the submittal of an application. 
3.	The application form shall be completely filled out and returned to the Office of the City Clerk with the appropriate filing fee and any required supplemental information. As a part of the application, ten (10) copies of a site plan conforming to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance shall be submitted. An application shall not be processed until it has been fully completed, the appropriate fee paid, all requested information submitted, and the required pre-application meeting is held. 
4.	Planning Commission - The Planning Commission reviews all moderate-density and multifamily site plan applications. The Planning Commission shall consider the application and the recommendation of staff at the regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission for which the item may be scheduled and shall adjourn and reconvene as is determined necessary. 
5.	The applicant may appeal a site plan review determination to the City Council for approval in the event that an applicant alleges that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Planning Commission in the enforcement of Site Plan Review. The request for review by the City Council shall be accompanied by a complete description of the error(s) alleged. 
[Sec. 2.] - Required supplementary information for zoning and site plan applications. 
    In addition to the necessary information included on plans submitted in support of planned development district zoning applications, the following information shall be required for infill and moderate-density and multifamily rezoning applications or plan approvals, if applicable, as determined by the City Staff. As each site is different, it is advisable to confirm with City Staff the necessary information required. 
A.	Site Section Plans - up to three as designated by the City Staff.
B.	Site Plan Content Requirements: Does the Site Plan comply with or show the following?
YesNo1.Name of the project, address, boundaries, date, north arrow and scale of the plan.____________ ____________ 2.Name and address of the owner of record, developer, and seal of the engineer, architect or landscape architect. ____________ ____________ 3.Name and address of all owners of record of abutting parcels.____________ ____________ 4.All existing lot lines, easements, and rights-of-way. Include area in acres or square feet, abutting land uses and structures. ____________ ____________ 5.The location and use of all existing and proposed buildings and structures within the development, including all dimensions of height and floor area, show all exterior entrances and all anticipated future additions and alterations, and typical elevations and building materials. ____________ ____________ 6.The location of all present and proposed public and private ways, driveways, sidewalks, ramps, curbs and fences. Location type and screening details for all waste disposal containers shall also be shown. ____________ ____________ 7.The location of required parking areas including parking stalls, setbacks and loading and service areas. ____________ ____________ 8.The location, height, intensity, and bulb type (e.g., fluorescent, sodium incandescent) of all external lighting fixtures. The direction of illumination and methods to eliminate glare onto adjoining properties. ____________ ____________ 9.The location, height, size, materials, and design of all proposed signage.____________ ____________ 10.A landscape plan showing all existing open space, trees forest cover and water sources, and all proposed changes to these features including the size and type of plant material. Water sources will include ponds, lakes, brooks, streams, wetlands, flood plains, and drainage retention areas. ____________ ____________ 11.The location of all existing and proposed utility systems including:a.Sewer lines and manholes;____________ ____________ b.Water lines and fire hydrants;____________ ____________ c.Telephone, cable and electrical systems; and____________ ____________ d.Storm drainage system including existing and proposed drain lines, culverts, catch basins, head walls, end walls, hydrants, manholes, and drainage swales. ____________ ____________ 12.Plans to prevent the pollution of surface [water] or groundwater, the erosion of soil both during and after construction, excessive run-off, excessive raising or lowering of the water table, and flooding of other properties, as applicable. ____________ ____________ 13.Existing and proposed topography shown at not more than two-foot contour intervals. All elevation shall refer to United States Geodetic Survey (USGS) datum. No building shall be located in the 100-year flood plain. ____________ ____________ 14.Existing and proposed zoning district boundaries adjacent to the site's perimeter shall be drawn and identified on the plan. ____________ ____________ 15.Traffic flow patterns within the site, entrances and exits, loading and unloading areas, curb cuts on the site and within 100 feet of the site. ____________ ____________ 16.A detailed traffic study for mixed use and multi-tenant developments, or for developments in heavy traffic areas, if required by the Zoning Administrator, to include: a.The projected number of motor vehicle trips to enter or exit the site, estimated for daily and peak hour traffic level. ____________ ____________ b.The projected traffic flow pattern including vehicular movements at all major intersections likely to be affected by the proposed use of the site; and ____________ ____________ c.The impact of this traffic upon existing abutting public and private ways in relation to existing road capacities. Existing and proposed daily and peak hour traffic levels, as well as road capacity levels, shall also be given. ____________ ____________ B. Design Standards:1.Does the proposed development meet bonus standards?____________ ____________  
Appendix A - FRANCHISES 
ARTICLE I. - CABLE TELEVISION 
DIVISION 1. - AEBY-TOMBERLIN 
ORDINANCE NO. 1094 
ORDINANCE GRANTING AEBY-TOMBERLIN, INC., A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT AND OPERATE A COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, MISSOURI, AND GRANTING LIMITED EASEMENT RIGHTS THEREIN. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, MISSOURI: 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is Ordinance No. 1094, granting a cable television franchise to Aeby-Tomberlin, Inc., as adopted by the city council on April 22, 1980. It should be noted that Resolution No. 86-1013, adopted October 14, 1986, consented to an assignment of the franchise to Jones Intercable Inc., and that Resolution No. 87-801 of August 24, 1987 consented to assignment to Jones Intercable Investors, L.P., and that Ord. No. 1117 revised the definition of "grantee" to mean Landmark Cablevision. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Sec. 1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the meaning herein given. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include the singular; and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(a)	"City" is the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri, a city of the State of Missouri.
(b)	"Grantee" is Landmark Cablevision, Associates, a Missouri limited partnership, the party to which the franchise under this ordinance is granted by the council, and the lawful successors and assigns of said party. 
(c)	"Council" is the City Council of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri.
(d)	"Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
(e)	"Cablecasting" is programming carried on a cable system, exclusive of broadcast signals, whether originated by the cable operator or any other party. 
(f)	"Cable communications system" or "system" is any system which receives and amplifies signals broadcast by one or more television and/or radio stations and which transmits programming originated by the system itself or by another party, and distributes such signals and programming by wire, cable, microwave, satellite, or other means to persons who subscribe to such service. 
(g)	"Gross subscriber revenues" shall mean any and all compensation and other consideration in any form paid by a subscriber and received by the franchisee arising from the sale of its monthly service to its subscribers, provided, however, that revenues resulting from installation and connection charges, relocation charges, the sale of tangible personal property, payable revenues and advertising revenues shall not be deemed "gross subscriber revenues" for the purpose of computing any franchise fees pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(h)	"Subscriber" is a recipient of cable television service.
(Ord. No. 1117, § 1, 5-12-1981) 
Sec. 2. - Grant of authority. 
(a)	There is hereby granted by the franchising authority to the grantee, the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places as laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the city poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other cable conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the city of a cable communications system, to be used for the sale and distribution of cable services to the residences of the city. Said broad band cable service shall include, but shall not be limited to the carriage of television and radio signals and any cable casting programming. 
(b)	The grantee shall, at all times during the operation of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power as may be hereafter provided by the franchising authority. 
(c)	The franchise area is for the city limits as presently defined. Cable service shall be made available to the entire franchise area in accordance with the construction timetable contained in section 5[4] of this ordinance. 
Sec. 3. - Duration of franchise; renewal. 
(a)	The duration of the rights, privileges and authorizations hereby granted shall be 15 years from the effective date of this ordinance. 
(b)	This franchise may be renewed or extended by the council upon application of the grantee, in accordance with the then existing rules of the Federal Communications Commission and applicable law. Renewal or extension of the franchise shall be considered in a full public proceeding affording due process, during which the performance of the grantee, and the adequacy of the franchise ordinance will be reviewed. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to require such renewal or extension; however, decision upon such renewal or extension may not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. 
Sec. 4. - Commencement and completion of construction. 
    The grantee must within 150 days from the date it obtains all necessary pole agreements from utility companies commence construction of the system, and have said system operating within 12 months from the commencement of construction. If said system is not in operation within 12 months from the commencement of construction the franchise may be cancelled at the option of the city. 
Sec. 5. - Transfer of control. 
    No transfer of control of the cable system shall take place, whether by forced or voluntary sale, lease, mortgage, assignment, encumbrance, or any other form of disposition, without prior notice to and approval by the council, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit the assignment of the franchise or mortgage of the grantee's property for financing purposes, subject to the rights of the city under this ordinance. Such requisite approval shall not be unreasonably delayed or withheld. 
Sec. 6. - Rates. 
(a)	The initial basic service rates and charges, inclusive of the franchise fee, but exclusive of any federal, state, or local taxes, which may be made by grantee for connections and service rendered by it to the inhabitants of the city shall be as set forth on exhibit A, which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. These rates shall remain in effect for a period of at least two years from the effective date of this ordinance. 
(b)	[The] grantee shall have the right to set subscriber rates and charges for cable television service within the franchise area granted herein provided that at least 60 days prior to the date of anticipated change in basic subscriber rates and charges is to go into effect, grantee must notify the city and file current financial statements certified by a certified public accountant, based on assets and liability allocated by miles of cable plant and the profit and loss statement allocated by the number of basic subscribers. If the council thereafter chooses to hold a public proceeding prior to the date of the anticipated change in basic subscriber rates and charges is to go into effect, a representative of grantee shall be required to appear at said public proceeding on behalf of grantee, in order to answer any inquiries relating to the anticipated increase in basic subscriber rates and charges. If the council chooses to conduct a public proceeding, it shall be expeditious, and the council shall approve the rates proposed, so long as they are fair and reasonable, based upon actual expenses of the grantee, including a fair and reasonable return on the original cost, less depreciation, of the properties devoted to such service. The rates shall go into effect, if not made subject to a public proceeding by the council within 60 days after grantee's notification of the anticipated change. 
(c)	The grantee shall collect no money from the inhabitants of the city until grantee's system is operable. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 1, 5-12-1981) 
Sec. 7. - Payment to the city. 
    For the use of the streets, and other facilities of the city for the operation of the cable communication system and for the supervision thereof, the grantee shall pay to the city an amount equal to three percent of the subscriber from the operations of the cable communications system in the franchise area of the city during the year. Said charge shall be paid quarterly to the city, and shall be adjusted annually based on grantee's year end financial statements submitted by grantee and by a certified public accountant. The city is hereby authorized to investigate the correctness and accuracy of any statement filed pursuant to this ordinance and for that purpose shall have access at all reasonable times to the books, documents, papers, and records for the grantee's system serving the city, upon reasonable notice to grantee. Additionally, grantee shall reimburse the city for its actual and reasonable expenses incurred in the initial granting of this franchise, and during the period of monitoring construction, including and limited to engineering costs, permits, and attorney's fees. Each expense shall be submitted to grantee with an itemized billing. 
Sec. 8. - Broadband communications service. 
    The communications system permitted to be installed and operated hereunder shall: 
1.	Be constructed and operated in conformance with the technical standards, rules and regulations governing cable television service, as promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission. Any amendments of technical standards of the Federal Communications Commission shall be incorporated in this ordinance by specific amendments thereto by the lawful action of the council within one year from the effective date of the amendment. 
2.	Carry on the system all allowable broadcast signals pursuant to the signal carriage rules of the Federal Communications Commission. 
3.	Not include X-rated programming or motion pictures.
Sec. 9. - System construction, maintenance, and procedures. 
(a)	All transmissions and distribution structures, lines, and equipment erected by the grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the said streets. 
(b)	In case of disturbance of any street or paved area the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore such street or paved area in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. 
(c)	If any time during the period of the franchise the city shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, relay, and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense. 
(d)	Any poles or other fixtures placed in or adjacent to any street by the grantee shall be placed in such manner as to comply with all requirements of the city. 
(e)	The grantee shall, at the request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(f)	The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and over hanging streets of the city so as to prevent the branches of the trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee, except that at the option of the city, such trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the expense of the grantee. 
(g)	In all sections of the city where the cables, wire[s], or other like facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the grantee shall place its cables, wires, or other like facilities underground. 
(h)	On expiration of the terms for which the franchise is granted, or upon its termination and cancellation, as provided for herein, the city shall have the right to require the grantee to remove at its own expense all portions of the television [cable] system from all streets within this city. 
(i)	[The] grantee's system, poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected, and maintained so that none of its facilities shall endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or interfere with any improvements the city may deem proper to make, or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements or public property. 
(j)	The construction, operation and maintenance of the system by grantee shall be in full compliance with such portions of the National Building and Electrical Code, and National Electrical Safety Code as may be applicable and as the same may be amended and revised from time to time, and in full compliance with all other applicable rules, regulation and ordinances now in effect or hereinafter adopted by the Federal Communications Commission, the city, or any other agency which may hereafter acquire jurisdiction of the operations of grantee authorized herein. 
(k)	Upon grant of this ordinance to construct and maintain a cable television system in the city, and in furtherance of grantee's execution of contracts with public utility companies or any other owner or lessee of any poles located within or without the city to whatever extent such contract or contracts shall be expedient and of advantage to the grantee for use of poles and posts necessary for proper installation of the system, grantee shall obtain right-of-way permits from appropriate state, county, and federal officials necessary to cross highways or roads under their respective jurisdictions to supply main trunk lines from grantee's receiving antennas, obtain permission from the Federal Aviation Authority to erect and maintain antennas suitable to the needs of the system and its subscribers, and obtain whatever other permits a city, county, state or federal agency may require. 
(l)	[The] grantee shall construct its cable system using material of good and durable quality and all work involved in the construction, installation, maintenance and repair of the cable system shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner. 
(m)	Within 60 days after the effective date of this ordinance, grantee shall file with the Federal Communications Commission such request, petition, or other application as it is then required to secure from said Federal Communications Commission any and all necessary permits, licenses, waiver, or the like as may be necessary to be secured from said Federal Communications Commission to fully comply with the terms of this ordinance. Grantee shall thereafter diligently pursue such application with the Federal Communications Commission and shall do all reasonable things necessary and proper to secure any such permit, license, waiver, approval or the like from it. Grantee shall keep the city advised, from time to time, of the progress of such application. 
(n)	[The] grantee shall file with the city clerk true and accurate maps or plats of all existing and proposed installations. 
Sec. 10. - Indemnification. 
    It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the city and any grantee hereunder that the grantee shall save the city and its agents and employees harmless from and against all claims, damages, losses, and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees sustained by the city on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever arising out of but not limited to copyright infringements and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the cable system authorized herein, whether or not any act of negligence or omission complained of may appear to be authorized, allowed or prohibited by this ordinance and any franchise granted hereunder. 
Sec. 11. - Service standards. 
(a)	The grantee shall put, keep, and maintain all parts of the system in good condition throughout the entire franchise period. 
(b)	Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the grantee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his request. 
(c)	[The] grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible[,] shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum system use. 
(d)	[The] grantee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of persons not served by grantee, nor shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner, the operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the city. 
(e)	The facilities used by grantee shall be capable of distributing color TV signals, and when the signals grantee distributes are received in color they shall be distributed in color where technically feasible. 
(f)	[The] grantee shall produce a picture, whether in black and white or in color, that is undistorted, free from ghost images, and accompanied with proper sound on typical standard production TV sets in good repair, and as good as the state of the art allows. 
(g)	[The] grantee shall transmit signals of adequate strength to produce good pictures with good sound at all outlets without causing cross modulation in the cables or interfering with other electrical or electronic systems. 
Sec. 12. - Complaint procedure. 
(a)	The grantee shall maintain an office in Independence, Missouri, for the purpose of receiving and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and other related matters. Grantee further agrees to establish a local point in Pleasant Hill, Missouri, for payment of subscribers fees; and grantee agrees to review the need for a local office for filing of complaints on a regular basis, with the understanding that future growth of the subscriber base in Pleasant Hill, Missouri, may require the maintenance of such a local office in Pleasant Hill, Missouri. Grantee further agrees to maintain a toll-free telephone number for subscriber's use in making inquiries and complaints 24 hours per day, seven days per week. 
(b)	The grantee shall maintain a repair and maintenance crew capable of responding to subscriber complaints or requests for service within 48 hours after receipt of the complaint or request. No charge shall be made to the subscriber for this service. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 3, 5-12-1981) 
Sec. 13. - Right of revocation. 
(a)	The council shall have the right to rescind or revoke the rights herein granted upon any violation by the grantee of any material obligation or requirement contained herein, or upon the refusal to comply with any reasonable request made by the council concerning compliance with this ordinance, after written notice by the franchising authority to the grantee, and continuation of such violation or refusal to comply by the grantee. 
(b)	Such written notice to the grantee shall specify precisely the manner in which the grantee is in violation, with respect to the franchise. The notice shall specify a reasonable amount of time within which the grantee must correct the violation, but in no event shall the time period be less than 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice to the grantee. 
(c)	In the event the grantee shall be adjudicated bankrupt or placed in receivership, the city may be [by] resolution declare this franchise herein granted to be forfeited and terminated. 
Sec. 14. - Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. 
    [The] grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service[s], services facilities, rules, regulations, employment, or in any other respect, make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any party, nor subject any party to any prejudice or disadvantage, because of sex, race, color, creed, or national origin. 
Sec. 15. - Nonexclusive grant. 
    The permit and grant is not exclusive and nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the city from granting any other like privilege to any other person. 
Sec. 16. - Bonds and insurance. 
(a)	The grantee, shall at all times during the existence of this franchise, carry and require its contractors to carry insurance as follows: 
(1)	Workmen's compensation insurance in accordance with the laws of the State of Missouri, with limits of no less than $100,000.00, which shall cover all operations to be performed by grantee under this ordinance. 
(2)	Public liability insurance with limits in the amount of $500,000.00 for each person; $1,000,000.00 for each accident; and $500,000.00 property damage liability. 
(b)	[The] grantee's workmen's compensation and public liability insurance shall be written by an insurance company with a capital and/or surplus of not less than $3,000,000.00 and grantee agrees to furnish city with certified copies of certificates of insurance of said policies, which shall provide that insurance shall not be cancelled unless ten days' prior written notice shall first be given to the city. 
(c)	All insurance policies and bonds as are required of grantee in this regulatory ordinance shall be written by a company or companies authorized and qualified to do business in the State of Missouri. Certificates of all coverage required shall be promptly filed by grantee with the city. 
Sec. 17. - Service to city and schools. 
    The grantee shall provide service to the city and public school locations within the city, and public libraries within the city, for educational purposes upon request by the city at no cost to it, one terminal junction, to the public school system, or to the public libraries. The grantee shall provide similar services, without cost, to private schools, including parochial or other religious schools, during the term of this franchise. In addition, the grantee shall provide at least one noncommercial access channel for use by the educational and governmental agencies. 
Sec. 18. - Emergency use of facilities. 
    In the case of any emergency or disaster the grantee shall, upon request of the council, make available its facilities to the city for emergency use during the emergency or disaster. 
Sec. 19. - Rights of city. 
(a)	City rules. The right is hereby reserved to the city to adopt, in addition to the provisions herein contained and existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the police power, provided that such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in conflict with the rights herein granted, and shall not be in conflict with the applicable laws of the State of Missouri or the United States. 
(b)	Use of system by city. The city shall have the right, during the life of this ordinance, of maintaining upon the poles or in the underground conduits of grantee within the city limits wire and fixtures necessary for a traffic signal control system and/or a police and fire alarm system. Such wires and fixtures shall be installed and maintained at the sole expense of the city and shall at all times comply with all the reasonable rules and regulations of the company so that there may be a minimum danger of contact or conflict between the wires and fixtures of the company and wires and fixtures used by the city. 
(c)	Liability. The city shall not be liable for any damage occurring to the property of the company caused by employees of the city in the performance of their duties, except for damage caused to the company's facilities by the negligence of the city's employees. The city shall not be liable for the interruption of service by reasonable actions of city employees in the performance of their duties, nor shall the city be held liable for the failure of the company to be able to perform normal services due to acts of God or other factors beyond the control of the city and/or grantee. 
(d)	[Maintenance, right of property.] Nothing in this ordinance shall grant to grantee any right of property in the city-owned property, nor shall the city be compelled to maintain any of its property any longer than, or in any fashion other than in the city's judgment its own business or needs may require. 
(e)	[Inspection.] The city shall have the right to inspect the books, records, maps, plans, and other like materials of grantee's system serving the city, at any time during normal business hours, after reasonable notice. 
(f)	[Supervision of construction, work.] The city shall have the right to supervise all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this franchise and make such inspections as it shall find necessary to insure compliance with the terms of this franchise and other pertinent provisions of law. 
(g)	[Limitation of lawful rights prohibited.] The foregoing shall in no way limit any other lawful rights the city may have in regard to the franchise granted in the ordinance. 
Sec. 20. - Grantee's application incorporated. 
    By its acceptance of the franchise, grantee specifically grants and agrees that its application, if any, is thereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this ordinance. In the event of a conflict between proposed services listed in said application and the provisions of this ordinance, that provision which provides the greatest benefit to the city, in the opinion of the council, shall prevail. Failure to provide services as promised in grantee's application as incorporated herein shall be deemed a breach of this ordinance to which the provisions of section 14[13] of this ordinance are applicable. 
Sec. 21. - Reports. 
(a)	[The] grantee shall file annually with the city clerk not later than 60 days after the end of the grantee's fiscal year, an income statement applicable to its operation during the preceding 12 months period, and a balance sheet. The balance sheet shall be allocated by miles of plant. 
(b)	The grantee shall keep on file with the city clerk a current list of its shareholders owning at least ten percent of the outstanding stock, directors, officers and bondholders. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 21, 5-12-1981) 
Sec. 22. - Severability. 
    If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of the ordinance is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the ordinance, and any portions in conflict are hereby repealed. Provided, however, that in the event that the Federal Communications Commission declares any section or sections invalid, then such section or sections shall be renegotiated by the city and the grantee. 
Sec. 23. - Publication costs. 
    The grantee shall assume the costs of the publication of this ordinance as such publication is required by law. A bill for publication costs shall be presented to the grantee by the appropriate city officials upon the grantee's filing of its acceptance of this ordinance and the said publication costs shall be paid at the time by the grantee. 
Sec. 24. - Effect. 
    This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its acceptance by the grantee. 
Sec. 25. - Publication. 
    In lieu of newspaper publication, the city clerk is directed to post a copy of this ordinance at three public locations within the city for a period of 30 days, to distribute copies of this ordinance upon request at city hall to inform the inhabitants and to notify the council, with entry in the council record, when the posting and notification have been completed. 
    Passed and approved this 22nd day of April, 1980. 
DIVISION 2. - JONES INTERCABLE INVESTORS, L.P. 
ORDINANCE NO. 1357 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, MISSOURI, GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO JONES INTERCABLE INVESTORS, L.P., A COLORADO LIMITED PARTNERSHIP, ITS SUCCESSORS, TRANSFEREES AND ASSIGNS, FOR A TERM OF 15 YEARS, THE RIGHT TO CONSTRUCT, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE A COMMUNITY CABLE TELEVISION AND COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM WITHIN THE CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, MISSOURI, AND TO USE AND OCCUPY THE STREETS, ALLEYS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES OF SAID CITY FOR SUCH PURPOSES, SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANT OF FRANCHISE, AND PROVIDING FOR PAYMENT OF A FRANCHISE FEE TO SAID CITY. 
    WHEREAS, Jones Intercable Investors, L.P. ("Jones") is the lawful successor in interest to that certain franchise originally granted to Aeby-Tomberlin, Inc. by the City Council of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri, by Franchise Agreement dated April 22, 1980; and 
    WHEREAS, an application for renewal of said franchise has been received by the City of Pleasant Hill, a municipal corporation, duly organized and existing under the laws of the State of Missouri, whose principal place of business is located at 203 Paul Street in said City, from Jones to provide community cable television and communications service to subscribers residing within the City of Pleasant Hill; and 
    WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Pleasant Hill finds such service to be desirable and that the same will contribute to the public welfare of the residents of Pleasant Hill; and 
    WHEREAS, such applicant requires and desires to use such public streets, easements and other public ways as exist within Pleasant Hill for the location of cables, wires and other appurtenances necessary to the operation of such a system, it being understood that the applicant must make its own arrangements for the use of private streets and property where required within Pleasant Hill; and 
    WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Pleasant Hill after a full, open and public hearing, upon prior notice and the opportunity to all interested parties to be heard, has reviewed the qualifications of Jones, has determined that Jones is legally qualified, of good moral character and reputation, adequately financed, and technically competent to continue to provide community antennae television services to the residents of Pleasant Hill; and 
    WHEREAS, the City Council of the city finds that Jones is willing to accept the grant of the franchise herein awarded and conferred to it, and that Jones can provide to the residents of Pleasant Hill a useful and desirable service for the benefit of the public welfare of said residents. 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PLEASANT HILL: 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is Ordinance No. 1357, granting a cable television franchise to Jones Intercable Investors, L.P., as adopted by the city council on February 27, 1995. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Sec. 1. - [Short title.] 
    This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Jones Intercable Franchise Ordinance." 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have for the purposes of this ordinance the meanings herein stated; provided that when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words in the plural shall include the singular number, and words in the singular number shall include the plural number; and provided further that the word "shall" is to be construed as mandatory and not simply directive; the word "may" is permissive, and words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning; and provided further that the following definitions shall herein apply: 
A.	"Cable communications system" or "system", also referred to as "cable television system", "cable system," "CATV system", or "Community antenna TV system", shall mean a system of antennae, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides, or other conductors, converters, amplifiers, headend equipment, master controls, earth stations, equipment and facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting, amplifying and distributing audio, video and other forms of electronic or electrical signals within the city. 
B.	"Channel" means a six Megaherts (MHz) frequency band, or its equivalent, which is capable of carrying either one standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or other non-video signals, or some combination of such signals. 
C.	"City" shall mean the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri, a municipal corporation or its successors. 
D.	"Drop" shall mean the cable that connects the computer terminal or the antenna terminal on the subscriber's radio, television set or VCR to the nearest feeder cable of the system. 
E.	"Dwelling Unit" shall mean a permanently located building or portion thereof designed exclusively for separate residential occupancy, including single family, two family, and multiple family buildings, but excluding hotels, motels, and other non-residential uses. 
F.	"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission or a designated representative. 
G.	"Franchise" shall mean the right granted through this ordinance and accepted by the franchisee by which the city authorizes a person to erect, construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle, test, use, repair, and maintain a cable communications system in the city. As provided in section 3 below, any franchise awarded by an agreement in accordance herewith shall be a non-exclusive franchise. 
H.	"Franchise area" shall mean and include all the territory within the present boundary of the City of Pleasant Hill and its future boundaries as they may be expanded through annexation. 
I.	"Franchisee" shall mean Jones Intercable Investors, L.P., a Colorado limited partnership, its agents, employees, lawful successors, transferees or assignees. 
J.	"Franchise fee" means any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by a franchising authority or other government entity on a franchisee solely because of its status as such. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
1.	Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability, including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against franchisee; 
2.	Capital costs which are required by the franchise for educational or governmental access services; 
3.	Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including, but not limited to payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
4.	Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code.
K.	"Governing body" shall mean the present legislative body of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri, or any successor to the legislative powers of said present governing body; 
L.	"Gross revenues" shall mean all cash, credits, property of any kind or nature or other consideration received, directly or indirectly, by the franchisee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents, and any other person or entity in which the franchisee has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in the franchisee, providing the foregoing arise from or are directly attributable to operation of the cable television system in Pleasant Hill, including but not limited to: 
1.	Receipts from all charges for services provided to subscribers of entertainment and non-entertainment services (including leased access fees); 
2.	Receipts from all charges for the insertion of commercial advertisements upon the Cable Television system; 
3.	Receipts from all charges for the leased use of studios, if any;
4.	Receipts from all charges for the installation, connection and reinstatement or equipment necessary for the utilization of the cable television system and the provision of subscriber and other services; and 
Gross revenues shall include at retail price levels, the value of any goods, services, or other remuneration in non-monetary form, received by the franchisee or others described above in consideration for performance by the franchisee or others described above of any service in connection with the cable television system. However, gross revenues shall not include: (1) the franchise fee, (2) any taxes, fees or assessments of any kind which are excluded by section 2(J) or (3) any such retail price value for free use or access provided for governmental or educational purposes under section 25. 
M.	"Leased access" shall mean the use of a fee-for-service basis of the cable television system by business enterprises (whether profit, nonprofit or governmental) to render services to the citizens of the city and shall include without limitation all use pursuant to Section 612 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (47 USC 521 et seq.) except that such fees may not be charged for services provided pursuant to section 25 on a free basis. 
N.	"Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture or organization of any kind and the lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof. 
O.	"Street" shall mean the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, easement, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or driveway now or hereafter existing as such within the franchise area. 
P.	"Subscriber" means any person who legally receives any one or more of the services provided by the cable communications system. 
Sec. 3. - Grant of non-exclusive franchise. 
    The governing body of the city hereby grants unto the franchisee a non-exclusive franchise to construct, erect, operate and maintain a cable communication system within the franchise area, and in so doing to use the streets and public ways of the franchise area, to the extent dedicated to the public, by erecting, installing, constructing, repairing, replacing, reconstructing, maintaining and retaining in, on, under, upon or across any such streets and public ways, such wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system, located only as permitted in section 7 hereof. Franchisee understands it shall be obligated to make its own arrangements for the use of any private streets, ways or easements located in the franchise area. 
    The franchise granted under the terms and conditions contained herein shall be consistent with federal laws and regulations and state general laws and regulations. In the event of conflict between the terms and conditions of the franchise and the terms and conditions on which the city can grant a franchise, the general law and/or statutory requirements shall, without exception, control. 
    The authority hereby granted to conduct a cable communication system within the franchise area and to use and to occupy the streets and ways thereof, to the extent dedicated to the public, does not and shall not be deemed an exclusive right or permission, and the city expressly reserves the right to grant additional, non-exclusive franchises to persons, firms, corporations or other business organizations, to construct, operate and maintain cable communication systems within the franchise area but only on dedicated streets, ways and easements; but no such additional franchise shall be more favorable or less burdensome than this franchise, and no such franchise shall in any way affect or lessen the rights or obligations of the franchisee herein. 
Sec. 4. - Term of franchise. 
    The franchise, privilege, and authority herein granted shall take effect upon filing of acceptance within 30 days by the franchisee and shall continue force and effect for a term of 15 years after the effective date of this franchise. The franchise may be renewed for an additional time period upon the approval of the governing body of the city based upon a reasonable determination that the franchisee has met the terms of the franchise and provided satisfactory service to its customers. In all instances renewals shall be subject to and in compliance with the provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (the "Cable Act"), as amended, as well as state and federal law. The franchisee shall submit its request to renew the franchise at least one year prior to its expiration. 
Sec. 5. - Compliance with FCC and state regulations. 
    The franchisee shall comply with any and all regulations and technical standards promulgated by the FCC or other appropriate federal or state regulatory bodies with regard to its operation in the franchise area and in regard to its conduct under this franchise. The Cable Act and the rules and regulations of the FCC are incorporated into this franchise as of the date of its adoption and any lawful modification resulting from the amendment of the Cable Act and the rules and regulations of the FCC shall be incorporated into this Franchise as of the date such modification becomes obligatory under the Cable Act and the FCC rules and regulations, or in the event no obligatory date is established, within one year of adoption or at the time of franchise renewal, whichever occurs first. 
Sec. 6. - Other authority. 
    This franchise authorizes the operation of a cable communications system and service as provided for herein and does not take the place of any other franchise, license, or permit which might be required by the law. 
Sec. 7. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
(a)	All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment maintained by the franchisee within the franchise area shall be located so as not to cause any unreasonable interference with the proper use of streets and other public ways and places and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any such street or other public ways and places. The system shall be constructed and operated in compliance with city, state, and national construction and electrical codes in effect on the date this ordinance is adopted and shall be kept current with new codes as they are adopted as necessary to maintain the safety of the public. The franchisee shall maintain its wires, cable[s], fixtures and other equipment in such manner that they will not unreasonably interfere with any installation of the city or of a public utility serving the city. 
(b)	In case of disturbance of any street, public way or paved areas as a result of the operation of the franchisee, the franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense, replace and restore such street, public way or paved area to as nearly as possible as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done within a period of ten days. In case any obstruction caused by the franchisee shall remain longer than 30 days after notice to remove it, or in the case of neglect by the franchisee to safeguard any dangerous places, the city may remove such obstruction or safeguard such dangerous places at the expense of the franchisee, unless the franchisee provides the city written evidence that corrective action has been taken or is being actively pursued with reasonable diligence. 
(c)	Any fixtures placed in any street or public way by the franchisee shall be placed in such manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such street or public way. 
(d)	The franchisee, at its expense, shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate along, under or over any street, or public place, or remove from any street, or public place, any of franchisee's equipment or facilities when reasonably required by the city for reasons including but not limited to, traffic conditions, public safety, street excavation, freeway or street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installations of sewers, drains, water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by the city acting in a governmental or in a proprietary capacity. This provision shall be inapplicable to rearrangements of facilities not located in the public right-of-way. 
(e)	The franchisee, upon request by any person holding a validly issued building or moving permit issued by the city, shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its wire to permit the movement of buildings. The expense of such removal, raising or lowering shall be paid by the person requesting same, and the franchisee shall be authorized to require such payment in advance. The franchisee shall be given not less than 48 hours oral or written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(f)	The franchisee shall consult at all times with the city engineer with respect to the use of public rights-of-way, location of transmission facilities and shall provide service maps for the franchised territory. 
(g)	Prior to all excavations of public property, other than excavations necessary to effect emergency repairs, the franchisee or its agents shall first obtain the necessary permit from the office of the city clerk pursuant to the city municipal code. All excavation work shall be completed in accordance with the city's technical specifications. Permits for emergency excavations may be obtained upon completion of repairs. 
(h)	The city shall have the right to request installation, free of charge, upon the poles and within the underground pipes and conduits of the franchisee any wire and fixtures desired by the city to the extent that installation, and maintenance does not reasonably interfere with the franchisee's operations. 
Sec. 8. - Technical and safety standards. 
(a)	The franchisee shall establish, construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all state and federal laws, FCC technical standards (47 CFR 76.605 and amendments thereto), local ordinances, and construction standards, which are all incorporated in this agreement by reference. 
(b)	The franchisee shall establish, construct, install, operate and maintain its system in accordance with the highest standards of the art of cable communications which are technically and financially feasible. The franchisee shall maintain its system facility in a manner which will continue to enable it to add new services and associated equipment as they are developed, available and proved marketable to subscribers. The new services and associated equipment will be added to the system when the franchisee determines, in its sole discretion, that they are technically reliable and adaptable to the system at a cost to the subscriber that is acceptable in the marketplace. 
(c)	Antenna supporting structures shall be designed, painted, lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other applicable state or local codes and regulations. 
(d)	The system shall be subject to FCC standards concerning RF leakage (47 CFR 76.611 et seq.). 
(e)	All of the franchisee's plant and equipment located within the franchise area shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not to endanger or interfere with public improvements the city may undertake, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on city properties. 
(f)	The franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install, maintain and use commonly accepted uses and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. All structures, lines, equipment and connections belonging to the franchisee shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable condition and in good order and repair. 
Sec. 9. - Transactions affecting ownership or control of the franchisee or its facilities. 
(a)	The franchisee shall not sell, assign, or transfer, either in whole or in part, or lease, sublet, or mortgage in any manner the franchise, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable or any right or interest therein, pass to or vest in any person or party without the prior written consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
    No such consent but only written notice shall be necessary (i) for the assignment of the franchise by the franchisee to Jones Intercable, Inc. ("JIC") or any affiliate of JIC, including any limited partnership or partnerships of which JIC or any affiliate of JIC is a general partner, or any joint venture or general partnership or partnerships of which JIC, any affiliate of JIC, or any such limited partnership or partnerships is a constituent partner (hereinafter the "JIC Entities") or (ii) for the granting from time to time by the franchisee or the JIC Entities which may hold the franchise of a security interest in all of its rights, powers and privileges under the franchise and all of its other assets to such lending institution or institutions as may be designated by the franchise or the JIC Entities. 
(b)	The consent or approval of the city council to any transfer of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms be expressly subject to the terms and conditions of this franchise. 
Sec. 10. - Filing with regulatory agencies. 
    The franchisee shall maintain records in a public inspection file as required by FCC regulations (47 CFR 76.305). Such records shall be available for public inspection and copying as required by said regulations. 
Sec. 11. - Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(a)	The franchisee shall at all times during the term of this franchise be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city including all codes, zoning ordinances and subdivision regulations. 
(b)	The right is hereby reserved by the governing body of the city to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained herein and in existing applicable resolutions, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the police power, provided that such regulations shall be reasonable and, insofar as the public interest may permit, shall not be in conflict with the rights herein granted. 
(c)	The city shall have the right to monitor all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this franchise and make such inspections as it shall find necessary to insure compliance with the terms of this franchise and other pertinent provisions of law. The city shall have the right to inspect such maps, plans and other materials of the franchisee, as reasonably required to determine compliance with this franchise. 
(d)	At the expiration of the term for which this franchise is granted or upon its termination and cancellation, as provided for herein, the city shall have the right to require the franchisee to remove at franchisee's expense all portions of the system from all public ways within the franchise area. 
Sec. 12. - Service policies. 
(a)	The franchisee shall provide cable service to any occupant of a dwelling unit who requests service, including all multiple dwelling unit buildings (except those dwelling units to which franchisee cannot obtain access), provided that such dwelling unit can be served with a standard drop of no more than 150 feet. If an occupant of a dwelling unit who requests service cannot be served with a standard drop, the franchisee shall extend the cable system as necessary to provide such service. The franchisee shall bear all costs of any such extension, provided there is a density in the area to be reached by the extension of at least 25 dwelling units per linear mile of cable plant. If there is not a density in the area to be reached by the extension of at least 25 dwelling units per mile, then franchisee shall only be obligated to extend its cable system if the occupant or occupants requesting service agree to bear a portion of the costs of the extension. The cost allocation shall be determined using the following formula: 
C = N/M×25 
C = The proportion of the total extension costs to be borne by the franchisee 
N = The actual number of dwelling units that can be served by the extension (with a standard drop of no more than 150 feet) 
M = The length of the extension, expressed in miles 
For example, if the required extension of the cable system is one mile (M=1.0), and the extension will pass within 150 feet of five dwelling units (N=5), then the franchisee shall bear one-fifth of the costs (five divided by (1.0 × 25)) and those requesting the extension shall bear the remaining costs. 
(b)	In the event continued use of a street or right-of-way is denied for any reasonable reason related to public health, safety or welfare, the franchisee shall make every reasonable effort, subject to subsection (a) above, to provide service over alternate routing. 
(c)	The franchisee shall not, as to service, facilities, rules, regulations or any other respect, take or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person, not subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage, and no person, firm, or corporation in the franchise area shall be arbitrarily refused service. This section shall not prohibit special rates for promotional sales, commercial rate structures, or free connections and service to franchisee employees. 
(d)	Whenever, in any place within the franchise area, all or any part of the electric or other utilities shall be located underground, it shall be the obligation of the franchisee to locate or to cause its property to be located underground within such places, and to comply with all ordinances of the city relating to underground service, unless such requirement is waived by the governing body pursuant to the City Municipal Code. Amplifier boxes and pedestal mounted terminal boxes may be placed above ground if existing technology reasonably requires, but shall be of such size and design and shall be so located as not to be unsightly or unsafe. Where underground construction is required, the franchisee shall have the option of sharing or not sharing in utility trenches. 
(e)	The franchisee shall maintain the system in good condition, render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause during the franchise term. Such interruptions for repair, testing or other valid purposes shall where possible be limited to periods of minimum usage. 
(f)	Upon the request of any private, parochial or public elementary or secondary school or any college or university located in Pleasant Hill, or upon request by the city for one of its municipal or public facilities, franchisee shall furnish a single service drop to such institution or facility free of installation charge and monthly service charge. If the distance between the franchisee's nearest distribution or feeder cable and the requesting institution or facility exceeds 1,000 feet, the franchisee may charge the requestor the reasonable differential expense of providing said drop. 
Sec. 13. - Indemnification of city. 
A.	The franchisee shall, at its sole expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, and in their capacity as such, the officers, agents and employees thereof, against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages including expenses for reasonable legal fees and disbursements assumed by the city: 
(1)	For actual or alleged injury to persons or property, including loss of use of property due to an occurrence, whether or not such property is physically damaged or destroyed, in any way arising out of or through or alleged to arise out of or through the acts or omissions of the franchisee or its officers, agents, employees, or contractors or to which the franchisee's or its officers, agents, employees or contractors acts or omissions in any way contribute; 
(2)	Arising out of or alleged to arise out of any claim for damages for invasion of the right or privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trade mark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any similar other right of any person, firm or corporation; and 
(3)	Arising out of or alleged to arise out of franchisee's failure to comply with the provisions of any statute, regulation or ordinance of the United States, State of Missouri or any local agency applicable to the franchisee in its business. 
B.	The indemnification obligation of the franchisee is conditioned on the following:
(1)	That the franchisee shall be promptly notified in writing by the city of any notice of said claim; 
(2)	That the franchisee shall have the control of the defense of any action on such claim and all negotiations for its settlement or compromise; 
(3)	That should any actions or inaction of the franchisee become, or in the franchisee's opinion be likely to become the subject of any claim or action, the city shall permit the franchisee, at its option and expense, to take such reasonable action as may be necessary in order to avoid or mitigate any such claim; and 
(4)	That the franchisee shall have no liability to the city under the provision of this paragraph with respect to any claim or action brought against the city to the extent said claim or action is based on the actions of the city, its agents and employees. 
Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the parties indemnified and held harmless herein from participating in the defense of any litigation by their own counsel at their own respective expense. Such participation shall not under any circumstances relieve the franchisee from it duty of defense against liability or of paying any judgment entered against any party to the extent required by this section. 
Sec. 14. - Insurance. 
    Franchisee shall procure and maintain for the duration of the franchise insurance against claims for injuries to persons or damages to property which may arise from or in connection with the performance of the work hereunder by the franchisee, its agents, representatives, employees or subcontractors. 
A.	Minimum scope of insurance. Coverage shall be at least as broad as: 
(1)	Insurance services. Offices form number GL0002 (Ed. 1/73) covering Comprehensive General Liability and Insurance Services Office form number GL 0404 covering Broad Form Comprehensive General Liability; or Insurance Services Office Commercial General Liability coverage ("occurrence" form CG 0001). 
(2)	Insurance services. Office form number CA 0001 (Ed. 0180) covering Automobile Liability, code 1 "any auto" and endorsement CA 0025. 
(3)	Worker's compensation insurance, as required by Missouri law and Employers liability insurance. The policy shall include an "All States" endorsement. 
B.	Minimum limits of insurance. Franchisee shall maintain limits no less than: 
(1)	Comprehensive general liability. $1,000,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage. 
(2)	Automobile liability. $1,000,000.00 combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage. 
(3)	Worker's comprehensive and employers liability. Worker's compensation limits as required by Missouri law and Employers liability limits of $100,000.00/$500,000.00. 
C.	Deductibles and self-insured retentions. Any deductibles or self-insured retentions must be declared to the city. 
D.	Other insurance provisions. The policies are to contain, or be endorsed to contain, the following provisions: 
(1)	General liability and automobile liability coverages. 
(a)	The city, its officers, officials, or employees are to be covered as additional insureds as respects: liability arising out of activities performed by or on behalf of the franchisee; products and complete operations of the franchisee; premises owned, leased or used by the franchisee; or automobiles owned, leased, hired or borrowed by the franchisee. The coverage shall contain no special limitations on the scope of such protection afforded to the city, its officers, officials, or employees. 
(b)	The franchisee's insurance coverages shall be primary insurance as respects the city, its officers, officials and employees. Any insurance of self-insurance maintained by the city, its officers, officials or employees shall be excess of the franchisee's insurance and shall not contribute within. 
(c)	Any failure to comply with the reporting provisions of the policies shall not affect coverage provided to the city, its officers, officials or employees. 
(d)	The franchisee's insurance shall apply separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought, except with respect to the limits of the insurer's liability. 
(2)	Worker's compensation and employers liability coverage. The insurer shall agree to waive all rights of subrogation against the city, officers, officials, employees and volunteers for losses arising from work performed by the franchisee for the city. 
(3)	All coverages. Each insurance policy required shall be endorsed to state that coverage shall not be suspended, voided, canceled by either party, reduced in coverage or in limits except, after 30 days' prior written notice has been given to the city. 
E.	Acceptability of insurers. Insurance is to be placed with Missouri admitted insurers with a Bests' rating of no less than A:VII. 
F.	Verifications of coverage. Upon the city's request, the franchisee shall annually file certifications of insurance with the city clerk. The certifications for each insurance policy are to be signed by a person authorized by the insurer to bind coverage on its behalf. The city reserves the right, at any time, to require complete, certified copies of all required policies. To the extent allowed by law, the city and its representatives shall keep all such information confidential. 
G.	Subcontractors. Franchisee shall include all subcontractors as insureds under its policies or shall furnish to the city separate certificates and endorsements for each subcontractor. All coverages for subcontractors shall be subject to all the requirements stated herein. 
Sec. 15. - Performance bond. 
    Upon request, the franchisee shall maintain in favor of the city throughout the term of this franchise a faithful performance bond with a corporate surety licensed by the State of Missouri and approved by the city in the penal sum of $10,000.00 conditioned that the franchisee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of this franchise and that in case of any breach of condition of the bond, the amount thereof shall be recoverable from the principal and surety thereof by the city for all damages proximately resulting from the failure of the franchisee to well and faithfully observe and perform any provisions of this franchise. The requirement to furnish such bond may be waived or reinstated from time to time by the city. 
Sec. 16. - Forfeiture and termination of franchise. 
    In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the city under this franchise or otherwise, the city council reserves the right to forfeit and terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchisee under it in the event of a substantial breach of its terms and conditions; provided, in all instances any such forfeiture or termination shall be subject to the due process provisions of the Cable Act or state or federal law. A substantial breach by the franchisee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(a)	Violation of any material provision of the franchise or any material rule, order, regulation or determination of the council made pursuant to the franchise; 
(b)	Attempt to evade any material provision of the franchise or practice any fraud or deceit upon subscribers or upon the city government; 
(c)	Failure to restore system-wide service after 72 consecutive hours of interrupted service, except when approval of the interruption is obtained from the city council, which approval shall not be unreasonable withheld; or 
(d)	Material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or negotiation of the franchise.
    The above shall not constitute a substantial breach if the violation occurs but it is without fault of the franchisee, or if it occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its direct control such as war, civil disturbance, natural catastrophe and other acts of God, or failure of timely receipt of licenses or easements from utility companies. The franchisee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship nor by misfeasance nor malfeasance of its directors, officers or employees. 
    The city may make a written demand that the franchisee comply with any provision, rule, order, or determination under or pursuant to this franchise. If the violation by the franchisee continues for a period of 60 days following written demand without written evidence that the corrective action has taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the city may consider the issue of terminating the franchise provided that the city shall cause to be served upon the franchisee, at least 30 days prior to the date the city is to consider the issue of termination, a written notice of intent to request termination and the time and place of meeting. Public notice shall be given of the meeting and the issue which the city is to consider. 
    The city council or its duly designated representative shall hear and consider the issue and shall hear any person interested in it, and the city council shall determine in its reasonably exercised discretion whether or not any violation by the franchisee has occurred. 
    If the city council shall determine the violation by the franchisee was the fault of the franchisee and within its control, the council may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of the franchisee shall be forfeited and terminated unless there is compliance within such period as the council may fix, but not be less than ten days, provided that no opportunity for compliance need to be granted for fraud or misrepresentation. 
    The issue of forfeiture and termination shall automatically be placed upon the council agenda the expiration of the time set for it for compliance. The council then may terminate the franchise forthwith upon finding that the franchisee has failed to achieve compliance or may further extend the period at its discretion. 
Sec. 17. - Procedure upon termination. 
    Upon expiration of the franchise, if the franchisee shall not have acquired an extension or renewal thereof and accepted the same, the franchisee may enter upon the streets and public ways of the city for the purpose of removing therefrom any or all of its property and otherwise and in so removing said property the franchisee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it, and shall leave such streets and public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the franchisee's removal of its property. 
Sec. 18. - New developments, performance evaluation, and disputes. 
(a)	The field of cable communications is a relatively new and rapidly changing field which may see many regulatory, technical, financial, marketing and legal changes during the term of this franchise. Therefore, in order to provide for a maximum degree of flexibility in the franchise, and to help achieve a continued advanced and modern system, the city and the franchisee shall hold a scheduled performance evaluation session within 30 days of the third anniversary date of this ordinance, and every three years thereafter, or as may be required by federal or state law. All evaluation meetings shall be open to the public. Either party may notify the other, in writing, at least 60 days in advance, of each of the specified performance evaluation meetings. 
(b)	Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the request of the city or the franchisee. 
(c)	All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with the notice requirements of section 16 above. No newspaper notice shall be required as to any adjourned sessions. The franchisee shall notify subscribers of all scheduled evaluation sessions in writing. At its option, the franchisee may give such notice by announcement on its system. 
(d)	Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation sessions may include, but are not limited to, service, rate structures, access channel administration, institutional use, penalties, free or discounted service, state-of-the-art and applications of new technologies, system performance, services provided, programming offered, customer complaints, privacy, amendments to this ordinance, modifications to the franchise, judicial and FCC rulings, and franchisee or city rules. 
(e)	During a review and evaluation by the city, the franchisee shall fully cooperate with the city and shall provide information and documents as the city may need to reasonably perform its review. 
(f)	If at any time during its review, the city determines that reasonable evidence exists of inadequate system performance, it may require the franchisee to perform mutually agreeable tests and analysis directed toward the suspected inadequacies. The franchisee shall fully cooperate with the city in performing the testing and shall prepare results and a report, if requested, within 30 days after notice. 
(g)	The governing body of the city may, if it deems it advisable, amend this ordinance so as to enable the franchisee, or the governing body through the franchisee, to take advantage of any developments which will afford the franchisee and/or the governing body an opportunity to move efficiently, comprehensively or economically serve the subscribers. This section shall not be construed so as to require the governing body to amend any provision of this ordinance or to require the franchisee to implement services or standards it reasonably deems unmarketable or not economical at the time. 
(h)	Should any disputes arise between the franchisee and the city over any of the terms contained in this ordinance or the performance of their respective obligations, including proceedings under sections 16 and 17, both parties agree to use their respective best efforts to resolve such dispute through good faith discussion. 
Sec. 19. - Subscriber complaints. 
(a)	The franchisee shall have a listed, toll-free telephone number for service calls, and emergency service shall be available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The number shall be made available to subscribers and the general public. Normal service calls shall be handled during regular business hours. The franchisee also shall provide an unlisted telephone number to the city and utility companies to enable the city or utility companies to reach the franchisee in case of emergency on a 24-hour, seven day a week basis. 
(b)	The franchisee shall respond to and resolve subscribers' complaints or requests for service in connection with repairs and maintenance and malfunctions of system facilities. The franchisee shall respond as quickly as possible to complaints and requests, but shall in any case respond within 24 hours. All complaints concerning repairs and maintenance shall be resolved within seven business days, to the extent reasonable. Complaints or requests which may pose a potential health and safety hazard will be responded to immediately. In connection with billing complaints, the franchisee shall respond within seven business days. 
(c)	[Reserved.]
(d)	All subscribers and members of the general public may direct complaints regarding franchisee's service or performance to the city. The city shall ensure that all subscribers and members of the general public have access to public hearings scheduled in conjunction with regular or special evaluation sessions described in section 18. 
(e)	The franchisee shall prepare and file with the city copies of all of its rules and regulations in connection with the handling of subscriber inquiries, requests and complaints. As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the system, the franchisee shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom inquiries or complaints are to be addressed. 
Sec. 20. - Franchise fee. 
    The franchisee, in consideration of the privilege granted under this franchise for the operation of a cable communications system, the use of public rights-of-way, and the expense of regulation pursuant to the franchise incurred by the city, shall pay quarterly to the city, a franchise fee in an amount equal to three percent of the gross revenues. Payment shall be made within 60 days following the end of the quarterly period to which said payment should apply. Each payment shall be accompanied by a statement clearly showing the basis for its computation. Any payment which remains unpaid on its due date shall be delinquent and shall thereafter accrue interest at the maximum legal rate until paid. 
    Upon reasonable notice, the city or its authorized representatives, at its expense, shall have the right to review the pertinent books and records of the franchisee to verify that the franchise fee has been correctly computed and paid. To the extent allowed by law, the city and its representative shall keep all such information confidential. 
Sec. 21. - Subscriber rates. 
    Monthly rates for subscriber service shall be determined by franchisee and shall be uniform throughout the franchise area for each type of service. Subscriber rates for installation shall be determined by franchisee and shall be uniform, except where extraordinary installation procedures are required in order to establish service, in which case franchisee may charge the subscriber the actual cost of materials and labor, plus ten percent. Where a subscriber's service is disconnected for nonpayment of monies due, franchisee is authorized to collect a reconnection fee. 
    The franchisee shall not discriminate in the assessment, levy, charge, imposition or collection of rates on the basis of age, race, creed, color, religion, national origin, sex or marital status. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the reduction or waiving of charges in conjunction with promotional campaigns for the purpose of attracting subscribers or users. 
    The city expressly reserves the right to approve the rates which the franchisee charges its subscribers for basic service and other services if the governing body is permitted to regulate said rates or other services by law after adoption of this ordinance. Said approval and regulation shall only be applied prospectively. 
Sec. 22. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)	From and after the effective date of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street within the franchise area or within or upon any other public property within the franchise area or within or upon any privately owned area within the franchise area which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street of any tentative subdivision of the franchise area, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television or radio signals through a cable communication system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street of property or area has first been obtained, and unless a franchise is in full force and effect. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connections, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductibly or otherwise, in any part of a franchised cable communication system within the franchise area, for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound without payment to the operator of said system. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the franchisee, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. 
Sec. 23. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of section 22 of this ordinance shall be guilty of theft of service and is subject to prosecution as provided by local, state, or federal law. 
Sec. 24. - Service for educational and governmental purposes. 
    Upon request by the city, the franchisee shall provide, under mutually acceptable terms and conditions established by the franchisee and city, access to the system by schools, colleges, and governmental entities for educational and general governmental programming. 
    When requested by the city, use of the system for educational and governmental access shall be made available, without rental, deposits, or any other charge whatsoever to the city, for use under mutually acceptable terms and conditions established by the franchisee and the city in connection with the production or broadcast of educational or governmental access programming cablecast upon the system. The franchisee shall: 
(1)	If facilities exist, allow persons and entities desiring to cablecast educational or governmental access programming to produce programming upon and electronically interface directly with the system so as to effectively cablecast the educational or governmental access programming, or, in the alternative, 
(2)	Establish reasonable rules and procedures, designed to promote the utilization of such educational or governmental access programming as are mutually agreed to by the franchisee and city, whereby the franchisee shall accept and cablecast such educational or governmental access programming upon the system as shall be provided to the franchisee by such persons and entities. 
    The franchisee shall make all reasonable efforts to coordinate the cablecasting of educational or governmental access programming upon the system at the same time and upon the same channel designations as such programming is cablecast upon other cable television systems within the franchise area. 
    Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to limit the authority of the franchisee to make payments in support of the use of educational or governmental access. However, such payments are expressly not a requirement of the franchise granted hereunder and shall in no event be considered in the calculation of franchise fees pursuant to this ordinance. 
    The franchisee shall incorporate into its system the capability which will permit the city, in times of emergency, to override the audio portion of all channels simultaneously. The franchisee shall designate a channel which will be used for emergency cablecast, of both audio and video. The franchisee shall cooperate with the city in the use and operation of the emergency alert override system. 
Sec. 25. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court or regulatory body of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. The governing body of the city hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance and each section, sentence, clause and phrase hereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared illegal, invalid or unconstitutional. The validity of any portion of this ordinance shall not abate, reduce or otherwise affect any consideration or other obligation required of the franchisee; provided, however, that in the event the FCC declares any section invalid, then such section or sections will be renegotiated by the city and franchisee. 
Sec. 26. - Notices. 
    Both the franchisee and city shall at all times keep each other informed as to communications, filings, reports, or proposed actions that would materially affect the operation of the franchise granted herein. All notices, reports or demands required to be given in writing under the franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered personally to any authorized representative of franchisee or city, whichever is appropriate, or when 72 hours have elapsed after it is deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, with registered or certified mail postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the party to which notice is being given, as follows: 
If to franchisee: 
Jones Intercable 
4700 Selsa Road 
P.O. Box 2000 
Independence, Mo. 64055 
Attention: General Manager 
with a copy to: 
Jones Intercable Investors, L.P. 
9697 E. Mineral Ave. 
Englewood, Co. 80112 
Attention: Legal Department 
If to city: 
City of Pleasant Hill 
203 Paul St. 
Pleasant Hill, Mo. 64080 
Attention: City Clerk 
    Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other party given as provided in this section. 
Sec. 27. - Effective date. 
    This ordinance shall take effect and be in force after final passage hereof, publication as may be required by law, and upon filing of acceptance by franchisee. 
PASSED by the City Council this 27th day of Feb., 1995. 
Approved: 
____________ ____________/____________/____________ 
 Sandi Beatty 
____________ ____________/____________/____________ 
 Clerk, Clarence Hall 
____________ ____________/____________/____________ 
 Mayor 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICITY 
BILL NO. 9110-1 ORDINANCE NO. 1290 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING MISSOURI PUBLIC SERVICE, A DIVISION OF UTILICORP UNITED INC., A DELAWARE CORPORATION, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, A FRANCHISE AND THE AUTHORITY TO GENERATE, SUPPLY, SELL, DISTRIBUTE AND FURNISH ELECTRIC POWER AND ENERGY AND GRANTING THE RIGHT TO USE THE STREETS, ALLEYS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES WITHIN THE PRESENT OR FUTURE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, MISSOURI. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, MISSOURI, AS FOLLOWS: 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is Ordinance No. 1290, granting an electric power franchise to Missouri Public Service, as adopted by the city council on October 14, 1991. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Sec. 1. - Franchise granted. 
    The City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri (hereinafter referred to as the "grantor") hereby grants a franchise to Missouri Public Service, a division of UtiliCorp United Inc., a Delaware corporation (hereinafter referred to as the "grantee"), its successors and assigns. The franchise granted and described herein shall be in force for a period of 20 years from the effective date hereof. The grantee is hereby granted the right, permission and authority to construct, operate and maintain all facilities necessary for the production, transmission and distribution of electrical power and energy, for the purpose of carrying on a general power and light business and other operations connected therewith or incident thereto, within the corporate limits of said grantor as the same now exist or may hereafter be extended, including but not limited to the construction, operation and maintenance of electrical facilities, in, along, over, across and under all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes or other public places or thoroughfares and to trim and remove trees upon and overhanging such places within such limits of the grantor. Such facilities shall include poles, transmission lines, distribution lines, anchors, guy wires, cables, conduits, street lighting poles, transformers and all other apparatus and appliances incident thereto. Any pavements, sidewalks or curbing taken up and any and all excavations made shall be done in such a manner as to cause the least reasonable inconvenience to the inhabitants of the grantor and to the general public; and repairs and replacements shall be made by and at the expense of the grantee with all reasonable speed, leaving such properties in as good condition as before. 
Sec. 2. - Rules and regulations. 
    The grantee shall supply electrical service within the present or future corporate limits of the grantor under terms of the grantee's rules and regulations and rate schedules as now or hereafter filed with and approved by the public service commission of the State of Missouri. 
Sec. 3. - Hold harmless. 
    In constructing, operating and maintaining such production, transmission and distribution facilities and related apparatus, the grantee shall hold, save and keep harmless the grantor from any loss, injury or damage to life or property occasioned by reason of the negligence of the grantee or any of its employees. If an event occurs for which grantor claims indemnity from grantee, grantor shall immediately notify grantee of said event. 
Sec. 4. - No exclusive franchise. 
    Franchise rights and privileges granted by this ordinance shall not be construed or interpreted to be exclusive to the grantee. 
Sec. 5. - Transfer of rights and obligations. 
    All rights, privileges and authority hereby granted to the grantee shall inure to the benefit of its successors and assigns, subject to all the terms, provisions and conditions herein contained, and all obligations hereby imposed upon the grantee shall be binding upon its successors and assigns in the same manner. 
Sec. 6. - Acceptance. 
    No right, privilege or authority given or granted by this ordinance shall become effective until accepted by the grantee by written instrument executed and acknowledged by it as a deed is required to be, within 30 days of passage by the governing body. Two copies of the acceptance shall be marked so as to indicate the receipt of such acceptance, and shall be returned to the grantee by the clerk. 
Sec. 7. - Conflicting ordinances. 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 8. - Effective date. 
    This ordinance shall be effective immediately after its final passage and approval by the city council. 
    READ THREE TIMES AND PASSED BY the city council of the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri, the 14th day of October, 1991. 
    APPROVED this 14th day of October, 1991, and EFFECTIVE the 18th day of October, 1991. 
ARTICLE III. - GAS 
ORDINANCE NO.1648 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO MISSOURI GAS ENERGY, A DIVISION OF SOUTHERN UNION COMPANY, A DELAWARE CORPORATION, OPERATING A GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, MISSOURI, ITS SUCCESSORS OR ASSIGNS, A FRANCHISE TO OPERATE A NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION PLANT AND SYSTEM IN SAID CITY AND RELATING THERETO. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, MISSOURI. 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is Ordinance No. 1648, granting a gas distribution system franchise to Missouri Gas Energy Company, as adopted by the city council on January 28, 2008. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Section 1. - [Grant of authority.] 
    That there is hereby granted to Missouri Gas Energy, a division of Southern Union Company, a Delaware Corporation operating a gas distribution system, herein called the Company, its successors and assigns, the rights, privileges and franchise for a period of 20 years from February 28, 2008, to construct, maintain and operate in the present and future streets, alleys, bridges and public places in the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri, herein called city, its gas distribution system as now located, together with the right, privilege and franchise to acquire, construct, maintain and operate therein and thereon such additions and extensions thereto as may be necessary or desirable, all for the purpose of supplying natural gas for all purposes to the inhabitants of said city and consumers in the vicinity thereof, which grant shall be subject to all lawful ordinances of the City of Pleasant Hill now in existence of hereafter enacted which are not inconsistent herewith. Provided, further, that [the] Company shall, upon acceptance of this franchise, be obligated to remove, relocate or adjust as promptly as is practical any of its gas distribution facilities located in or upon the city's streets, alleys, bridges or other public places at no expense to the city when reasonably requested to do so by the city. Such requests made by the city shall be deemed reasonable unless shown to be otherwise by the Company. 
Section 2. - [Rates and charges; operating rules.] 
    All rates established and charges made by Company for gas transported, distributed and sold hereunder shall be subject to valid and lawful orders of the public service commission of the State of Missouri, and other competent authority having jurisdiction in the premises, and the transportation, distribution and sale of gas to consumers shall be governed by the present operating rules, regulations and customs of Company and such rules and regulations as may hereafter be prescribed or approved. 
Section 3. - [Company's duties re service generally.] 
    That in consideration of and as compensation for the right, privilege and franchise hereby granted, the Company, its successors and assigns, shall furnish gas at such pressure and of such quality as shall be designated by lawful orders of the public service commission of said state, if such gas is reasonably procurable; shall furnish to each consumer a recognized standard meter or other instrument for measurement of gas sold or computation of consumer's bills and keep same in repair at its cost, which meter shall at all times be subject to inspection by said city; shall at all times save the city harmless from any and all damages which said city may be liable to pay that may arise from the construction, maintenance and operation by the Company of its plant system or any part thereof; shall limit all excavations of streets, alleys or public places to the necessity of efficient operation and shall not at any one time open or encumber more of any highway or public place than shall be reasonably necessary to enable Company to proceed with advantage in laying or repairing mains or pipes and shall not permit such highway or public place to remain open longer than necessary for the purpose for which it was opened; shall refill all excavations and replace all pavements with like material and leave same in as good condition as when altered or removed; shall perform all work on streets, alleys and public places, under supervision of a representative of said city, if so desired; and shall repay said city all expense to which it has been put in the repair or replacement of streets, highways or pavements in the event such work is done by said city after the neglect or refusal of Company to perform same in a reasonable time. 
Section 4. - [Company to make monthly report to city.] 
    Company shall not later than the first day of each calendar month in each year, make a report to the governing board of the city of its gross receipts from the sale of natural gas for domestic and commercial purposes within the corporate limits of said city for the one-month period ending on the first day of the month next preceding that on which the report is due; and at the time of making such reports, pay into the City treasury a sum equal to five percent of said gross receipts subsequent to the effective date of this franchise. So long as Company shall be required, by any regulatory authority having jurisdiction, to separately state the franchise tax increment of its charges for natural gas service rendered under the franchise hereby granted, the term "gross receipts" as used herein shall not include the separately stated tax increment. Said percentage of Company's gross receipts is hereby levied and assessed as an occupation and license tax (in lieu of all other occupation, license or other revenue taxes or fees)for the privilege of engaging in the business herein recited during the term hereof; and as a further consideration for this franchise, Company agrees to recognize the same as a valid tax and make said payments during such periods. 
Section 5. - [Effective date.] 
    If a majority of the council express their assent to the granting of said franchise, said franchise shall become effective immediately, provided that the Company shall file its written acceptance of said franchise within 30 days from the date said governing body shall have declared the results of said vote. 
    PASSED THIS 28th DAY OF January , 2008. 
____________ ____________/____________/____________ 
 Mayor 
ATTEST: 
____________ ____________/____________/____________ 
 CITY CLERK 
APPROVED THIS 28th DAY OF January , 2008. 
____________ ____________/____________/____________ 
 Mayor 
ARTICLE IV. - TELEPHONE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1261 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO THE UNITED TELEPHONE COMPANY OF MISSOURI A FRANCHISE TO USE THE STREETS, AVENUES, BOULEVARDS, ALLEYS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES IN THE CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, COUNTY OF CASS, STATE OF MISSOURI, TO CONDUCT THE BUSINESS OF INSTALLING, MAINTAINING, MANAGING AND OPERATING A TELEPHONE SYSTEM WITH ALL NECESSARY POLES, WIRE[S], CABLES, FIXTURES AND APPARATUS. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, CASS COUNTY, MISSOURI, AS FOLLOWS: 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is Ordinance No. 1261, granting a telephone system franchise to United Telephone Company of Missouri, as adopted by the city council on February 26, 1990. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
[Sec. 1. - Grant of authority; terms and restrictions.] 
    That the United Telephone Company of Missouri, a corporation organized under the laws of the State of Missouri, with a license to do business in the State of Missouri, its successors and assigns be and they are hereby granted the right, in the City of Pleasant Hill to conduct the business of installing, maintaining, managing and operating a telephone system, to construct and maintain all the necessary poles, wires, cables, pole[s] and wire fixtures, telephone plant, and telephone apparatus of whatsoever nature for the purpose of conducting such business, to erect and maintain such telephone poles with the usual fixtures, and string the same with wire and cable along the streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys and other public places of said City of Pleasant Hill, and to construct or lay and maintain such conduits as grantee, its successors and assigns, may require, under the streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys and other public places, aforesaid, for the purpose of such business, under the following terms and restrictions, to-wit: 
1.	[Term.] The term of this grant shall be for 20 years from this date, subject to all ordinances regulating, taxing and controlling telephone lines of systems, in the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri. 
2.	[Duty to provide service generally.] The grantee, its successors and assigns, shall conduct such telephone business in such a manner as shall be to the benefit of the City of Pleasant Hill and its inhabitants, rendering good telephone service, at reasonable rates as authorized by the Missouri Public Service Commission, or any other state or local government agency charged by law with the power to regulate public utilities. 
3.	[Location of poles, wires and cables.] All poles and overhead wires or cables erected under this ordinance shall be placed, whether on streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys or other public places as not to interfere unnecessarily with the ordinary travel on such streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys or other public places. All poles erected under this ordinance shall be located as not to injure unnecessarily any drains, sewers, catchbasins, or other like public improvements, and said grantee shall forthwith repair any damages so caused to the satisfaction of the government of said city, and in default thereof, said city may repair such damage and charge the cost thereof to, and collect same from said grantee. 
4.	[Poles not to interfere with other public service companies.] The poles of the grantee, its successors and assigns, shall be placed and erected in such a manner as not unreasonable [unreasonably] to interfere with the orderly conduct of the business and the rights of any other public service corporation having a right or franchise to operate its business in said city. 
5.	[Placement of poles and conduit subject to supervision of city.] All work of locating and erecting poles or placing underground conduit, under and by virtue of this ordinance, shall be done under the supervision of the mayor, or his authorized representative. 
6.	[Grantee to hold city harmless.] The grantee shall hold the City of Pleasant Hill free and harmless from all damages arising by reason of any abuse or negligence in said occupancy, for the payment of which said city may have become liable to any person, persons or corporations, by reason of the granting of this ordinance or by reason of the construction of operation of said telephone system, or by reason of said telephone company failing to conform or comply with any of the provisions or requirements of this ordinance. 
7.	[Grantee to move poles, wires, etc., upon notice.] The said telephone company shall remove, raise or adjust its aerial plant after 48 hours' notice by the mayor or another properly authorized city official, for the purpose of permitting the moving of houses, or other structures, along the streets of said city; however, the person or persons for whose benefit such telephone plant is removed, raised or adjusted, shall first secure proper permission from said city for the moving and agree to pay said telephone company for its related costs and damages. If desired, an advance deposit by the mover may be required by the telephone company. 
8.	[Authority to trim trees.] Permission is hereby granted to the telephone company to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places of said city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the telephone company, all the said trimming to be done with the approval of any city official to whom said duties have been or may be delegated. 
9.	[Grantee to enter into agreements for joint usage of poles.] The telephone company shall, whenever feasible, enter into agreements with other public utilities operating within said city for the joint usage of poles. 
10.	[Annual audit.] Grantee hereby agrees to furnish to the City of Pleasant Hill, Missouri, a certified audit of its business accounts on an annual basis. 
11.	[City's right to renegotiate terms of grant.] The City of Pleasant Hill shall have the option to renegotiate the terms of this grant at any time during the term of this grant by giving written notice of such intention to grantee. However, the terms contained herein shall continue to be in full force and effect throughout the term of this grant unless this ordinance be amended or repealed. 
12.	[License tax.] In consideration for rights and privileges herein granted to said telephone company [there] is hereby levied on all telephone companies operating or doing business in the City of Pleasant Hill a license tax in a sum equal to five percent of the gross receipts from such business on and after January 1, 1990, and such payments shall be made twice a year the 15th day of January and July of each year for the period covered during the term of this ordinance. Same shall be in lieu of any general or special license tax, occupation tax, or any other such tax for the period covered during the terms of this ordinance, but shall not exempt telephone companies from the payment of levies on real or personal or any other taxes. 
13.	[Grantee to file acceptance.] Said telephone company shall file its acceptance of this ordinance with the clerk of said city, within 30 days after its passage and approval. 
14.	[Penalties.] Any telephone company violating this ordinance shall, on conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00, and each day's violation of this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. 
15.	[Ordinance No. 1096 repealed.] Ordinance No. 1096 is hereby repealed. 
16.	[Assignment permitted.] This franchise, as well as the rights hereunder, may be assigned by the grantee as well as all succeeding grantees, at their option, and the assigns shall succeed to all the rights, duties and liabilities of the grantee hereunder. 
17.	[Effective date.] This ordinance shall be in full force and effective from and after its passage by the city council and approval by the mayor and its acceptance by said telephone company. 
    Passed and adopted by city council this 26th day of February, 1990. 
Appendix B - FEE SCHEDULE 
SectionDescriptionAmountChapter 2. Administration 2-1(g) Records fees Paper copies  Black and white, 81/2 x 11 inches-Each$0.10  Color, 81/2 x 11 inches-Each$0.20 Clerical costs for photocopying-Per hour$12.00 Research-Per hourActual cost for employee time Police reports-Each$5.00 Uniform citation copies-Each$0.50 Electronic reproductions-Reproduction labor in addition to
actual reproduction costs-Per hour$12.00Chapter 4. Alcoholic Beverages 4-70 The city shall charge the maximum fee allowed as referenced by RSMo 311.22(2)and RSMo 312.140 at a rate of 11/2 times the state fee Chapter 8. Animals 8-65(d) Kennel inspection fees-Each$104.008-91 Spayed and neutered dogs and cats-Annually$6.00Unaltered dogs and cats-Annually$8.008-92 Late and delinquency fee$11.008-93 Duplicate or replacement license fee$3.008-94 License transfer fee$2.008-125 Redeeming or adopting animals from impoundment Boarding charge-Per each 24 hours or fraction thereof of impoundment in addition to actual cost incurred $11.00 Impoundment fee  1st offense$11.00  2nd offense$21.00  3rd and subsequent offenses$32.00Adoption fee$11.00Chapter 10. Businesses and Business Regulations 10-38 Business license fees/taxes-Not less than $25.00 nor more than $2,500.00, as follows: Manufacturers (subject to minimum/maximum above)  Base$25.00  Additional, per each employee working in city limits (excluding one owner)$1.00 All other businesses not specifically and separately listed herein (subject to minimum/maximum above):   Base$25.00  Additional, per each employee working in city limits (excluding one owner)$5.00Fortunetellers, per day$100.00Palm readers, per day$100.00Horoscope viewers, per day$100.0010-78 Cigarette license fee/occupation tax-Per 1,000 cigarettes sold or offered or displayed for sale $2.50Amending license for location changes$1.0010-112 Permit for engaging in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste-Annually $100.00Chapter 18. Environment 18-21(d) Development permit fee-EachTBDChapter 20. Fire Prevention and Protection 20-46 Licenses to sell fireworks, annually$52.0020-83 Blasting permit, original issuance-Valid for 14 days$26.0020-84 Blasting permit, renewal-Each additional 14 days$26.00Chapter 26. Manufactured and Mobile Homes 26-26(1) Manufactured home park license Temporary- Annually$47.0026-82 Special use permit for mobile home parks$156.0026-116 Manufactured or mobile home occupancy permit$47.00Chapter 28. Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions 28-24(b) Nuisance abatement by city-Administrative fee, each removal or correction$47.0028-142 Sound amplifying equipment use permit-Each$0.00Chapter 30. Parks and Recreation 30-21 Facility feesNot for profit use Swimming pool and facilities fees  Daily pass$4.00   Age 2 years and underFree   Age 55 years and over$2.00  Individual season pass$80.00  Family season pass   First five people$160.00   Additional, each person over first five$35.00  Aerobics season pass$80.00  Lap swim and aerobics only   20 punch card$40.00    40 punch card $75.00 Private pool party   Slide rental$25.00   1-25$100.00   26-60 people$130.00   61-100 people$160.00   100+ people$200.00 Memorial building-Individuals  Entire building   Resident$300.00   Nonresident$550.00  Downstairs   Resident$250.00   Nonresident$450.00 Memorial building-Civic group (nonprofit)  Weekend-Entire building   Resident$175.00   Nonresident$300.00  Weekend-Downstairs   Resident$150.00   Nonresident$250.00  Weekday-Entire building   Resident$140.00   Nonresident$230.00  Weekday-Downstairs   Resident$125.00   Nonresident$200.00  Building deposit   Resident$250.00   Nonresident$350.00   Civic group$0.00  Community building-Individuals   Resident$200.00   Nonresident$300.00  Community building-Civic group (nonprofit)   Weekend    Resident$100.00    Nonresident$200.00   Weekday    Resident$30.00    Nonresident$60.00   Per year for regular monthly meetings    Resident$100.00    Nonresident$200.00   Per year for bimonthly meetings    Resident$150.00    Nonresident$300.00  Building deposit   Resident$200.00   Nonresident$300.00   Resident civic groupsExcluded Fairgrounds (Entertainment Pavilion)  Nonprofit, individual gatherings$100.00 per day $200.00 deposit  Arena  Nonprofit, individual gatherings$150.00 per day$200.00 depositUse of facilities for profit-as a multiplier of not for profit use fees above2×Use of more than one fairground facility simultaneously-discount of total fee for both facilities 20%30-47 Shelter rental (resident/nonresident)$21.0030-48 Fishing license Resident$8.00 Nonresident$13.00 Day pass (accompanied by a licensed fisher)$4.0030-52 Duck blind permit Deposit$100.00 Permit fee$50.0030-63 Motorboat operation-Inboard and outboard Boat  Resident$7.00  Nonresident$11.00 Motor  Resident$7.00  Nonresident$11.0030-64 Camping, overnight Primitive, per night$6.00 Electric, per night$11.00Chapter 32. Peddlers and Solicitors 32-55 Peddler/vendor permit, each$16.00Chapter 36. Signs 36-53 Sign permits-Except temporary signsBased on a formula provided by building official based on valuation of the sign36-82 Temporary sign permits-Each Off-premises$52.00 Sale and/or special event$11.00Chapter 38. Solid Waste 38-117 Trash service Residential trash service$16.50 Senior trash service$15.0038-119 Recycling fees Per pickup truck load$6.00 Per trailer load-Up to 7' × 16' trailer$11.00 Mattresses, additional-Each$11.00 Chapter 40. Streets, Sidewalks and other Public Places 40-88 Excavation permit (street cuts) Half street cut$312.00 Full street cut$416.0040-125 Street use Permit-Each$52.00 Police escort$52.00Chapter 48. Utilities 48-26 Water tap fees 3/4-inch tap$1,770.00 Taps over 3/4-inchActual material costs48-36 Hydrant and related special water uses PermitAs determined for each permit Deposit, minimum$240.0048-165 Sewer tap$990.0048-166 Building sewer permit and inspection fee Commercial and residential$21.00 Industrial$37.0048-204 Wastewater contribution permit$26.0048-309 Water/sewer deposit Owner-occupied single-family$100.00 Rental homes or units$150.00 Commercial/industrial$100.0048-310 Water rates 0-1,000 gallons$9.37 Next 29,000 gallons (per 1,000 gallons)$7.99 Over 30,000 gallons (per 1,000 gallons)$6.0048-317 Disconnection and reconnection of water due to nonpayment of utilities$55.0048-329 Meter testing fee, in addition to lab testing fees (includes administrative and labor fees) $105.0048-341(f) Sewer rates-Charged on a per 1,000 gallon rate$5.5448-341(g) Sewer base rate Residential$14.75 Commercial/industrial$17.50Sewer use over base, per each 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof above base
 
Note: The city's 2009 sewer rate increase is being implemented at the rate of $0.18 per month. The rate stated will increase by $0.18 each month until the total rate increase is implemented. $2.9348-341(h) Bulk sewer surcharge Per pound BOD$0.26 Per pound SS$0.11 Chapter 52. Buildings and Building Regulations 52-4 Construction-related fees General building permits  Residential construction   Finished living space-Per square foot$65.00   Garage space-Per square foot$24.00   Unfinished basement space-Per square foot$16.00  Commercial constructionCalculated per formula provided by the building official Other building-related permits  Demolition permit-Each$47.00  Deck construction permit-Each$47.00  Grading permit-Each$105.00  Swimming pool construction permit-Each$47.00  Electrical upgrade permit-Each$47.00  Right-of-way excavation permit-Each$37.00  Plan review fees   Residential    Single-family$32.00    Multifamily-Per dwelling unit$32.00   All other plan review-Each    First $1,000 of job valuation$32.00    Each $1,000 or fraction thereof of job valuation
    over first $1,000$0.10  Plat map copies-Minimum$6.00  NOTE: Larger maps may be assessed additional fees in accordance with
  state law. Rezoning fees  Residential   Initial application$160.00   Revisions-Each$55.00  Commercial and industrial   Initial application$105.00   Revisions-Each$55.00 Special use permits-Each$160.00 Vacations  Easements-Per application$105.00  Street, alley or plat-Each$210.00 Development-related fees  Inspections   Streets-Per linear foot$0.80   Sanitary sewers-Per linear foot$0.30   Storm sewers-Per linear foot$0.30   Water lines-Per linear foot$0.30 Public works fees  Plan revision review after initial review-Each$55.00  Zoning regulations booklet-each$5.00  Subdivision regulations booklet-each$5.00Chapter 56. Subdivision Regulations 56-31 Plat filing fees Preliminary plats-Each  Minimum$105.00  Up to 30 lots$105.00  Each additional lot over 30$1.05 Revised plat-second and all subsequent-Each  Up to 30 lots$55.00  Each additional lot over 30$1.05 Minor plat-Each$105.00 Final plat-Each  Up to 30 lots$105.00  Each additional lot over 30$1.0556-107 Park land donation fee Commercial-Per square foot of land$0.020 ResidentialSee chapter 56, article III formulaChapter 58. Zoning 58-159 Application for zoning amendment$105.0058-193 Application for zoning variance$105.00Note-"TBD" = "To be determined." 
(Ord. No. 1670, § 1, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 1679, § 1, 10-12-2009; Ord. No. 1685, §§ 1, 2, 4-26-2010; Ord. No. 1721, § 1(Att.), 3-25-2013) 
Appendix C - FINES, COURT COSTS AND BONDS 
SectionViolation1st
Offense2nd
OffenseCourt
CostsBond
AmountNontraffic Violations 4-8 Minor in possession with parent unless emancipatedCourtCourt$24.50$200.008-12 Dangerous animal$50.50Court$24.50$200.008-57 Dog at large$30.50$50.50$24.50$100.008-61 Operating unlicensed kennel$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.008-89 Unlicensed animals$30.50$50.50$24.50$100.0012-69 Warrant/contempt of courtCourtCourt$24.50$500.0028-19 Nuisance$50.50$75.50$24.50$200.0028-22 Trash and junk$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0028-61 Abandoned vehicles$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0028-84 Weeds on property$50.50$75.50$24.50$50.5028-103 Possession of drug paraphernaliaCourtCourt$24.50$200.0028-109 Possession of marijuanaCourtCourt$24.50$400.0028-132 Indecent exposureCourtCourt$24.50$200.0028-135 Contributing to the delinquency of a minorCourtCourt$24.50$300.0028-138 
28-140 Unlawful assembly, rioting/refusal to disperseCourtCourt$24.50$200.0028-143 Urinating in public$50.50$75.50$24.50$200.0028-233 TamperingCourtCourt$24.50$200.0028-234 Property damageCourtCourt$24.50$300.0028-235 TrespassCourtCourt$24.50$100.0028-236 Stealing under 100CourtCourt$24.50$200.0028-237 Failure to return leased property$50.50$75.50$24.50$200.0028-238 Receiving stolen propertyCourtCourt$24.50$200.0028-239 Littering$30.50$50.50$24.50$100.0028-243 Negligent burning or explodingCourtCourt$24.50$200.0028-244 Theft or tampering of utility service or equipmentCourtCourt$24.50$200.0028-245 Climbing on railroad cars$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0028-270 
28-273 Loitering/peace disturbance/disorderly conditionCourtCourt$24.50$200.0028-275 HarrassmentCourtCourt$24.50$200.0028-301 AssaultCourtCourt$24.50$200.00Domestic assaultCourtCourt$24.50$400.0028-313 
28-315 Escape from or interfering with duties of officerCourtCourt$24.50$200.0028-317 False reportCourtCourt$24.50$200.0028-319 
28-322 Concealing offense or hindering prosecutionCourtCourt$24.50$200.0028-323 Tampering with witness or victimCourtCourt$24.50$200.0028-337 
28-343 Weapons violationCourtCourt$24.50$400.00Moving Violations 46-2 Driving without valid license$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.00Expired driver's license$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.00Driving while supendedCourtCourt$24.50$200.00Driving while revokedCourtCourt$24.50$400.0046-3 Operating motorcycle without motorcycle qualification$50.50$50.50$24.50$50.0046-4 Allowing unlicensed person to operate vehicle$50.50Court$24.50$200.0046-6 All-terrain vehicle on street or sidewalk$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-8 Seatbelt$10.5046-13 Leaving scene of accidentCourtCourt$24.50$200.0046-15 Expired license plates$30.50$50.50$24.50$100.0046-17No proof of financial responsibility$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-40 Failure to comply with officer$50.50$75.50$24.50$200.0046-140 Failure to obey traffic signal (stop sign barrier, railroad crossing, etc.)$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-141 Railroad crossing$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-175 Careless and imprudent driving (C&I)CourtCourt$24.50$200.0046-176 Driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs (DWI/Alcohol DW/Drugs)CourtCourt$24.50$600.0046-179 Improper use of roadway or street (improper lane)$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-180 Failure to yield emerging from alley, drive, building$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-181 Improper passing - left$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-183 Improper passing - right$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-186 No passing zone$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-187 Following too closely$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-192 Failure to yield to emergency vehicle$30.50$50.50OACA-inn nnFailure to get out of the wayFailure to stop in pursuitCourtCourt$24.50$400.0046-193 No signal - hand$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-194 No signal - mechanical46-195 Keys in parked vehicle on street$25.50$50.50$24.50$100.0046-198 Following within 500 feet of fire apparatus$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-199 Crossing fire hoses$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-200 Driving through funeral procession$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-202 Driving on sidewalk$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-203 Improper backing$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-206 Clinging to moving vehicle$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-229 Improper turn$50.50$75.50$24.50$100.0046-294 Exceeding speed limits Base fee: $30.50 plus court costs  Plus:   1-10 mph over limit, $1.00/mile$100.00   11-20 mph over limit, $2.00/mile$150.00   21-30 mph over limit, $3.00/mile$150.00    30+ mph over limit, court$200.00 Example: 43/25 = 18 miles over $30.50 + $18 + $18 + $24.50 = $91.0046-363 
46-377 Improper parking$10.50$30.50$24.50$50.0046-401 Defective equipment (without proper lights, signals, horn, brakes, mirrors, windshield, windows, speedometer) $30.50$50.50$24.50$50.0046-435 Passing school bus while stopped (stop arm)$30.50$50.50$24.50$100.0046-458 Failure to yield to pedestrian in crosswalk$30.50$50.50$24.50$100.00 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1994 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1994 Code, as updated through May 12, 2002, that are included herein. Sections of the 1994 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1994 Code
SectionSection

this Code1-1 1-1 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-2 1-4-1-11 1-4-1-11 1-12-1-15 1-13-1-16 1-16 1-18 2-1 2-1 2-26, 2-27 2-25, 2-26 2-462-56 2-81-2-8344-20-44-22 2-101-2-1032-174-2-176 2-116-2-119 2-206-2-209 2-131-2-1392-227-2-235 6-1, 6-24-1, 4-2 6-2, 6-34-3 6-4-6-114-4-4-11 6-414-69 6-42-6-474-72-4-77 6-484-70 6-49-6-554-78-4-84 6-664-112 10-1 8-1 10-4-10-178-2-8-15 10-41 8-34 10-42-10-44 8-57-8-59 10-56-10-638-89-8-96 10-86-10-918-121-8-126 10-111-10-116 8-151-8-156 14-1-14-9 52-1-52-9 14-3152-27 14-5152-45 14-7152-71 14-7252-73 14-74, 14-7552-74, 52-75 14-7852-76 14-91-14-9352-98-52-100 14-12652-129 14-13652-159 14-156-14-15940-54-40-57 14-181-14-18652-215-52-220 18-3016-3 22-1-22-1012-1-12-10 22-11, 22-1512-11 22-12-22-1412-12-12-14 22-36-22-4012-33-12-37 22-42-22-5112-38-12-47 22-71-22-7512-68-12-72 22-86-22-9112-103-12-108 26-1, 26-214-1, 14-2 30-26-30-2828-19-28-21 30-30-30-3428-22-28-26 30-46-30-49 28-41-28-44 34-2652-205 34-3620-44, 20-45 38-26-38-3018-19-18-23 38-32 18-24 38-33 18-18 42-26-42-30 22-19-22-23 42-51, 42-5222-50, 22-51 42-54-42-5722-52-22-55 46-26-46-2824-19-24-21 46-2928-302 50-26-50-3626-19-26-29 50-46-50-6026-47-26-61 50-71-50-7626-81-26-86 50-86-50-8926-116-26-119 50-10126-137 54-26-54-3728-60-28-71 54-61-54-6928-101-28-109 54-91-54-10028-132-28-141 54-10128-143 54-111-54-11628-168-28-173 54-126-54-13028-200-28-204 54-151-54-16428-232-28-245 54-186-54-19128-269-28-274 54-19228-301 54-193, 54-19428-275, 28-276 54-216-54-22928-312-28-325 54-251-54-25828-336-28-343 54-281-54-28528-375-28-379 54-301, 54-30228-402, 28-403 54-303, 54-30428-404 54-305, 54-30628-405, 28-406 58-1 30-1 58-26-58-332-116-2-123 58-5630-21 58-96-58-10230-47-30-53 58-104-58-11530-54-30-65 58-11630-46 58-117, 58-11830-66, 30-67 62-26-62-3132-19-32-24 62-41-62-5632-52-32-67 66-1-66-554-1-54-5 66-31-66-3954-29-54-37 66-61-66-6454-63-54-66 74-1-74-538-1-38-5 74-738-6 74-31-74-3538-31-38-35 74-56-74-6038-59-38-63 74-71-74-7810-110-10-117 74-101-74-10338-85-38-87 74-126, 74-12738-117, 38-118 74-12838-120 78-140-1 78-26, 78-2740-22, 40-23 78-2840-25 78-51-78-5340-88-40-90 78-86-78-9340-125-40-132 82-26-82-2842-58-42-60 82-52-82-5410-21-10-23 82-55-82-6210-26-10-33 82-65-82-7410-34-10-43 82-86-82-9310-75-10-82 82-9410-1 82-9610-83 82-102-82-11042-19-42-27 82-131-82-13348-295-48-297 86-1-86-1046-1-46-10 86-13-86-1846-11-46-16 86-36-86-4646-40-46-50 86-56-86-6246-74-46-80 86-76-86-8046-104-46-108 86-82-86-8546-109-46-112 86-106-86-12146-138-46-153 86-141-86-17446-175-46-208 86-17646-209 86-186-86-19146-229-46-234 86-201-86-20446-262-46-265 86-216-86-21846-294-46-296 86-231-86-24046-326-46-335 86-24146-337 86-261-86-27546-363-46-377 86-296-86-30546-400-46-409 86-326-86-33046-432-46-436 86-351-86-35946-456-46-464 90-1-90-748-1-48-7 90-31-90-4548-24-48-38 90-56-90-6048-50-48-54 90-81-90-9548-71-48-85 90-106-90-11548-97-48-106 90-126-90-13348-126-48-133 90-146-90-15548-165-48-174 90-166-90-17348-202-48-209 90-186-90-19748-227-48-238 90-211-90-21448-271-48-274 90-236, 90-23748-308, 48-309 90-240-90-24948-310-48-319 90-26148-327 90-263-90-26648-328-48-331 90-281-90-28648-338-48-343 94-26-94-3328-82-28-89 app. B, § 100.2-
app. B, § 100.1556-1-56-14 app. B, § 400.156-33 app. B, § 401.1-
app. B, § 401.1656-34-56-49 app. B, § 402.156-50 app. B, § 402.556-54 app. B, § 403.1-
App. B, § 403.656-55-56-60 app. B, § 404.1-
App. B, § 404.656-61-56-66 app. B, § 405.2-
App. B, § 405.1256-67-56-77 app. B, § 500.1-
App. B, § 500.1056-100-56-109 app. B, § 600.1, 
App. B, § 600.256-132, 56-133 app. C, § II, 
App. C, § III58-31, 58-32 app. C, § IV58-1 app. C, § V58-146 app. C, § VI, 
App. C, § VII58-33, 58-34 app. C, § VIII, 
App. C, § IX58-36, 58-37 app. C, § IX-A58-38 app. C, § X58-40 app. C, § X-A58-41 app. C, § XI-
App. C, § XV58-42-58-46 app. C, § XVI-
App. C, § XXV58-147-58-156 app. C, § XXVI-
App. C, § XXIX58-158-58-161 app. C, § XXX-
App. C, § XXXIII58-191-58-194 app. C, § XXXIV58-5 app. C, § XXXV, 
App. C, § XXXVI58-2, 58-3 app. C, § XXXVII(HA)58-74 app. C, § XXXVII(HA)158-73 app. C, § XXXVII(HB)58-75 app. C, § XXXVII(HD)58-78 app. C, § XXXVII(HE)58-82 app. C, § XXXVII(HF)58-79 app. C, § XXXVII(HH)58-85 app. C, § XXXVII(HI)58-87  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1994 Code, as updated through May 12, 2002, that are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1994 Code, as supplemented. This table may contain ordinances that precede May 12, 2002, but that were never included in the 1994 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since May 12, 2002, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance
NumberDateSectionSection
this Code76 1- 4-188128-342 38910- 6-191421-18 39010- 6-1914128-132 426 5- 1-1917128-245 441 2- 4-1918140-23 240-25 48711- 6-1923146-197 659 7- 6-1943514-1 738 7-14-19492-176 790 9-20-19551, 22-116, 2-117 4-62-118-2-120 7, 82-122, 2-123 930 6-17-196540-88-40-90 942 8-20-1966art. 1, § 1,52-1, 52-2 art. 1, § 2art. 1, § 3(A)-(D)52-4 art. 1, § 3(E)52-6 art. 1, § 3(N),52-7, 52-8 art. I, § 3(O)art. 3, § 252-3 944 9- 5-1967154-29 254-1 2-554-30-54-33 6, 754-63, 54-64 854-35 954-65 1054-34 1154-66 13, 1454-36, 54-37 15-1854-2-54-5 94611-21-1967146-376 246-234 994 6- 5-1972110-22 210-21 310-23 4, 510-41, 10-42 6-1210-27-10-33 15-2110-34-10-40 2210-26 2310-43 997 9-12-197212-174 1005 8-14-197328-314 101110- 8-19744(7)16-3 1014 1-13-1976128-102 1017 3- 9-19761-31-13 1019A 4-13-1976art. I, § A46-1 art. II, § I46-49 art. II, § A,46-74, 46-75 art. II, § Bart. II, § C46-42, 46-43 46-46 46-77 art. II, § D46-47 art. II, § D-46-78-46-80 art. II, § Fart. II, § G46-50 art. II, § H46-48 art. III, § I46-12 art. III, § A46-41 art. III, § B46-40 art. III, § C46-188 art. III, § D46-190 art. III, § E46-189 art. III, § F,46-191, 46-192 art. III, § Gart. III, § H46-11 art. III, § H(c)46-13 art. IV, § I46-147 art. IV, § A-46-138-46-140 art. IV, § Cart. IV, § D-46-142-46-146 art. IV, § Hart. IV, § J-46-148-46-153 art. IV, § Oart. V, § A-46-229-46-233 art. V, § Eart. VI, § A46-262 art. VI, § B46-265 art. VI, § C46-264 art. VI, § D46-263 art. VII, § I46-202 art. VII, § A46-2 art. VII, § B,46-4, 46-5 art. VII, § Cart. VII, § D-46-198-46-200 art. VII, § Fart. VII, § H(b)46-200, 46-201 art. VII, § J46-208 art. VII, § K-46-203-46-205 art. VII, § Mart. VII, § N46-14 art. VII, § O46-206 art. VII, § Q46-207 art. VIII, § I46-178 art. VIII, § A46-456 art. VIII, § B-46-458-46-464 art. VIII, § Hart. VIII, § J46-176 art. IX, § A46-363 46-375 art. IX, § B-46-364-46-366 art. IX, § Dart. X, § I46-374 art. X, § B-46-367-46-372 art. X, § Gart. X, § G46-373 art. XI, § A,46-294, 46-295 art. XI, § Bart. XII, § I46-333 art. XII, § A-46-326-46-332 art. XII, § Gart. XII, § H46-180 art. XII, § J46-141 art. XIII, § A-46-104-46-107 art. XIII, § Dart. XIV, § I46-186 art. XIV, § A46-175 art. XIV, § E46-179 art. XIV, § F46-181 46-184, 46-185 art. XIV, § G46-183 art. XIV, § J46-187 art. XIV, § K46-457 art. XIV, §§ K, L46-193, 46-194 art. XIV, § M,46-195, 46-196 art. XIV, § Nart. XV, § I28-68 art. XV, § A-28-60-28-67 art. XV, § Hart. XV, § J-28-69-28-71 art. XV, § Lart. XV, § M46-400 art. XV, § M(i)46-409 art. XV, § M(a)-46-401-46-408 art. XV, § M(h)art. XVI, § A46-76 art. XVI, § B,46-44, 46-45 art. XVI, § Csched. VI46-296 46-334, 46-335 46-337 1028 8-10-197628-338  3-17-1977(Ord.)58-159 1044 6-14-197732-174 1045 7-12-1977142-59 442-59 1046 8- 9-19771-352-215-52-217 552-218 7, 852-219, 52-220 1048 8- 9-19771-328-82-28-84 4(a)28-85 4(b)28-87 528-86 6, 728-88, 28-89 105311-22-19771-646-376 1065 9-12-1978B28-271, 28-272 1066 9-12-1978A28-338 1064-A 9-12-19781(B)52-73 2, 352-74, 52-75 4(C), 4(D)52-99, 52-100 4(F)52-76 106710-10-1978112-1 1(A)12-2 1(B), 1(C)12-33, 12-34 1(D)12-36 1(E)12-35 1(F)12-3 1(H)12-38 212-37 312-39 4-612-4-12-6 712-14 8-1112-40-12-43 12-1412-7-12-9 15, 1612-44, 12-45 17-2012-10-12-13 106911-14-19781-612-103-12-108 7-1112-68-12-72 107011-14-19781, 212-46, 12-47 107112-12-1978148-271 3, 448-273, 48-274 107212-12-1978248-272 74-8 107312-12-1978art. I, § 248-74 art. I, §§ 4-748-74 art. I, §§ 11, 1248-74 art. I, §§ 14-1648-74 art. I, §§ 18, 1948-74 art. I, §§ 22, 2348-74 art. II, § 1,48-78, 48-79 art. II, § 2art. II, § 348-126 art. II, § 448-80 art. III, § 1-48-127-48-130 art. III, § 4art. III, § 548-133 art. III, § 6,48-131, 48-132 art. III, § 7art. IV, § 1-48-165-48-171 art. IV, § 7art. IV, § 848-81 art. IV, § 9-48-172-48-174 art. IV, § 11art. V, § 248-81 art. VI, § 148-84 art. VII, § 148-82 art. VII, §§ 1, 348-82 art. VII, § 248-83 art. VIII, §§ 1-348-85 1079 6-12-19791(a)28-315 1083 6-12-1979128-236 3-528-236 1101 7- 8-1980146-3  7-24-19801-548-50-48-54 110611-11-1980A-E22-19-22-23 1110 2-24-1981128-301 1112 2-24-1981128-272 1113 2-24-1981128-232, 28-233 1114 2-24-1981128-234 1115 2-24-1981128-235 1110 3-24-1981328-269 1117 5-12-19811App. A, Art. I, Div. 1, § 1App. A, Art. I, Div. 1, § 63App. A, Art. I, Div. 1, § 1221App. A, Art. I, Div. 1, § 211118 5-12-1981122-51 222-50 3-522-53-22-55 922-52 1120 7-28-1981258-159 1121 8-25-1981art. I, § 1-48-1-48-5 art. I, § 5art. I, § 6,48-308, 48-309 art. I, § 7art. I, § 848-327 art. I, § 948-329, 48-330 art. I, § 1048-313 art. I, § 1148-6 art. I, § 1248-314 art. I, § 13,48-311, 48-312 art. I, § 14art. I, § 1548-7 art. I, § 16-48-315-48-318 art. I, § 19art. II, § 148-24, 48-25 art. II, § 2-48-26-48-32 art. II, § 8art. II, § 948-328 art. II, § 1048-331 art. II, § 11-48-33-48-37 art. II, § 15art. IV, § 148-319 art. IV, § 448-310 112510-13-198128-172 1, 228-168, 28-169 112611-10-19811, 228-135 112711-10-19812, 328-137 112811-10-19811, 228-19, 28-20 5-1028-21-28-26 112912- 8-19812-54-1 64-69 7-94-75-4-77 104-70 124-79 134-72 144-84 154-2, 4-3 16-184-3-4-5 194-80 20, 214-6, 4-7 224-72 234-74 244-11 254-73 264-81 274-72 28 4-112 29, 30 4-9, 4-10 31, 32 4-82 33 4-83 1130 1-12-198228-275 1137 9-13-1982246-109, 46-110 46-177 2(F)46-108 2(J)46-111 125412-11-19822(43)8-4 1149 5-14-19841.148-71-48-73 1.2, 1.348-74, 48-75 2.1-2.548-227-48-231 2.6-2.848-235-48-237 3.1, 3.248-238 4.148-202 4.2.1-4.2.648-203-48-208 4.348-209 4.4-4.648-232-48-234 4.748-76 5.148-97, 48-98 5.2-5.448-99-48-101 5.4.2-5.4.448-102-48-104 5.548-105 6.148-106 6.248-77 1150 9-24-198448-230 1154 7-24-1985100.2-100.1556-1-56-14 400.156-33 401.1-401.1056-34-56-43 401.1056-45 401.11-401.1656-44-56-49 402.156-50 402.4, 402.556-53, 56-54 403.1-403.656-55-56-60 404.1-404.656-61-56-66 405.2-405.1256-67-56-77 405.1256-101 500.156-100 600.1, 600.256-132, 56-133 1157 3-24-1986I26-19 II26-25 26-117 II(c)26-20 II(d)26-116 II(f)26-118 III26-86 III(a)26-81-26-83 III(b)26-84, 26-85 IV26-26 26-28 IV(c)26-27 IV(d)26-116 IV(e), (f)26-118, 26-119 V26-61 V(a)26-47 V(a)(1)-V(a)(13)26-48-26-60 VI26-23 VII26-21 VIII26-137 IX26-22 X26-24 XI26-29 1161 6- 9-1986120-44, 20-45 1176 1-12-19871-440-54-40-57 1200 2- 9-1987242-58 1212 7-27-19871-346-8-46-10 1213 8-24-19871A46-6 1B46-7 1215 8-24-198711-11 87-11911- 9-1987(Res.)72-1 1222 3-14-1988256-51 1223 4-25-1988146-296 46-334, 46-335 46-337 1231 8-22-19881-92-227-2-235 1235 9-26-1988138-1 2.2-2.438-31-38-33 2.538-35 3.138-117 3.2, 3.338-59, 38-60 3.438-62 3.538-61 3.638-34 3.738-63 4.1-4.338-85-38-87 5.138-118 5.238-120 6.110-110 6.210-112 6.310-111 6.4, 6.510-113, 10-114 6.610-117 6.738-3 6.8, 6.910-115, 10-116 6.1038-4 738-2 838-5 1235A11-28-19881, 238-5 123712-12-19884-2, 4-3 1238 1- 9-1989146-377 1240 2-13-1989124-21 2, 324-19, 24-20 1248 6-26-198928-270 125412-11-19892(1), 2(2)8-2, 8-3 2(3)8-126 2(4)8-1 2(5)8-34 2(6)8-15 2(7)-2(14)8-89-8-96 2(15), 2(16)8-57, 8-58 2(17)8-5 2(18)8-124 2(19)-2(21)8-121-8-123 2(22)8-125 2(23), 2(24)8-6, 8-7 2(25)8-10 2(26)8-59 2(27)8-11 8-62 2(28)8-12 2(29)8-15 2(30), 2(31)8-13, 8-14 2(33), 2(34)8-8, 8-9 2(36)8-65 2(37)-2(41)8-152-8-156 2(42)8-151 125512-19-1989128-302 125812-19-198912-175 1259 2-12-19901-428-41-28-44 1265 5-14-1990152-27 52-45 52-71 52-129 52-159 52-205 252-9 352-5 127212-10-1990146-435 2-446-432-46-434 546-436 1277 1-28-1991130-21 1278 2-11-1991130-47 1(a), 1(b)30-48, 30-49 1(d)-1(f)30-50-30-52 2-1330-54-30-65 1430-46 1530-66 172-121 1830-67 1279 3-11-1991146-377 1287 8-26-19911-42-206-2-209 129110-14-19911-348-295-48-297 1294 1- 3-19921-314-2 1298 3- 5-19921-840-125-40-132 1302 6- 4-199230-1 1303 7-27-19921, 238-5 1304 7-27-199240-1 40-22 1305 7-27-199211-11 1308 8-27-19922-25 1312 1-11-19932, 330-53 1314 1-25-199328-132 1316 4-26-1993138-6 1318 6-14-199314-2, 4-3 24-2, 4-3 1319 6-28-19931-528-375-28-379 628-379 1320 6-28-19931-328-402-28-404 4-628-404-28-406 1324 9-13-19931-42-206-2-209 132610-11-1993146-334 1330 1-10-199446-334 1333 4-11-1994146-15 1334 5-23-199428-20 1338 6-13-199412-33 12-35, 12-36 12-45 1339 7-25-1994I-VI48-338-48-343 1345 9-12-19941-42-206-2-209 1346 9-12-1994144-20-44-22 1347 9-12-1994112-11 1355 2-13-199512-11 1361 6-12-1995142-60 1363 6-26-199530-64 1370 9-11-19951-42-206-2-209 1378 4- 9-1996146-112 139010-28-19961-810-75-10-82 910-1 1110-83 1394 1-13-199746-16 1030 3-17-1997158-1 58-31-58-34 58-36-58-38 58-40-58-46 58-146 1398 5-12-199746-377 1400 8-11-19971-42-206-2-209 1401 8-11-19971(exh. A)58-37 58-40-58-43 58-45, 58-46 58-149 1406 8-25-1997146-334 1413 1-26-199826-118 1415 3- 9-1998152-71 1423 7-27-1998156-41 1424 8-10-19981-42-206-2-209 1451 9-27-19991, 254-31 1457 1-24-20001-42-206-2-209 1460 3-27-2000152-27 52-45 52-71 52-129 52-159 52-205 1463 5- 8-2000156-38 258-150 358-38 458-31 558-44 756-32 1058-146 1158-149 1258-34 1358-42 1458-1 1558-37 1658-1 1465 6-12-2000156-41 58-156 356-41 58-156 1466 6-12-20001, 248-38 1491 6-11-2001art. I18-19 art. II-18-20-18-23 art. Vart. VII18-24 art. VIII18-18 1495 6-25-2001112-11 1497 7-23-2001158-156 150210-22-20011-314-2 1504 1-28-20021, 246-209 1505 1-28-2002146-177 1513 3-11-20022-1042-19-42-27 1516 5-13-2002I58-73, 58-74 II-VI58-75-58-79 VII-XIII58-81-58-87 XIV58-4 XV58-80 1518 8-12-200256-52 1519 8-12-20021-42-206-2-209 1517-B 8-12-2002I50-64 A-H50-56-50-63 J-L50-65-50-67 1528 1-27-200358-34 1529 1-27-2003II(A), II(B)20-81, 20-82 II(C)20-84 II(D)20-83 II(E)20-86 1530 2-10-200350-26-50-3626-19-26-29 50-46-50-4826-47-26-49 50-50-50-6026-51-26-61 50-71-50-7626-81-26-86 50-86-50-8926-116-26-119 50-10126-137 1547 6-28-200458-34 1548 6-28-2004158-43 1550 7-12-200458-156 1551 7-12-2004158-159 58-193 1549 7-26-200446-378 1552 8- 9-20041-42-206-2-209 1556 9-27-200456-51 156211-11-200446-2 155912-13-2004158-146 156512-13-20041, 246-336 346-296 1561 1-10-2005138-5 1563 1-10-200570(A), 70(B)36-1, 36-2 70(C)36-23 70(D)(1), 70(D)(2)36-51, 36-52 70(D)(3), (4)36-53 70(D)(5), 70(D)(6)36-54, 36-55 70(E)36-24 70(F)(1)-(3)36-82 70(F)(4)36-83 70(F)(5), (6)36-84 70(F)(7), (8)36-85 70(F)(9)36-82 70(F)(10)36-86 70(F)(intro. ¶)36-81 70(G)36-3 1566 1-10-200542-61 1568 2-14-200548-130 1573 5-23-2005A, B58-63 C-E58-64-58-66 F58-157 1574 5-23-200558-106-58-113 156-54 58-34-58-37 58-39 58-114 1575 6-15-2005158-36-58-38 1576 6-15-20051(500.1)-1(500.10)56-100-56-109 159012-12-200556-32 1593 2-13-200642-61 1594 2-13-200618-19, 18-20 1605 4-22-200654-31 1598 4-24-2006152-221 1599 4-24-20061, 252-27 352-45 452-71 552-129 652-159 752-187 852-205 1606 5-22-2006136-52 1612 7-24-2006152-221 1613 8-28-20061-42-206-2-209 1633 6-25-200712-2 1654 4-14-20081(58-96), 1(58-97)30-47, 30-48 1(58-101)30-52 1(58-116)30-46 1(58-117)30-66 1656 7-28-200810-1 8-1 10-4-10-178-2-8-15 10-41 8-34 10-42-10-50 8-57-8-65 10-56-10-638-89-8-96 10-86-10-918-121-8-126 10-111-10-116 8-151-8-156 1660 8-25-20081-42-206-2-209 1665 4-27-200920-46-20-52 1666 4-27-2009152-221 1668 7-13-20091(14-157)52-221 1670 7-13-20091App. B1677 9-28-2009Adopt. ord., p. xi167910-12-20091App. B168010-26-2009128-20(11) 1682 1-11-20101     Added28-271(5) 1683 3- 8-2010158-156(g) 1684 4-12-2010138-117 1685 4-26-20102App. B1688 5-24-2010138-117 1691 8-23-20101-42-206-2-209 169811- 8-2010     Added40-133 1703 6-13-2011     Added26-19-26-29 26-47-26-61 26-81-26-86 26-116-26-119 26-137 26-155-26-157 26-175, 26-176 26-185-26-188170610-10-20111-314-2(1)-14-2(3) 1710 1- 9-2012152-27 252-45 452-71 552-129 652-159 752-187 852-205 1710A 4-30-201212-25 1714 8-27-20121-42-206-2-209 171711-26-201218-18-18-24 art. 618-25 art. 718-26 1719 2-11-20131(Att.)     Added36-1-36-3 36-23, 36-24 36-51-36-55 36-81-36-86 1721 3-25-2013App. B 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Missouri law. 
RSMo
SectionSection

this Code1.010 et seq.Ch. 1 1.020 et seq.1-2 1.0901-2 1.9401-6 40.005 et seq.Ch. 24 44.010 et seq.Ch. 16 44.09016-3 45.08528-302 64.285Ch. 56 67.280Pt. III, Ch. 52 52-27 52-45 52-71 52-129 52-159 52-205 67.30528-276 67.317Ch. 36 67.318Pt. III, Ch. 52 Ch. 20 Ch. 40 67.398Ch. 18 Ch. 28, Art. II 67.400Pt. XXIII, Art. IX67.410Pt. XXIII, Art. IX67.1842Ch. 44 67.2681Ch. 44 71.005Ch. 2 71.010Ch. 1 71.140Ch. 2 71.150Ch. 2 71.2001-14 Ch. 24 71.2201-13 71.240Ch. 40 71.26510-28 71.270Ch. 40 Ch. 56 71.28528-20 Ch. 38 Ch. 50 71.287Ch. 48 71.288Ch. 36 Ch. 58 71.300Ch. 12 Ch. 24 71.340Ch. 40 71.365Ch. 40 71.370 et seq.Ch. 20 71.520 et seq.Ch. 48 71.530Ch. 48 71.610Ch. 10 Ch. 42 71.610 et seq.Ch. 42 71.62010-22 10-34 71.675Ch. 44 71.680 et seq.Ch. 38 71.690Ch. 38 71.700Ch. 48 71.710Ch. 48 71.715Ch. 48 71.720Ch. 10 71.730Ch. 8 71.750Ch. 10 71.76028-20 71.760 et seq.28-20 71.780Ch. 18 71.9401-1 71.940 et seq.Ch. 1 1-8 71.9431-1 71.9481-9 72.010 et seq.Ch. 1 72.030 et seq.char. citiesCh. 2 77.010Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 4 77.030Ch. 2, Art. II 77.040Ch. 2, Art. V 77.042Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 4 77.0442-229 2-231 77.046Ch. 2, Art. V 77.048Ch. 2, Art. II Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 4 77.060Ch. 2, Art. II 77.0801-1 81.010Ch. 1 Char. §§ 1-3581.010 et seq.Ch. 1, Ch. 2 81.013Char. §§ 1-3581.070Ch. 2, Art. II Ch. 2, Art. V Ch. 14 81.075Ch. 14 81.080Char. § 181.090Ch. 12 Ch. 24 82.29128-20 85.00524-19 85.005 et seq.Ch. 20 Ch. 24 86.010 et seq.Ch. 24 87.005 et seq.Ch. 20 88.010 et seq.Ch. 42 88.81240-57 ch. 8918-19 54-34 58-159 89.010 et seq.Ch. 54 Ch. 56 Ch. 58 89.010-89.25054-33 89.020Ch. 26 89.11018-23 89.300 et seq.Ch. 54 Ch. 56 Ch. 58 89.300(3)54-29 89.310Ch. 54, Art. II 89.32054-31 89.33054-32 89.35054-63 89.37054-35 89.38054-65 89.380-89.49056-2 89.40054-66 89.42054-36 89.43054-37 89.45054-2 89.46054-3 89.47054-4 90.010 et seq.Ch. 30 90.500 et seq.Ch. 30 90.500-90.5702-120 2-123 90.520 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 90.5302-117, 2-118 90.5402-119 90.5502-120 90.5602-122 90.5702-123 91.010 et seq.Ch. 48 91.560 et seq.Ch. 48 92.074 et seq.Ch. 44, Art. III 94.340 et seq.Ch. 10 Ch. 42 94.360Ch. 10, Art. II Ch. 32, Art. II 42-20 94.37010-41 94.390Ch. 10, Art. II 94.500-94.55042-59 94.700-94.75542-58 95.415 et seq.Ch. 2 98.030 et seq.Ch. 12 99.010 et seq.Pt. III, Ch. 52 Ch. 22 Ch. 54 Ch. 56 Ch. 58 100.010 et seq.Ch. 54 Ch. 56 Ch. 58 103.003 et seq.Ch. 2 105.450 et seq.Ch. 2 Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 3 105.4542-207 105.485Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 3 105.955Ch. 2 106.220Ch. 2 107.010 et seq.Ch. 2 109.005 et seq.Ch. 2 110.010 et seq.Ch. 2 115.001 et seq.Ch. 14 115.132 et seq.Ch. 14 115.407 et seq.Ch. 14 115.629 et seq.Ch. 14 115.700Ch. 14 130.011 et seq.Ch. 14 135.010 et seq.Ch. 10 Ch. 42 137.010 et seq.Ch. 42 137.185Ch. 56 139.031 et seq.Ch. 42 140.010 et seq.Ch. 42 143.191-143.26110-24 144.010 et seq.Ch. 42 144.010-144.51010-24 144.010-144.52542-59-42-61 144.010-144.52642-58, 42-59 144.03242-60, 42-61 144.08310-24 149.035Ch. 10, Art. II, Div. 2 149.055Ch. 10, Art. II, Div. 2 150.010 et seq.Ch. 10 Ch. 32 Ch. 42 190.001 et seq.Ch. 16 190.094 et seq.Ch. 16 191.005Ch. 16 Ch. 18 191.76528-404 191.765 et seq.Pt. III, Ch. 52 Ch. 18 Ch. 28, Art. X 191.76728-402 28-405 191.77128-403 191.777Ch. 28, Art. X ch. 19528-101 28-135 195.01028-101 195.03028-101 195.21228-105 195.23328-103 195.23528-104 195.24128-106 ch. 2114-8 211.031(1)(2)(d)28-137 211.031(1)(3)28-137 ch. 21322-53 213.010 et seq.Ch. 22 213.045Ch. 22 22-54 213.050Ch. 22 22-53 213.055Ch. 22 213.065Ch. 22 226.500 et seq.Ch. 36 226.65028-20 226.650 et seq.Ch. 34 227.010Ch. 40 228.010 et seq.Ch. 40 228.342 et seq.Ch. 40 229.010 et seq.Ch. 40 229.230 et seq.Pt. III, Ch. 52 Ch. 40 229.380 et seq.Ch. 40 229.475 et seq.Ch. 40 Ch. 50 231.010 et seq.Ch. 40 241.010 et seq.Ch. 18 Ch. 48 251.010 et seq.Ch. 18 Ch. 22 Ch. 54 Ch. 58 251.150 et seq.Ch. 22 Ch. 54 Ch. 56 Ch. 58 256.200 et seq.Ch. 18 Ch. 48 256.400 et seq.Ch. 18 Ch. 48 260.003 et seq.Ch. 18 260.200 et seq.Ch. 38 260.200-260.24538-118 260.260 et seq.Ch. 38 260.270 et seq.Ch. 38 260.280Ch. 38 260.350 et seq.Ch. 38 261.010 et seq.Ch. 8 263.010Ch. 50 263.010 et seq.Ch. 50 263.08028-20 Ch. 50 263.190 et seq.Ch. 50 263.255 et seq.Ch. 50 263.450 et seq.Ch. 50 263.46028-20 269.010 et seq.Ch. 8 269.02028-20 270.0108-3 8-10 8-57 270.010 et seq.Ch. 8 271.010 et seq.Ch. 8 272.010 et seq.Ch. 8 272.210Ch. 8 ch. 273Ch. 8, Art. II 273.0108-1 273.010 et seq.Ch. 8 273.0408-1 273.040 et seq.Ch. 8 8-89 273.0508-92 273.0608-91 273.0808-95 273.1008-121 273.3258-1 273.325 et seq.Ch. 8 273.400 et seq.Ch. 8 278.010 et seq.Ch. 18 278.160 et seq.Ch. 18 287.0610-25 287.06110-25 ch. 28812-43 300.01046-1 300.010 et seq.Ch. 46 300.01546-74 300.02046-75 300.02546-42 300.03046-78 300.03546-79 300.04046-80 300.04546-50 300.06046-48 300.06546-49 300.08046-40 300.08546-188 300.09046-190 300.09546-189 300.10046-191 300.10546-192 300.11046-11 300.12046-12 300.13046-138 300.13546-139 300.14046-140 46-208 46-328 300.14546-142 300.15046-143 300.15546-144 300.16046-145 300.16546-146 300.17046-147 300.17546-148 300.18046-149 300.18546-150 300.19046-151 300.19546-152 300.20046-153 300.20546-294, 46-295 300.21046-295 300.21546-229 300.22046-230 300.22546-231 300.23046-232 300.23546-233 300.24046-262 46-265 300.24546-264 300.25046-263 300.25546-326 300.26046-327 300.26546-329 300.27046-330 300.27546-331 300.28046-332 300.28546-180 300.29046-333 300.29546-141 300.30046-198 300.30546-199 300.31046-200 300.31546-201 300.33046-202 300.33546-203 300.34046-204 300.345(1)46-205 300.34746-14 300.35028-136 46-206 300.36546-207 300.37046-456 300.37546-41 46-458 300.38046-459 300.38546-460 300.39046-461 300.39546-462 300.40046-463 300.40546-464 300.41046-457 300.41546-363 300.42046-364 300.42546-365 300.43046-366 300.44046-375 300.44546-367 300.45046-368 300.45546-369 300.46046-370 300.46546-371 300.47046-372 300.47546-373 300.48046-374 300.57546-104 300.58046-105 300.58546-106 300.59046-107 301.002 et seq.Ch. 46 301.01046-8 46-205 301.387Ch. 8 301.700 et seq.Ch. 46 302.02046-2 46-4 302.020(1)46-2 302.020(2), (3)46-3 302.08046-3 302.130(2)46-5 302.17346-3 302.22546-110 302.302(1), (2), (4)46-109 302.302.446-109 ch. 30346-16 303.010 et seq.Ch. 46 303.02446-16 304.001 et seq.Ch. 46 304.01046-176 304.01246-175 304.01546-179 304.01646-181-46-185 304.01746-187 304.01946-193, 46-194 304.05046-432-46-436 304.050-304.07046-432 304.154-304.15828-63 304.155Ch. 28, Art. II, Div. 3 28-62 306.010 et seq.Ch. 30 307.010 et seq.Ch. 46 307.020-307.12746-401 307.04046-197 307.130-307.16046-402 307.16546-8 307.17946-8 ch. 311Ch. 4 4-6 311.22(2)Ch. 4, Art. II 311.0204-1 311.0604-73 311.0804-80 311.089, 311.0904-3 311.097, 311.0984-3 311.1004-1 311.1024-3 311.1104-75 4-79 311.200(2)4-1 311.220Ch. 4 311.2904-2 311.2934-3 311.2984-3 311.3104-7, 4-8 311.3204-8 28-136 311.3254-8 311.4704-6 311.4814-3 311.4854-112 ch. 312Ch. 4 312.0104-1 312.0204-1 312.140Ch. 4 Ch. 4, Art. II 312.4004-7, 4-8 312.4054-8 312.4074-8 313.001 et seq.Ch. 6 314.100 et seq.Ch. 22 ch. 3164-112 316.010 et seq.Ch. 6 317.001 et seq.Ch. 6 318.010 et seq.Ch. 6 319.300 et seq.Ch. 20 Ch. 20, Art. IV 20-61 319.30620-81 319.324Ch. 20 Ch. 20, Art. IV 319.342Ch. 20 Ch. 20, Art. IV 20-61 20-81 20-85 320.010 et seq.Pt. III, Ch. 52 Ch. 20 320.106 et seq.Ch. 20 Ch. 20, Art. III 320.11028-135 320.121Ch. 20, Art. III 320.250Ch. 20 ch. 322Ch. 8, Art. IV 322.0208-57 322.0408-153 322.0608-153 8-155 324.001 et seq.Ch. 10 ch. 33028-101 chs. 330, 33228-109 334, 33528-109 33828-109 34028-109 351.010 et seq.Ch. 10 352.010 et seq.Ch. 32 367.011 et seq.Ch. 34 392.010 et seq.Ch. 48 392.245Ch. 44 393.010 et seq.Ch. 48 393.700 et seq.Ch. 48 407.924 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. IX 407.925Ch. 28, Art. IX 407.92728-376 407.92928-377 407.93128-375 28-379 407.934Ch. 10, Art. II, Div. 2 441.500 et seq.Pt. III, Ch. 52 Ch. 28, Art. II ch. 44556-2 447.620Pt. III, Ch. 52 28-20 ch. 44858-36-58-38 451.010 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. VI, Div. 2 455.003 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. VI, Div. 2 455.005 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. VI, Div. 2 28-302 476.001 et seq.Ch. 12 479.01012-2 479.010 et seq.Ch. 12 479.011Ch. 46 479.020Ch. 12 Ch. 12, Art. II 12-1 479.020(1), (5)12-6 479.04012-1 479.05012-37 12-39 Ch. 46 479.07012-37 479.0801-11 479.09012-104 479.10012-4 12-69 479.11012-5 479.12012-14 479.16012-40 479.17012-41 479.18012-42 479.19012-43 479.20012-7 479.22012-44 479.23012-45 479.24012-13 479.26012-11 483.010Ch. 12 12-10 488.005 et seq.Ch. 12 488.2205 et seq.Ch. 12 490.010 et seq.Ch. 12 506.010 et seq.Ch. 12 ch. 53652-219 540.010Ch. 28 540.021 et seq.Ch. 12 556.011Ch. 28 556.011 et seq.Ch. 28 556.05128-236 556.06128-236 28-342 559.6071-11 564.01628-108 565.02446-108 565.06046-108 565.07028-301 565.08028-301 565.09028-275 566.09328-132 567.01028-200 567.010 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. IV, Div. 3 567.02028-201 567.03028-202 567.04028-203 567.08028-204 568.05028-137 568.07028-135 568.10028-171 569.010 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. V 569.06528-243 569.08028-233 28-244 569.09028-233, 28-234 28-244 569.15028-235 28-240 569.17028-240 569.18028-241 570.01028-232 28-236 570.010 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. V 570.03028-236 570.08028-238 570.12028-242 570.19028-244 571.01028-336 571.010 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. VIII 571.02028-337 571.03028-338 571.04528-339 571.05028-340 571.06028-341 571.07028-342 571.08028-337 573.01028-168 573.010 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. IV, Div. 2 573.03028-169 573.04028-170 573.05028-171 573.06028-172 573.500 et seq.28-132 574.01028-271 574.010 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. VI 574.02028-272 574.04028-138 574.05028-139 574.06028-140 575.010 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. VII 575.02028-319 575.03028-320 575.08028-317 575.12028-318 575.15028-315 575.16028-316 575.17028-321 575.19028-322 575.21028-313 575.25028-312 575.27028-323, 28-324 576.03028-325 577.01246-177 577.020-577.04946-177 577.04946-111 577.06046-13 577.07028-239 Ch. 38 577.07128-239 Ch. 38 577.07628-20 577.080Ch. 28, Art. II, Div. 3 578.0098-5 8-7 8-126 578.0128-5 8-7 8-126 578.0168-121 578.0238-1 8-4 578.15028-237 578.26528-107 590.010 et seq.Ch. 24 ch. 61028-404 610.010 et seq.Ch. 2 610.02058-75 610.020 et seq.2-1 610.0212-1 610.100 et seq.Ch. 24 Ch. 28 610.150Ch. 16 Ch. 24 610.200Ch. 24 Ch. 28 610.225Ch. 42 644.006 et seq.Ch. 18 Ch. 48 700.010Ch. 26 701.025 et seq.Ch. 48, Art. III 701.350Pt. III, Ch. 52 701.450Pt. III, Ch. 52  
